
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-171/Wählergruppe  Gemeinsam Zajedno/Birlikte Alternative und Grüne GewerkschafterInnen/UG and Others(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Verfassungsgerichtshof (Austria))
         
«(EEC-Turkey Association – Freedom of movement for workers – Article 10(1) of Decision No 1/of the Association Council – Prohibition of discrimination as regards conditions of work – Direct effect – Scope – Legislation of a Member State excluding Turkish workers from eligibility for election to a chamber of workers)»
Opinion of Advocate General Jacobs delivered on December I - Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber), May I - Summary of the Judgment
1..
International agreements – Agreements concluded by the Community – Direct effect – Conditions – Article 10(1) of Decision No 1/of the Council of Association, set up under the EEC-Turkey Association Agreement – Principle of non-discrimination as regards conditions of work  (Decision No 1/of the EEC-Turkey Association Council, Art. 10(1)) 
2..
International agreements – EEC-Turkey Association Agreement – Freedom of movement for persons – Workers – Equal treatment – Exercise of trade-union rights – National legislation excluding Turkish workers from eligibility for election to their chamber of workers – Not permissible – Application of the principles laid down in Article of the Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC)(EC Treaty, Art. 48(2) (now, after amendment, Art. 39(2) EC); Decision No 1/of the EEC-Turkey Association Council, Art.
                  10(1)) 
1.
 A provision in an agreement concluded by the Community with a non-member country must be regarded as being directly applicable
         when, regard being had to its wording and to the purpose and nature of the agreement, it contains a clear and precise obligation
         which is not subject, in its implementation or effects, to the adoption of any subsequent measure. The same conditions apply
         in determining whether the provisions of a decision of the association council established by an association agreement may
         have direct effect.  Article 10(1) of Decision No 1/80, adopted by the Association Council established by the EEC-Turkey Association Agreement,
         which prohibits Member States, in clear, precise and unconditional terms, from discriminating, on the basis of nationality,
         against Turkish migrant workers duly registered as belonging to their labour force as regards remuneration and other conditions
         of work must be interpreted as having direct effect in the Member States and as conferring on the Turkish nationals to whom
         it applies the right to rely on it before the courts of the host Member State. see paras 54-55, 57, 67, operative part
         
2.
 In the context of Community law and, in particular, Article 48(2) of the Treaty (now, after amendment, Article 39(2) EC),
         national legislation which denies workers who are nationals of other Member States the right to vote and/or the right to stand
         as a candidate in elections held by bodies such as occupational guilds to which those workers are compulsorily affiliated,
         to which they must pay contributions, which are responsible for defending and representing workers' interests and which perform
         a consultative function in the legislative field is contrary to the fundamental principle of non-discrimination on the grounds
         of nationality.  In the light of that principle, which is applicable by analogy to Turkish workers enjoying the rights conferred by Decision
         No 1/of the EEC-Turkey Association Council, Article 10(1) of that decision must be interpreted as precluding the application
         of national legislation which excludes Turkish workers duly registered as belonging to the labour force of the host Member
         State from eligibility for election to the general assembly of a body representing and defending the interests of workers.
         see paras 75, 78, 94, operative part
      
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)May (1)
((EEC-Turkey Association – Freedom of movement for workers – Article 10(1) of Decision No 1/of the Association Council – Prohibition of discrimination as regards conditions of work – Direct effect – Scope – Legislation of a Member State excluding Turkish workers from eligibility for election to a chamber of workers))
In Case C-171/01, 
            REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Verfassungsgerichtshof (Austria) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings
            brought before that court by
            
 Wählergruppe  
               Gemeinsam Zajedno/Birlikte Alternative und Grüne GewerkschafterInnen/UG, also represented: Bundesminister für Wirtschaft und Arbeit, Kammer für Arbeiter und Angestellte für Vorarlberg, Wählergruppe  
               Vorarlberger Arbeiter- und Angestelltenbund (ÖAAB) ─ AK-Präsident Josef Fink, Wählergruppe  
               FSG ─ Walter Gelbmann ─ mit euch ins nächste Jahrtausend/Liste 2, Wählergruppe  
               Freiheitliche und parteifreie Arbeitnehmer Vorarlberg ─ FPÖ, Wählergruppe  
               Gewerkschaftlicher Linksblock, and Wählergruppe  
               NBZ ─ Neue Bewegung für die Zukunft,
on the interpretation of Article 10(1) of Decision No 1/of September on the development of the Association, adopted
            by the Association Council established by the Association Agreement between the European Economic Community and Turkey,
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
composed of: J.-P. Puissochet, President of the Chamber, R. Schintgen (Rapporteur), V. Skouris, F. Macken and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: F.G. Jacobs, Registrar: M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
Wählergruppe  
               Gemeinsam Zajedno/Birlikte Alternative und Grüne GewerkschafterInnen/UG, by W.L. Weh, Rechtsanwalt, 
               
─
Kammer für Arbeiter und Angestellte für Vorarlberg, by W.-G Schärf, Rechtsanwalt, 
               
─
the Austrian Government, by H. Dossi, acting as Agent, 
               
─
the Commission of the European Communities, by J. Sack and H. Kreppel, acting as Agents, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of Wählergruppe  
               Gemeinsam Zajedno/Birlikte Alternative und Grüne GewerkschafterInnen/UG, the Kammer für Arbeiter und Angestellte für Vorarlberg and the Commission at the hearing on October 2002,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on December 2002,
gives the following
Judgment
            
By order of March 2001, received at the Court on April 2001, the Verfassungsgerichtshof referred to the Court for a preliminary
         ruling under Article EC two questions on the interpretation of Article 10(1) of Decision No 1/of the Association Council
         of September on the development of the Association (
         Decision No 1/80). The Association Council was set up by the Agreement establishing an Association between the European Economic Community
         and Turkey, signed at Ankara on September by the Republic of Turkey and by the Member States of the EEC and the Community
         and concluded, approved and confirmed on behalf of the Community by Council Decision 64/732/EEC of December (OJ C 113, p. 1,  
         the Association Agreement). 
         
            
Those questions were raised in proceedings brought before the Verfassungsgerichtshof by the voters' group Wählergruppe  
         Gemeinsam Zajedno/Birlikte Alternative und Grüne GewerkschafterInnen/UG (
         Wählergruppe Gemeinsam) for annulment of the elections to the general assembly of the chamber of workers of the  
          Land  of Vorarlberg (Austria) which took place between and April 1999. 
         
Legal background
The EEC-Turkey Association
         
            
According to Article 2(1), the aim of the Association Agreement is to promote the continuous and balanced strengthening of
         trade and economic relations between the Contracting Parties, including in the labour sector, by progressively securing freedom
         of movement for workers (Article 12) and by abolishing restrictions on freedom of establishment (Article 13) and on freedom
         to provide services (Article 14) in order to improve the standard of living of the Turkish people and facilitate the accession
         of the Republic of Turkey to the Community at a later date (fourth recital in the preamble and Article 28). 
         
            
To that end, the Association Agreement provides for a preparatory stage enabling the Republic of Turkey to strengthen its
         economy with aid from the Community (Article 3), a transitional stage during which a customs union is progressively to be
         established and economic policies are to be aligned (Article 4) and a final stage based on the customs union and entailing
         closer coordination of the economic policies of the Contracting Parties (Article 5). 
         
            
Article of the Association Agreement is worded as follows: To ensure the implementation and the progressive development of the Association, the Contracting Parties shall meet in a Council
         of Association which shall act within the powers conferred upon it by this Agreement.
         
            
According to Article of the Association Agreement, which is included under Title II, entitled  
         Implementation of the Transitional Stage: In order to attain the objectives set out in Article 4, the Council of Association shall, before the beginning of the transitional
         stage and in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article of the Provisional Protocol, determine the conditions, rules
         and timetables for the implementation of the provisions relating to the fields covered by the Treaty establishing the Community
         which must be considered; this shall apply in particular to such of those fields as are mentioned under this Title and to
         any protective clause which may prove appropriate.
         
            
Article of the Association Agreement, which is also part of Title II, states: The Contracting Parties recognise that within the scope of this Agreement and without prejudice to any special provisions
         which may be laid down pursuant to Article 8, any discrimination on grounds of nationality shall be prohibited in accordance
         with the principle laid down in Article of the Treaty establishing the Community.
         
            
Article of the Association Agreement, which is also included under Title II in Chapter 3, entitled  
         Other economic provisions, provides: The Contracting Parties agree to be guided by Articles 48, and of the Treaty establishing the Community for the purpose
         of progressively securing freedom of movement for workers between them.
         
            
According to Article 22(1) of the Association Agreement: In order to attain the objectives of this Agreement the Council of Association shall have the power to take decisions in the
         cases provided for therein. Each of the Parties shall take the measures necessary to implement the decisions taken. ...
         
            
Article of the Additional Protocol, which was signed in Brussels on November and concluded, approved and confirmed
         on behalf of the Community by Council Regulation (EEC) No 2760/of December (OJ C 113, p. 18,  
         the Additional Protocol), lays down the conditions, arrangements and timetables for implementing the transitional phase referred to in Article of the Association Agreement. According to Article 62, the Additional Protocol forms an integral part of that agreement. 
         
            
Title II of the Additional Protocol is entitled  
         Movement of Persons and Services and Chapter I of that title deals with  
         Workers. 
         
            
Article of the Additional Protocol, which is part of Chapter I, provides that freedom of movement for workers between the
         Member States of the Community and Turkey is to be secured by progressive stages in accordance with the principles set out
         in Article of the Association Agreement between the end of 12th and 22nd year after the entry into force of that agreement
         and that the Association Council is to decide on the rules necessary to that end. 
         
            
Article of the Additional Protocol, which is likewise in Chapter I of Title II, is worded as follows: As regards conditions of work and remuneration, the rules which each Member State applies to workers of Turkish nationality
         employed in the Community shall not discriminate on grounds of nationality between such workers and workers who are nationals
         of other Member States of the Community.
         
            
On September 1980, the Association Council, established by the Association Agreement and consisting of members of the Governments
         of the Member States and members of the Council and of the Commission of the European Communities on the one hand and of members
         of the Turkish Government on the other, adopted Decision No 1/80. 
         
            
Article of that decision is contained in Section 1, concerning  
         Questions relating to employment and the free movement of workers, of Chapter II, entitled  
         Social provisions. Article 6(1) states: Subject to Article on free access to employment for members of his family, a Turkish worker duly registered as belonging
         to the labour force of a Member State:
         
─
shall be entitled in that Member State, after one year's legal employment, to the renewal of his permit to work for the same
            employer, if a job is available; 
         
─
shall be entitled in that Member State, after three years of legal employment and subject to the priority to be given to workers
            of Member States of the Community, to respond to another offer of employment, with an employer of his choice, made under normal
            conditions and registered with the employment services of that State, for the same occupation; 
         
─
shall enjoy free access in that Member State to any paid employment of his choice, after four years of legal employment.
         
            
Article of that decision is also part of Section of Chapter II. Article 10(1) provides: The Member States of the Community shall as regards remuneration and other conditions of work grant Turkish workers duly registered
         as belonging to their labour forces treatment involving no discrimination on the basis of nationality between them and Community
         workers.
         The other relevant provisions of Community law
         
            
The first paragraph of Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, the first paragraph of Article EC) provides: Within the scope of application of this Treaty ... any discrimination on grounds of nationality shall be prohibited.
         
            
According to Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC): 
         
1.
 Freedom of movement for workers shall be secured within the Community. 
         
2.
 Such freedom of movement shall entail the abolition of any discrimination based on nationality between workers of the Member
         States as regards employment, remuneration and other conditions of work and employment. 
         ...
         
4.
 The provisions of this article shall not apply to employment in the public service.
         
            
The first recital in the preamble to Council Regulation (EEC) No 1612/of October on freedom of movement for workers
         within the Community (OJ, English Special Edition 1968(II), p. 475), as amended by Council Regulation (EEC) No 2434/of
         July (OJ L 245, p. 1,  
         Regulation No 1612/68), states: ... freedom of movement for workers should be secured within the Community by the end of the transitional period at the latest;
         ... the attainment of this objective entails the abolition of any discrimination based on nationality between workers of the
         Member States as regards employment, remuneration and other conditions of work and employment, as well as the right of such
         workers to move freely within the Community in order to pursue activities as employed persons, subject to any limitations
         justified on grounds of public policy, public security or public health.
         
            
Articles and of Regulation No 1612/are contained in Part I, dealing with  
         Employment and Workers' Families, of Title II, entitled  
         Employment and equality of treatment. 
         
            
Article of Regulation No 1612/provides: 
         
1.
 A worker who is a national of a Member State may not, in the territory of another Member State, be treated differently from
         national workers by reason of his nationality in respect of any conditions of employment and work, in particular as regards
         remuneration, dismissal, and, should he become unemployed, reinstatement or re-employment. 
         
2.
 He shall enjoy the same social and tax advantages as national workers. 
         ...
         
4.
 Any clause of a collective or individual agreement or of any other collective regulation concerning eligibility for employment,
         employment, remuneration and other conditions of work or dismissal shall be null and void in so far as it lays down or authorises
         discriminatory conditions in respect of workers who are nationals of the other Member States.
         
            
According to Article of Regulation No 1612/68: A worker who is a national of a Member State and who is employed in the territory of another Member State shall enjoy equality
         of treatment as regards membership of trade unions and the exercise of rights attaching thereto, including the right to vote
         and to be eligible for the administration or management posts of a trade union; he may be excluded from taking part in the
         management of bodies governed by public law and from holding an office governed by public law. Furthermore, he shall have
         the right of eligibility for workers' representative bodies in the undertaking.The provisions of this article shall not affect laws or regulations in certain Member States which grant more extensive rights
         to workers coming from the other Member States.
         National law
         
            
In Austria, Paragraph of the Arbeiterkammergesetz (Law on Chambers of Workers, BGBl. 1991/626, in the version published
         in BGBl. I, 1998/166,  
         the AKG) provides that the aim of chambers of workers and employees (
         chambers of workers) and the Federal Chamber of Workers and Employees (
         Federal Chamber of Workers) is to represent and promote the social, economic and cultural interests of workers of both sexes. 
         
            
According to Paragraph of the AKG, chambers of workers and the Federal Chamber of Workers are corporations governed by public
         law. The chambers of workers form the Federal Chamber of Workers. The competency of a chamber of workers covers a single 
         
          Land , while that of the Federal Chamber of Workers covers the whole of Austrian territory. 
         
            
Under Paragraphs to of the AKG, the task of the chambers of workers, within their own area ─ where they are not subject
         to the instructions of State bodies but merely under their supervision (Paragraph of the AKG) ─ is: 
         
─
to take all measures necessary for representing the interests of workers, including unemployed and retired persons, and, in
            particular, to send representatives to corporations or other institutions (Paragraph 4), 
         
─
to monitor conditions of work (Paragraph of the AKG),
         
─
to cooperate with the voluntary occupational associations entitled to enter into collective agreements and with the institutions
            representing  interests within undertakings (Paragraph of the AKG), 
         
─
to advise workers who belong to the chamber on matters of employment and social law and to protect their legal rights by representing
            them, in particular before tribunals, in employment and social-law disputes (Paragraph of the AKG). 
         
            
In addition, the chambers of workers, in their capacity as legal representatives of workers' interests, must exert influence
         over the legislation applying to conditions of work and, for that purpose, are authorised to sign collective agreements. However,
         according to the national court, this is a subsidiary competence which is not exercised in practice. 
         
            
Within the areas of competence conferred on them, the chambers of workers have the task, subject to the binding instructions
         of State bodies, of exercising functions of State administration which are conferred on them by law (Paragraph of the AKG).
         However, according to the national court, there are no significant provisions of this kind ─ apart from the powers regarding
         the works committee funds conferred on the chambers of workers by Paragraphs 74(5), (6) and (12) to (14) of the Arbeitsverfassungsgesetz
         (Law on organisation of work, BGBl. 1974/22, in the version published in BGBl. I, 1998/69). 
         
            
All workers are, in principle, members of a chamber of workers (Paragraph of the AKG). 
         
            
Under Paragraph of the AKG, every worker belonging to a chamber of workers is obliged to pay a contribution. 
         
            
The institutions of a chamber of workers include,  
          inter alia , the general assembly (Paragraph of the AKG). It is elected ─ for a term of five years (Paragraph 18(1) of the AKG) ─
         by the workers entitled to vote by equal, direct and secret ballot in accordance with the principles of proportional representation
         (Paragraph of the AKG). Under Paragraph 20(1) of the AKG, all workers who belong to the chamber on the relevant date are
         entitled to vote. 
         
            
As regards the conditions for eligibility for election, Paragraph of the AKG provides: All workers belonging to a chamber of workers who on the relevant date
         
1.
 have completed their 19th year, and
         
2.
 have, for a total of at least two years during the previous five years, been in a work or employment relationship in Austria
         giving rise to membership of the chamber, and 
         
3.
 apart from the age requirement, are not excluded from eligibility for election to the Nationalrat (Parliament) 
         are eligible for election to the chamber of workers.
         
            
According to Article 26(4) of the Bundesverfassungsgesetz (Federal Constitutional Law): All persons possessing Austrian nationality on the relevant date who have reached the age of before January of the year
         of the election shall be eligible for election.
         
            
Under Paragraph 37(1) of the AKG, lists of candidates are to be lodged in writing (by the groups seeking election) with the
         principal election committee within the prescribed period. Under Paragraph 37(3), that committee must examine the lists of
         candidates which have been lodged and delete from the lists candidates who are not eligible. 
         
            
Under Paragraph of the AKG, any group which has lodged a list of candidates may contest the validity of the election before
         the Federal Minister for Employment, Health and Social Affairs within days of the declaration of the results on the ground
         of an alleged infringement of the election procedure. The challenge must be upheld if provisions of the election procedure
         were infringed and the result of the election could have been influenced thereby. If the competent minister upholds the challenge,
         a new election must be announced within the following three months. 
         The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
It is clear from the documents concerning the case in the main proceedings that, among others, Wählergruppe Gemeinsam put
         forward a list of candidates for the elections to the general assembly of the chamber of workers for the  
          Land  of Vorarlberg which took place in April 1999. 
         
            
The results of those elections were as follows: 
         
ÖAAB:
delegates
FSG:
delegates
Freiheitliche und parteifreie Arbeitnehmer:
delegates
Wählergruppe Gemeinsam:
delegates
Gewerkschaftlicher Linksblock:
delegates
NBZ:
delegates.
            
The list of candidates lodged by Wählergruppe Gemeinsam originally comprised candidates, including five Turkish nationals
         who, the parties agree, fulfilled all the conditions laid down in the third indent of Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/and
         were in possession of a  
         Befreiungsschein (a certificate exempting the holder from the national provisions on the employment of foreigners) in accordance with Paragraph
         4c of the Ausländerbeschäftigungsgesetz (Law on employment of foreigners). 
         
            
It is likewise undisputed that the five Turkish candidates concerned fulfilled all the criteria for eligibility laid down
         by national law, except that relating to the possession of Austrian nationality. 
         
            
On February 1999, the principal election committee decided to delete the five Turkish nationals from the list of candidates
         submitted by Wählergruppe Gemeinsam on the ground that they did not have Austrian nationality and were therefore ineligible.
         
         
            
By letter of May 1999, Wählergruppe Gemeinsam contested the validity of the elections pursuant to Paragraph 42(1) of the
         AKG, alleging an infringement of the election procedure which significantly influenced the result of the election. By excluding
         from its list the five Turkish nationals, the principal election committee infringed a specific right directly applicable
         in the European Union, namely the prohibition of discrimination laid down in Article 10(1) of Decision No 1/80. 
         
            
By decision of November 1999, the competent Federal Minister rejected the complaint. 
         
            
The Minister acknowledged that it follows from the prohibition of discrimination laid down in Article 10(1) of Decision No
         1/that Turkish workers are likewise eligible for election to the general assembly of a chamber of workers. Since Community
         law takes precedence, the contrary national law is not to be applied. However, the unlawfulness arising from the deletion
         of the names of the Turkish nationals from the list of Wählergruppe Gemeinsam was not such as to influence the results of
         the election since, in view of the non-personalised list voting system prescribed for elections to the general assembly of
         a chamber of workers, the person of the individual candidate is of little importance to voters, who cast their vote according
         to the political orientation of the list as a whole. 
         
            
Wählergruppe Gemeinsam then took the dispute to the Verfassungsgerichtshof. It claims that the principal election committee's
         decision of February should be declared unlawful and annulled in so far as the five Turkish candidates were deleted
         from the list put forward by it on the ground that they were ineligible under Austrian law. It also claims that the electoral
         procedure as a whole should be declared unlawful and annulled and that fresh elections should be held. 
         
            
With a view to ruling on those claims, the Verfassungsgerichtshof raises the question whether the applicable Austrian law
         is compatible with Community law. 
         
            
The Verfassungsgerichtshof takes the view, first, that it should be determined whether a national provision such as that in
         Paragraph 21(3) of the AKG, which excludes,  
          inter alia , migrant workers of Turkish nationality duly registered as belonging to the labour force of the host Member State from eligibility
         for election to the general assembly of a chamber of workers, is contrary to Article 10(1) of Decision No 1/80, in particular
         as regards  
         other conditions of work within the meaning of that article. 
         
            
In that connection, it observes that it follows from Article of the Treaty and the first paragraph of Article of Regulation
         No 1612/and from the judgments in Case C-213/ASTI  [1991] ECR I-(
          ASTI I ) and Case C-118/Commission  v  
          Luxembourg  [1994] ECR I-(
          ASTI II ) that workers who are nationals of another Member State are eligible for election to the full assembly of a body such as
         the chambers of workers in Austria. 
         
            
All the criteria considered by the Court to be relevant in relation to the Luxembourg occupational guilds which were the subject
         of the  
          ASTI I  and  
          ASTI II  judgments, namely the establishment by law of the body concerned, compulsory membership for all workers in the occupational
         sector in question, the body's general task of representing the interests of its members, its right to make proposals and
         submit opinions to the government and the legislature and the duty of every member to pay a contribution, would appear to
         apply to the chambers of workers in Austria also. 
         
            
In order to decide whether that interpretation can be applied to Turkish workers, it must be determined whether the term 
         
         other conditions of work in Article 10(1) of Decision No 1/encompasses the right to stand as a candidate in elections to the bodies legally representing
         the interests of workers. 
         
            
The national court considers that the judgments in Case C-434/Bozkurt  [1995] ECR I-and Case C-116/Meyers  [1995] ECR I-support a broad interpretation of that term. 
         
            
On the other hand, the contrary conclusion may have to be drawn from the fact that, in contrast to the specific form given
         to the term  
         conditions of work used in Article 48(2) of the Treaty by,  
          inter alia , Article of Regulation No 1612/68, the right deriving from the EEC-Turkey Association did not expressly provide for such
         a specific meaning to be given to that term. 
         
            
Second, the national court considers that, if Article 10(1) of Decision No 1/precludes a national law under which workers
         who are not Austrian nationals are ineligible for election to the general assembly of a chamber of workers, it must be determined,
         in addition, whether that article is unconditional and sufficiently precise to be directly applicable, with the result that
         it precludes the application of the incompatible national law. 
         
            
Considering that, in those circumstances, the solution to the dispute required an interpretation of Community law, the Verfassungsgerichtshof
         decided to stay proceedings and refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling: 
         
1.
 Is Article 10(1) of Decision No 1/... to be interpreted as precluding a provision of a Member State which excludes Turkish
         workers from eligibility for the general assembly of a chamber of workers? 
         
2.
 If so, is Article 10(1) of Decision No 1/... directly applicable Community law?
         
The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
In order to provide a helpful answer to the question whether a provision in an agreement concluded between the Community and
         a non-member country which lays down a prohibition on discrimination on the grounds of nationality precludes a Member State
         from refusing, within the scope of the agreement, to grant a national of the non-member country a benefit on the sole ground
         that that person is a national of the non-member country, it is necessary to consider, first, whether the provision in question
         is, by its nature, such as to confer directly on an individual rights which he may assert before a court of a Member State
         and, if so, to determine, second, the scope of the prohibition of discrimination laid down by that provision (see, to that
         effect, Case C-18/Kziber  [1991] ECR I-199, paragraph 14; Case C-416/Eddline El-Yassini  [1999] ECR I-1209, paragraph 24; Case C-262/Sürül  [1999] ECR I-2685, paragraph 47; and Case C-162/Pokrzeptowicz-Meyer  [2002] ECR I-1049, paragraph 18). 
         The direct effect of Article 10(1) of Decision No 1/According to the settled case-law of the Court, a provision in an agreement concluded by the Community with a non-member country
         must be regarded as being directly applicable when, regard being had to its wording and to the purpose and nature of the agreement,
         the provision contains a clear and precise obligation which is not subject, in its implementation or effects, to the adoption
         of any subsequent measure (see,  
          inter alia , Case 12/Demirel  [1987] ECR 3719, paragraph 14; and the judgments, cited above, in  
          Kziber , paragraph 15;  
          Eddline El-Yassini , paragraph 25;  
          Sürül , paragraph 60; and  
          Pokrzeptowicz-Meyer , paragraph 19). 
         
            
In Case C-192/Sevince  [1990] ECR I-3461, paragraphs and 15, the Court stated that the same conditions apply in determining whether the provisions
         of a decision of the EEC-Turkey Association Council may have direct effect. 
         
            
In order to decide whether Article 10(1) of Decision No 1/satisfies those conditions, it is first necessary to examine
         its terms. 
         
            
Article 10(1) prohibits Member States, in clear, precise and unconditional terms, from discriminating, on the basis of nationality,
         against Turkish migrant workers duly registered as belonging to their labour force as regards remuneration and other conditions
         of work. 
         
            
That rule of equal treatment lays down a precise obligation of result and, by its nature, can be relied on by an individual
         before a national court as a basis for requesting it to disapply the discriminatory provisions of the legislation of a Member
         State under which the grant of a right is subject to a condition not imposed on nationals. No further implementing measures
         are required (see, by analogy,  
          Sürül , paragraph 63). 
         
            
That finding is supported by the fact that Article 10(1) of Decision No 1/constitutes merely the implementation and the
         specific expression, in the particular field of remuneration and conditions of work, of the general principle of non-discrimination
         on grounds of nationality laid down in Article of the Association Agreement, which refers to Article of the EEC Treaty,
         which became Article of the EC Treaty (see, by analogy,  
          Sürül , paragraph 64). 
         
            
The above interpretation is also confirmed by the case-law of the Court (see  
          Eddline El-Yassini , paragraph 27, and  
          Pokrzeptowicz-Meyer , paragraphs and 22) relating to the principle of equal treatment as regards conditions of work laid down in the first
         paragraph of Article of the Cooperation Agreement between the European Economic Community and the Kingdom of Morocco, signed
         in Rabat on April and approved on behalf of the Community by Council Regulation (EEC) No 2211/of September (OJ L 264, p. 1) and Article 37(1) of the Europe Agreement establishing an association between the European Communities
         and their Member States and the Republic of Poland, concluded and approved on behalf of the Communities by Decision 93/743/Euratom,
         ECSC, EC of the Council and the Commission of December (OJ L 348, p. 1). 
         
            
Moreover, the finding that the prohibition of discrimination embodied in Article 10(1) of Decision No 1/is capable of directly
         governing the situation of individuals is not contradicted by an examination of the purpose and the nature of that decision
         and the Association Agreement of which it is part. 
         
            
As is clear from Articles 2(1) and 12, the purpose of the Association Agreement is to establish an association to promote
         the development of trade and economic relations between the parties, including in the field of employment, through the progressive
         achievement of freedom of movement for workers. In particular, Article provides that  
         the Contracting Parties agree to be guided by Articles 48, and the Treaty establishing the Community for the purpose
         of progressively securing freedom of movement for workers between them. 
         
            
Article of the Additional Protocol provides for the timetable for the progressive achievement of such freedom of movement
         for workers and states that the Association Council is to adopt the rules necessary to that end. 
         
            
Decision No 1/was adopted by the Association Council in order to implement Article of the Association Agreement and
         Article of the Additional Protocol. According to the third recital in the preamble, it seeks to improve, in the social
         field, the treatment accorded to workers and members of their families in relation to the arrangements introduced by Decision
         No 2/76, which the Council of Association adopted on December 1976. The provisions of Section of Chapter II of Decision
         No 1/80, of which Article 10(1) forms part, thus constitute a further stage in securing freedom of movement for workers on
         the basis of Articles 48, and of the EEC Treaty, which became Articles and of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment,
         Articles EC and EC) and Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC). The fact that, as the Court recognised in 
         
          Demirel , cited above, the abovementioned provisions of the Association Agreement and the Additional Protocol essentially set out
         a programme therefore does not prevent the decisions of the Council of Association which give effect in specific respects
         to the programmes envisaged in that agreement from having direct effect (see, to that effect,  
          Sevince , paragraph 21, and Case C-1/Birden  [1998] ECR I-7747, paragraph 52, and the case-law cited there). 
         
            
Finally, the fact that the Association Agreement is intended essentially to promote the economic development of Turkey and
         therefore involves an imbalance in the obligations assumed by the Community towards the non-member country concerned is not
         such as to prevent recognition by the Community of the direct effect of certain of its provisions or,  
          a fortiori , of those intended to implement that agreement (see, to that effect,  
          Sürül , paragraph 72, and the case-law cited there). 
         
            
That conclusion applies in particular to Article 10(1) of Decision No 1/80, which, far from being purely programmatic in nature,
         establishes, in the field of working conditions and remuneration, a clear and unconditional principle which is sufficiently
         practical to be applied by national courts and is therefore capable of directly governing the legal situation of individuals
         (see, by analogy,  
          Eddline El-Yassini , paragraph 31, and  
          Sürül , paragraph 74). 
         
            
In light of the above, Article 10(1) of Decision No 1/must be recognised as having direct effect in the Member States,
         which means that Turkish nationals to whom that article applies are entitled to rely on it before the courts of the host Member
         State. 
         The scope of Article 10(1) of Decision No 1/First of all, it should be observed that it is undisputed that the five Turkish nationals who were removed from the list of
         candidates of Wählergruppe Gemeinsam for the election to the general assembly of the chamber of workers of the  
          Land  of Vorarlberg are workers duly registered as belonging to the labour force of a Member State within the meaning of Article
         10(1) of Decision No 1/80, as that term is explained in the case-law of the Court (see, most recently, with respect to the
         same term  
         duly registered as belonging to the labour force in Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/80, Case C-188/Kurz  [2002] ECR I-0000, paragraphs and to 41). 
         
            
The Turkish workers are therefore among the persons covered by Article 10(1) of Decision No 1/80. 
         
            
It is likewise undisputed that the five Turkish nationals with whom the case in the main proceedings is concerned fulfil all
         the criteria for eligibility laid down by the applicable national law, except that requiring the possession of Austrian nationality,
         their candidature for election to the general assembly of the chamber of workers of the  
          Land  of Vorarlberg having been excluded only on the ground that they are Turkish nationals. 
         
            
It must therefore be determined whether such a condition of nationality, to which eligibility for election to the general
         assembly of a chamber of workers in the host Member State is subject, is compatible with the prohibition laid down in Article
         10(1) of Decision No 1/of any discrimination based on nationality in the field of conditions of work. 
         
            
Since  
          Bozkurt  (cited above), paragraphs 14, and 20, the Court has consistently inferred from the wording of Article of the Association
         Agreement and Article of the Additional Protocol, as well as from the objective of Decision No 1/─ which is progressively
         to secure freedom of movement for workers, guided by Articles 48, and of the Treaty ─ that the principles laid down
         in those articles must be extended, so far as possible, to Turkish nationals who enjoy the rights conferred by Decision No
         1/(see,  
          inter   alia , Case C-340/Nazli  [2000] ECR I-957, paragraphs to 55, and the references cited therein). 
         
            
It follows that, when determining the scope of the prohibition of discrimination as regards conditions of work laid down by
         Article 10(1) of Decision 1/80, reference should be made to the interpretation given to that principle in the field of freedom
         of movement for workers who are nationals of a Member State of the Community. 
         
            
Such an approach is all the more justified because that article is formulated in terms almost identical to those of Article
         48(2) of the Treaty. 
         
            
In the context of Community law and, in particular, Article 48(2) of the Treaty, the Court has consistently held that national
         legislation which denies workers who are nationals of other Member States the right to vote and/or the right to stand as a
         candidate in elections held by bodies such as occupational guilds to which those workers are compulsorily affiliated, to which
         they must pay contributions, which are responsible for defending and representing workers' interests and which perform a consultative
         function in the legislative field is contrary to the fundamental principle of non-discrimination on the grounds of nationality
         (see  
          ASTI I  and  
          ASTI II ). 
         
            
In those two judgments, the Court concluded that Community law precludes the application of national legislation which denies
         nationals of other Member States who are employed in the host Member State the right to vote and to stand as candidates in
         elections of the members of such bodies. 
         
            
As was pointed out in paragraphs and of this judgment, Article 10(1) of Decision No 1/imposes on each Member State,
         as regards the conditions of work for Turkish workers duly registered as belonging to its labour force, obligations analogous
         to those applying to nationals of other Member States. 
         
            
Consequently, in the light of the principles laid down in connection with the freedom of movement for workers who are nationals
         of a Member State and applicable by analogy to Turkish workers enjoying the rights conferred by Decision No 1/80, national
         legislation which makes eligibility for election to a body representing and defending the interests of workers, such as the
         chambers of workers in Austria, subject to possession of the nationality of the host Member State must be considered to be
         incompatible with Article 10(1) of that decision. 
         
            
Moreover, as the Commission rightly pointed out, the above interpretation is the only one consistent with the aim and broad
         logic of Decision No 1/80, which is intended to secure progressively freedom of movement for workers and to promote the integration
         in the host Member State of Turkish workers who satisfy the conditions laid down in that decision and thus enjoy the rights
         conferred on them by it (see  
          Kurz , paragraphs and 45). Granting Turkish workers legally employed in the territory of a Member State entitlement to the same
         conditions of work as those enjoyed by workers who are nationals of the Member States is an important step towards creating
         an appropriate framework for the gradual integration of migrant Turkish workers. 
         
            
However, the Kammer für Arbeiter und Angestellte für Vorarlberg (Chamber of Workers and Employees of the  
          Land  of Vorarlberg,  
         the Kammer) and the Austrian Government claim, essentially, that the term  
         other conditions of work within the meaning of Article 10(1) of Decision No 1/does not encompass a right for Turkish workers to stand as candidates
         in elections to the bodies representing the legal interests of workers such as the chambers of workers in Austria. That term
         must be regarded as having a narrower scope than the same term used in Article 48(2) of the Treaty because that article was
         clarified in specific terms by Regulation No 1612/68, the first paragraph of Article of which expressly refers to trade-union
         and similar rights, whereas no such specific terms are used in the EEC-Turkey Association Agreement, and because the aims
         of that agreement are less ambitious than those of the Treaty. Accordingly, the findings in  
          ASTI I  and  
          ASTI II  cannot be applied by analogy in the context of chambers of workers. 
         
            
That argument cannot be upheld. 
         
            
It is clear, first of all, that Regulation No 1612/was adopted on the basis of Article of the Treaty, according to which
         the Council is to adopt the measures necessary to secure progressively freedom of movement for workers, which is defined in
         Article of the Treaty. 
         
            
The aim of Regulation No 1612/is therefore solely to clarify the requirements of Article 48; as secondary legislation,
         it cannot supplement the rules of the Treaty which it is intended to implement and which are its legal basis. 
         
            
The first paragraph of Article of that regulation must thus be regarded as constituting merely a particular expression of
         the prohibition of discrimination laid down by Article 48(2) of the Treaty in the specific field of workers' participation
         in trade-union and similar activities, which are guaranteed by any organisation representing and defending workers' interests
         (see, to that effect,  
          ASTI I , paragraph 15). 
         
            
Next, it must be emphasised that, given that Article 48(2) of the Treaty ─ which is likewise simply a particular expression
         of the fundamental rule, laid down in the first paragraph of Article of the Treaty, that discrimination on the basis of
         nationality is prohibited ─ must be regarded as a general principle, the term  
         conditions of work within the meaning of Article 48(2) must be interpreted as having a broad scope in so far as that article provides for equal
         treatment in all matters directly or indirectly related to the exercise of activity as an employee in the host Member State.
         As is clear from paragraphs to of the present judgment, that rule was, subsequently, merely implemented and given particular
         expression by the more specific provisions of Regulation No 1612/68. 
         
            
Accordingly, Article 48(2) of the Treaty and the first paragraph of Article of Regulation No 1612/are an expression of
         that general principle of non-discrimination on the basis of nationality, which is one of the fundamental principles of Community
         law. 
         
            
That finding is supported by paragraph of the  
          ASTI I  judgment, according to which the fundamental principle of non-discrimination on grounds of nationality  
         laid down in Article 48(2) of the Treaty is  
         restated in several  
         individual provisions of Regulation No 1612/68, including, in particular, Articles and 8. It is likewise confirmed by the fact that,
         in  
          ASTI II , the Court found that the Member State concerned had failed to fulfil its obligations on the double basis of those two articles
         read in conjunction. 
         
            
Finally, it is clear from the wording of Article 10(1) of Decision No 1/80, which is drafted in terms almost identical to
         those of Article 48(2) of the Treaty, and from a comparison of the aims and the context of the Association Agreement with
         those of the Treaty that there is no reason to regard Article 10(1) of that decision as having a scope other than that given
         by the Court to Article 48(2) in  
          ASTI I  and  
          ASTI II . 
         
            
Although Article 10(1) of Decision No 1/does not establish a principle of freedom of movement for Turkish workers within
         the Community, whilst Article of the Treaty lays down for the benefit of Community nationals the principle of freedom of
         movement for workers, Article 10(1) lays down for workers of Turkish nationality, once they are legally employed within the
         territory of a Member State, a right to equal treatment as regards conditions of work and remuneration of the same extent
         as that conferred in similar terms by Article 48(2) of the Treaty on nationals of the Member States (see, by analogy,  
          Pokrzeptowicz-Meyer , paragraphs and 41). 
         
            
The Kammer also maintains that, even if eligibility for election to the general assembly of the chambers of work in Austria
         falls within the scope of Article 10(1) of Decision No 1/80, those chambers are institutions governed by public law which
         participate in the exercise of public-law powers and that the exclusion of a right for foreign workers to be elected to such
         bodies is justified for that reason. 
         
            
However, it should be stated, first of all, that, in the order for reference, the Verfassungsgerichtshof found that all the
         considerations on which the  
          ASTI I  and  
          ASTI II  judgments were based ─ including the absence of participation in the exercise of powers conferred by public law by the Luxembourg
         occupational chambers at issue in the cases leading to those judgments ─ can be applied to the chambers of workers in Austria
         and that those chambers do not appear to be of a type to participate in the exercise of such public-law powers. 
         
            
It must be added that, in any event, it is settled case-law that the non-application of the rules laid down in Article of the Treaty to activities which constitute participation in the exercise of powers conferred by public law is an exception
         to a fundamental freedom and must therefore be interpreted in such a way as to limit its scope to that which is strictly necessary
         in order to safeguard the interests which that exception allows the Member States to protect. It follows that that exception
         cannot permit a Member State to submit generally any participation in a public-law institution such as the chambers of work
         in Austria to a condition of nationality but merely permits foreign workers to be excluded, where appropriate, from certain
         specific activities of the institution in question which, in themselves, actually entail direct participation in the exercise
         of public-law powers conferred (see,  
          inter alia ,  
          ASTI I , paragraph 19). 
         
            
It follows that, with respect to foreign workers enjoying equal treatment as regards remuneration and other conditions of
         work, the denial of the right to stand as a candidate for election to a body representing and defending the interests of workers,
         such as the chambers of workers in Austria, can be justified neither by the legal nature of the body in question under national
         law nor by the fact that certain of its functions could involve participation in the exercise of powers conferred by public
         law (see  
          ASTI I , paragraph 20). 
         
            
In the light of all the above findings, the answer to the questions referred for a preliminary ruling must be that Article
         10(1) of Decision No 1/is to be interpreted as: 
         
─
having direct effect in the Member States, and 
         
─
precluding the application of national legislation which excludes Turkish workers duly registered as belonging to the labour
            force of the host Member State from eligibility for election to the general assembly of a body representing and defending
            the interests of workers, such as the chambers of workers in Austria. 
         
Costs
            
The costs incurred by the Austrian Government and by the Commission, which have submitted observations to the Court, are not
         recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main action, a step in the proceedings pending before the
         national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
in answer to the questions referred to it by the Verfassungsgerichtshof by order of March 2001, hereby rules: 
          Article 10(1) of Decision No 1/of September on the development of the Association, adopted by the Association Council
               established by the Association Agreement between the European Economic Community and Turkey, must be interpreted as:
─
having direct effect in the Member States, and 
            
─
precluding the application of national legislation which excludes Turkish workers duly registered as belonging to the labour
            force of the host Member State from eligibility for election to the general assembly of a body representing and defending
            the interests of workers, such as the chambers of workers in Austria. 
            
Puissochet 
Schintgen
Skouris 
Macken 
Cunha Rodrigues 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on May 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
J.-P. Puissochet  
Registrar
President of the Sixth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: German.
Top  
 