
ORDER OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
May (*)
      
(Appeal – Plant protection products – Active substance trifluralin – Non-inclusion in Annex I to Directive 91/414/EEC – Decision 1999/468/EC – Article 5)
In Case C‑584/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, brought on November 2011,
Dow AgroSciences Ltd, established in Hitchin (United Kingdom),
      
Dow AgroSciences LLC, established in Indianapolis (United States),
      
Dow AgroSciences SAS, established in Mougins (France),
      
Dow AgroSciences Export SAS, established in Mougins (France),
      
Dow Agrosciences BV, established in Hoek (Netherlands), 
      
Dow AgroSciences Hungary kft, established in Budapest (Hungary),
      
Dow AgroSciences Italia srl, established in Milan (Italy),
      
Dow AgroSciences Polska sp. z o.o., established in Warsaw (Poland),
      
Dow AgroSciences Iberica SA, established in Madrid (Spain),
      
Dow AgroSciences s.r.o., established in Prague (Czech Republic),
      
Dow AgroSciences Danmark A/S, established in Kongens Lyngby (Denmark), 
      
Dow AgroSciences GmbH, established in Munich (Germany),
      
represented by K. Van Maldegem and C. Mereu, avocats,
appellants,
the other party to the proceedings being:
European Commission, represented by G. von Rintelen and P. Ondrůšek, acting as Agents, and by J. Stuyck, advocaat, with an address for service
         in Luxembourg,
      
defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
composed of J.-J. Kasel, acting as President of the Fifth Chamber, M. Safjan and M. Berger (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: E. Sharpston,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to rule by order, pursuant to Article of the Rules of Procedure of
         the Court of Justice, 
      
makes the following
Order
By their appeal, Dow AgroSciences Ltd, Dow AgroSciences LLC, Dow AgroSciences SAS, Dow AgroSciences Export SAS, Dow AgroSciences
         BV, Dow AgroSciences Hungary kft, Dow AgroSciences Italia Srl, Dow AgroSciences Polska sp. z o.o., Dow AgroSciences Iberica
         SA, Dow AgroSciences s.r.o., Dow AgroSciences Danmark A/S and Dow AgroSciences GmbH request the Court of Justice to set aside
         the judgment of the General Court in Case T‑475/Dow AgroSciences and Others v Commission [2011] ECR I‑(‘the judgment under appeal’) by which the General Court dismissed their action for annulment of Commission
         Decision 2007/629/EC of September concerning the non-inclusion of trifluralin in Annex I to Council Directive 91/414/EEC
         and the withdrawal of authorisations for plant protection products containing that substance (OJ L 255, p. 42) (‘the
         decision at issue’).
      
 Legal context
Council Directive 91/414/EEC of July concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market (OJ L 230,
         p. 1), as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 806/of April (OJ L 122, p. 1; ‘Directive 91/414’), lays
         down the Community rules applicable to the granting of authorisation to place plant protection products – such as pesticides
         and weedkillers – on the market and to the withdrawal of such authorisation. The directive requires that the Member States
         authorise the placing of those products on the market only if the active substance contained in those products is listed in
         Annex I to that directive.
      
Under Article 4(1) of Directive 91/414, the Member States must ensure that the placing on the market of a plant protection
         product is not authorised unless it complies with certain criteria relating in particular to the environment and to human
         health. It is provided that the use of the active substance, that is to say, the ingredient which makes the product effective,
         must have been authorised at European Union level. Such authorisation cannot be granted until after the active substance has
         been included in Annex I to that directive.
      
Article of Directive 91/lays down the conditions required in order for a plant protection product to be eligible for
         inclusion in Annex I to that directive. That article provides that inclusion may be envisaged only for an initial period not
         exceeding years and, moreover, if it may be expected, in the light of current scientific and technical knowledge, that
         the plant protection products containing the active substance in question will fulfil certain conditions as to harmlessness.
      
Articles and of that directive govern the procedure for including active substances in Annex I.
      
Article of that directive states that the European Commission is to be assisted by the Standing Committee on the Food Chain
         and Animal Health (‘the Standing Committee’).
      
Trifluralin is an active substance that is covered by the second stage of the work programme referred to in Article 8(2) of
         Directive 91/414. It belongs to the list of substances which are subject to the procedures put in place by Commission Regulation
         (EC) No 451/of February laying down the detailed rules for the implementation of the second and third stages
         of the work programme referred to in Article 8(2) of Council Directive 91/(OJ L 55, p. 25), as amended by Commission
         Regulation (EC) No 1490/of August (OJ L 224, p. 23) (‘Regulation No 451/2000’).
      
Under the provisions of Directive 91/and Regulation No 451/2000, the evaluation procedure operates in several stages.
         The Commission, having been requested by a producer to include a substance in Annex I to that directive, must designate, after
         an initial examination of the request, a rapporteur Member State (‘the RMS’) for the active substance that is the subject
         of the evaluation. Following that designation, there is a complex evaluation procedure involving the authorities of the RMS,
         the Commission, the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), the Standing Committee on Plant Health (to which the matter is
         referred under the ‘comitology’ procedure) and possibly experts from the Member States (peer review). The Commission cannot
         adopt a final decision on whether or not to include the active substance in Annex I to Directive 91/until that procedure
         has been concluded.
      
Article of Regulation No 451/specifies the documents that must always be included in the complete dossier and in the
         summary dossier which producers are required to submit to the RMS.
      
Under the third indent of Article 6(2)(c) of that regulation, the submission of an additional study is possible only in so
         far as the study was already ongoing at the time of submission of the complete dossier, the communication of that study was
         announced when that dossier was submitted, and the study was submitted at the latest within the months following that submission.
      
Article 8(5) of that regulation provides: 
      
‘The EFSA shall circulate the rapporteur’s draft assessment report to the Member States and may organise a consultation of
         experts including the [RMS]. The EFSA may consult some or all of the notifiers of active substances specified in Annex I on
         the report or parts of the report on the relevant active substance.
      
Without prejudice to Article of [Directive 91/414], submission of new studies shall not be accepted. The [RMS], with the
         agreement of the EFSA, may request the notifiers to submit within specified periods further data considered by the [RMS] [or]
         the EFSA necessary to clarify the dossier.’
      
Regulation (EC) No 850/of the European Parliament and of the Council of April on persistent organic pollutants
         and amending Directive 79/117/EEC (OJ L 158, p. 7) is the legal basis for the assessment of chemicals in the light of
         the persistent organic pollutants (‘POP’) criteria applying the Stockholm Convention on persistent organic pollutants, signed
         on May (‘the Stockholm Convention’).
      
Article 3(3) of Regulation No 850/provides: 
      
‘Member States and the Commission shall, within the assessment and authorisation schemes for existing and new chemicals and
         pesticides under the relevant Community legislation, take into consideration the criteria set out in paragraph of Annex
         D to the [Stockholm] Convention and take appropriate measures to control existing chemicals and pesticides and prevent the
         production, placing on the market and use of new chemicals and pesticides, which exhibit characteristics of [POP].’
      
A Commission working group concluded that trifluralin met the POP selection criteria referred to in Article 3(3) of Regulation
         No 850/2004, and therefore that that substance was caught by the legal obligations therein defined. 
      
Article of Council Decision 1999/468/EC of June laying down the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers
         conferred on the Commission (OJ L 184, p. 23) (‘the comitology decision’), entitled ‘Regulatory procedure’, provides:
      
‘1.      The Commission shall be assisted by a regulatory committee composed of the representatives of the Member States and chaired
         by the representative of the Commission.
      
2.      The representative of the Commission shall submit to the committee a draft of the measures to be taken. The committee shall
         deliver its opinion on the draft within a time-limit which the chairman may lay down according to the urgency of the matter.
         The opinion shall be delivered by the majority laid down in Article 205(2) and (4) of the Treaty in the case of decisions
         which the Council [of the European Union] is required to adopt on a proposal from the Commission. The votes of the representatives
         of the Member States within the Committee shall be weighted in the manner set out in that Article. The chairman shall not
         vote.
      
3.      The Commission shall, without prejudice to Article 8, adopt the measures envisaged if they are in accordance with the opinion
         of the committee.
      
4.      If the measures envisaged are not in accordance with the opinion of the committee, or if no opinion is delivered, the Commission
         shall, without delay, submit to the Council a proposal relating to the measures to be taken and shall inform the European
         Parliament.
      
5.      If the European Parliament considers that a proposal submitted by the Commission pursuant to a basic instrument adopted in
         accordance with the procedure laid down in Article of the Treaty exceeds the implementing powers provided for in that
         basic instrument, it shall inform the Council of its position.
      
6.      The Council may, where appropriate in view of any such position, act by qualified majority on the proposal, within a period
         to be laid down in each basic instrument but which shall in no case exceed three months from the date of referral to the Council.
      
If within that period the Council has indicated by qualified majority that it opposes the proposal, the Commission shall re-examine
         it. It may submit an amended proposal to the Council, re-submit its proposal or present a legislative proposal on the basis
         of the Treaty.
      
If on the expiry of that period the Council has neither adopted the proposed implementing act nor indicated its opposition
         to the proposal for implementing measures, the proposed implementing act shall be adopted by the Commission.’
      
 Facts underlying the dispute and the decision at issue
Trifluralin is an active substance used as a selective broad spectrum herbicide which belongs to the class of dinitroaniline-type
         herbicides and which can be used to control grass and broad-leaved weeds. It is absorbed by the roots and shoots and inhibits
         cell division. In most cases, trifluralin is incorporated in the soil in order to protect it against degradation by sunlight.
      
The representative formulated product for the evaluation required to be carried out under Directive 91/is ‘EF 1521’ (known
         as ‘Treflan’), that is to say, an emulsifiable concentrate registered under different trade names in Europe. 
      
In August the appellants and the other applicants at first instance, that is Makhteshim-Agan Holding BV, Makhteshim Agan
         International Coordination Center, Dintec Agroquímica – Produtos Químicos Lda and Finchimica SpA, all of which produce or manufacture trifluralin or trifluralin-based plant protection products or hold
         national authorisations to market and sell those products in one or more Member States of the European Union, notified the
         Commission of their wish to secure the inclusion of that substance in Annex I to Directive 91/414. They did so within the
         period laid down in Article 4(1) of Regulation No 451/2000.
      
That notification gave rise to a large number of scientific assessments involving the experts of the Commission’s Directorate-General
         for the Environment, the EFSA, the Standing Committee, the Member States, the European Union’s trifluralin working group and
         the European Pesticides Co-ordination (‘EPCO’). 
      
The applicants at first instance submitted their dossiers on April to the Hellenic Republic, the Member State designated
         by the Commission as RMS for the trifluralin evaluation procedure.
      
In its draft assessment report presented on July 2003, the RMS recommended that trifluralin be included in Annex I to Directive
         91/subject to two conditions, relating (1) to the minimum purity of the substance, and (2) to the adoption by Member States,
         when granting authorisations, of risk mitigation measures for the protection of aquatic organisms.
      
In regard to that last point, the draft assessment report stated that the applicants at first instance could ‘consider conducting
         new experimental tests to address specific concerns at [Member State] level’, while nevertheless pointing out that such studies
         were ‘not a requirement for the inclusion of trifluralin in Annex I [to Directive 91/414]’.
      
Following the EFSA’s transmission of that draft report to the Member States and the notifying parties on July in order
         to initiate the peer review provided for in Article 8(5) of Regulation No 451/(‘the peer review’), two Member States
         expressed their concerns regarding the persistence, bioaccumulation and high volatility of trifluralin, and the view that
         that active substance should not be authorised to be placed on the market. 
      
At the first meeting of the EFSA ‘Evaluation’ working group, which took place on January and was attended by representatives
         of the applicants at first instance and the European Crop Protection Association, it was decided that various further data
         would be necessary in regard to, inter alia, the storage stability of the substance; its shelf life; analytical methods for
         the determination of impurities; mammalian toxicology; a metabolism study in oilseeds; and a number of studies on the environmental
         behaviour and fate of the substance. 
      
On March the applicants at first instance sent an email to the EFSA requesting clarification regarding the deadline
         set for a new lengthy study of plant metabolites TR‑and TR‑of trifluralin.
      
By email of March the EFSA replied that it was for the applicants at first instance to address the data requirements
         by either submitting the requested information or providing confirmation that it would be submitted, and that the peer review
         of trifluralin would continue to stay in line with the deadlines given in Commission Regulation (EC) No 1490/of August
         laying down further detailed rules for the implementation of the third stage of the programme of work referred to in
         Article 8(2) of Directive 91/and amending Regulation (EC) No 451/(OJ L 224, p. 23). In addition, any outstanding
         data would be referenced in the EFSA’s conclusion on the risk assessment.
      
Owing to the disagreement of certain Member States with the report of the RMS, the matter was referred to the sittings of
         EPCO, that is to say, the operational secretariat – composed of officials of the German Federal Ministry for Consumer Protection
         and Food Safety and the United Kingdom Pesticides Safety Directorate – which is responsible, within the EFSA, for the practical
         organisation of the rounds of experts responsible for peer review. 
      
The conclusions of the EPCO meeting were lodged on June 2004, at the end of the assessment carried out by the Member States’
         technical experts between April and June with the aim of re-examining the draft assessment report. Those conclusions
         resulted in new requirements, expressed in the following terms: 
      
‘… [t]he initial [predicted environmental concentrations] together with the [no observed effect concentration] of 0.3µg/l
         should be used for a new risk assessment. If the [applicants at first instance disagree] on this, additional studies with
         different exposure regimes to identify the most critical exposure period should be conducted. [The applicants at first instance
         are] to submit exposure studies with different exposure times using the fathead minnow [(pimephales promelas)] as the most sensitive fish species.’ 
      
On October the RMS, in an email to which the text of the minutes of the EPCO experts’ meeting referred to in paragraph
         of the present order was attached, stated the following to the applicants at first instance: 
      
‘Please find attached the data requirements for ecotoxicology and residues as presented in the evaluation table for trifluralin
         that was produced following the EPCO meetings. The sections of fate and behaviour and toxicology have no data requirements
         and the section of phys-chem and methods of analysis has not prepared its part since a clarification by EPCO for some point
         is still missing.’ 
      
On February the RMS informed the applicants at first instance by email that the draft EFSA conclusions on trifluralin
         had become final. It is apparent from those conclusions that, although there had been no evaluation either by the EFSA or
         by the RMS on the POP properties of trifluralin, the meeting of the ‘Evaluation’ working group considered that a paragraph
         should be included in the EFSA’s conclusions, so as to draw attention to the POP issue. It was also pointed out that, although
         the POP issue is not a criterion for non-inclusion of any active substance in Annex I to Directive 91/414, a substance that
         has been classified as POP should be withdrawn from the European Union market.
      
On March the EFSA delivered its opinion which included a list of eight studies which were to be carried out or were
         ongoing with, for each of those studies, information on a possible submission date given by the applicants at first instance,
         going from July to March 2006, or the information that no valid date had been proposed. The study on chronic toxicity
         to fish was included among those studies.  
      
In that opinion, the EFSA stated that it was unable to take Regulation No 850/into account because it had entered into
         force when the peer review was at an advanced stage, but that the available information assessed during the peer review should
         allow the Commission and the Member States to assess trifluralin in the light of the provisions of that regulation as well.
         
      
In addition, the EFSA stated that various studies remained necessary with regard to the high toxicity of trifluralin for aquatic
         organisms, in particular fish, the high risk of bioaccumulation, high persistence in soil and the risk of propagation over
         great distance by air by reason of the high volatility of that active substance. As regards high toxicity for aquatic organisms,
         the EFSA took the view that further data were needed and that risk assessment in that regard could be concluded only when
         those data had been evaluated. It further considered that appropriate risk mitigation measures were required with respect
         to the high risk for aquatic organisms.
      
By letter of May the Commission invited the applicants at first instance to submit their comments on the conclusions
         of the EFSA’s final report within four weeks of receipt of that letter, stating that no further studies or modifications to
         the uses notified would be accepted.
      
Furthermore, in a letter of June 2005, the Commission stated that it refused to respond to the technical issues raised
         by the applicants at first instance or to give indications as to the positions of the Member States in that regard.
      
The RMS informed the applicants at first instance by email that a draft directive for the inclusion of trifluralin in Annex
         I to Directive 91/had been included on the agenda for the meeting of the Standing Committee of and July 2005. The
         agenda for the next meeting of the Standing Committee, which was held on and September 2005, again referred to a draft
         directive for the inclusion of trifluralin.
      
In a note of October the Commission’s Directorate-General for the Environment expressed the view that it was necessary
         that trifluralin be examined by the ‘Technical Committee on New and Existing Substances’ sub-group (‘the TC‑NES sub-group’)
         against the POP criteria. It proposed, in view of the time constraints under Directive 91/414, that trifluralin should be
         submitted to a group of experts as soon as possible, despite the absence of a formal decision on this procedure. The Commission
         took the view that such an opinion would be very helpful for the Standing Committee and for the Commission itself in the procedure
         carried out in the context of Directive 91/414. In that note, the Directorate-General for the Environment also expressed the
         wish that the TC‑NES sub-group should discuss that point at its meeting on and October 2005.
      
In a letter of January the European Union’s trifluralin working group took note of the examination undertaken on the
         basis of the POP criteria and submitted its comments on the POP evaluation to the TC-NES sub-group.
      
On January 2006, in a letter sent to the Commission, the applicants at first instance challenged the legality, in the context
         of the evaluation required under Directive 91/414, of the evaluation of trifluralin against the POP criteria. 
      
In a working document dated February 2006, the Directorate-General for the Environment stated that trifluralin was an example
         of an existing active substance used in plant protection products exhibiting POP characteristics, and that, therefore, Article
         3(3) of Regulation No 850/had to be applied when considering inclusion of that substance in Annex I to Directive 91/and when granting a national authorisation for a plant protection product containing trifluralin. The Directorate-General
         for the Environment stated that the wording of that provision left a lot to the discretion of authorities involved in the
         assessment and authorisation schemes, and that, in the case of a plant protection product which is intentionally applied to
         field crops and therefore also spread into the environment, exposure could be fully eliminated only by prohibiting the use
         of that product. It added that it could not, however, be directly deduced from the regulation or the Stockholm Convention
         that there was an obligation to eliminate all exposure, with the result that the decision on what can be regarded as ‘an appropriate
         measure to control’ a POP-like substance was left to be made, case by case, by the authorities working within the particular
         assessment and authorisation scheme. The Directorate-General for the Environment therefore requested the POP competent authorities
         to discuss the issue with their counterparts under Directive 91/414, and, if possible, to agree on an opinion/advice concerning
         the interpretation of Article 3(3) of Regulation No 850/that could be forwarded to the competent authorities under Directive
         91/414.
      
By letter of March 2006, in reply to the letter from the applicants at first instance of January 2006, the Commission
         reminded them of the functional separation between the EFSA and the Commission and stated that the EFSA assumed sole responsibility
         for the content of its report.
      
On May the applicants at first instance submitted to the RMS a study on chronic toxicity to fish undertaken in March
         by an independent laboratory, together with an updated chronic risk assessment. That study was also submitted on June
         to the Commission, which communicated it to the Member States. The Commission, however, took the view that that study
         was out of time and that there was thus no need to take it into consideration. 
      
The non-inclusion of trifluralin was subsequently included on the agenda of the meetings of the Standing Committee of and
         May 2006, and July 2006, and September 2006, and November and and January 2007, without a
         vote being taken at the end of those meetings. 
      
On March the Standing Committee delivered an opinion in favour of the non-inclusion of trifluralin in Annex I to Directive
         91/414. It is evident from the summary report of that meeting that a number of Member States commented on that occasion, including
         the RMS, which declared that it was in a position to vote in favour of the proposal for the non‑inclusion of trifluralin,
         in order to allow the applicants at first instance to take advantage of the subsequent 18-month period formally to submit
         the study on chronic toxicity to fish and to allow it, as RMS, formally to evaluate that study. 
      
On September the Commission adopted the decision at issue, concluding that trifluralin should not be included in Annex
         I to the directive and that authorisations for plant protection products containing that substance should be withdrawn. 
      
According to recital in the preamble to the decision at issue, a number of concerns remained unresolved according to the
         information available, owing, first of all, to trifluralin’s high toxicity to aquatic organisms, in particular to fish; next,
         to the fact that trifluralin is highly persistent in soil and its potential for accumulation; and, lastly, to the presence
         of trifluralin in places distant from application (findings on POP properties).
      
On April the applicants at first instance informed the Commission of their intention to submit a fresh request for
         the inclusion of trifluralin in Annex I to Directive 91/414, pursuant to Commission Regulation (EC) No 33/of January
         laying down detailed rules for the application of Directive 91/as regards a regular and an accelerated procedure
         for the assessment of active substances which were part of the programme of work referred to in Article 8(2) of that directive
         but have not been included in its Annex I (OJ L 15, p. 5). 
      
The decision at issue was repealed by Article of Commission Decision 2010/355/EU of June concerning the non-inclusion
         of trifluralin in Annex I to Directive 91/(OJ L 160, p. 30). 
      
 The action before the General Court and the judgment under appeal
By application lodged at the General Court Registry on December 2007, the appellants brought an action under the fourth
         paragraph of Article EC for annulment of the decision at issue and for a declaration that Article 3(3) of Regulation No 850/is illegal.
      
In support of their action before the General Court, the appellants put forward six pleas for annulment and a plea of illegality
         relating to Article 3(3) of Regulation No 850/2004. 
      
The first plea alleged that the decision at issue was not based on the EFSA report provided for in Article 8(8) of Regulation
         No 451/and that it was therefore adopted in breach of the applicable procedural rules. In support of their second plea,
         the appellants claimed that the Commission had made a certain number of manifest errors of assessment. The third plea alleged
         that the decision at issue did not comply with the applicable legislative procedure and breached Articles EC and EC, Article
         8(8) of Regulation No 451/and Article of the comitology decision. The fourth plea alleged failure to observe the procedural
         deadlines provided for in Article 8(7) and (8) of Regulation No 451/2000. In support of the fifth plea, the appellants claimed
         that the decision at issue was inadequately reasoned. Lastly, the sixth plea alleged breach of the principles of legal certainty,
         protection of legitimate expectations and proportionality, and also infringement of the rights of the defence and of the right
         to a fair hearing. 
      
The General Court dismissed the action, holding, in essence, that the Commission was not required to follow the EFSA’s opinion
         and that the appellants had not proved any manifest error of assessment, abuse of powers, procedural error or failure to state
         reasons on the part of the Commission. Moreover, the General Court was unable to establish any breach of the principles of
         legal certainty, of the rights of the defence or of the appellants’ legitimate expectations.
      
 Forms of order sought
The appellants claim that the Court should:
      
–        set aside the judgment under appeal and annul the decision at issue;
–        in the alternative, refer the case back to the General Court; and
–        order the Commission to pay the costs, including those incurred at first instance. 
The Commission contends that the Court should dismiss the appeal and order the appellants to pay the costs. 
      
 The appeal
Under Article of its Rules of Procedure, where an appeal is, in whole or in part, manifestly inadmissible or manifestly
         unfounded, the Court may at any time, acting on a proposal from the Judge-Rapporteur and after hearing the Advocate General,
         dismiss that appeal in whole or in part by reasoned order, without opening the oral procedure. It is appropriate to apply
         that provision in the present case. 
      
The appellants submit that the General Court made a number of errors in interpreting the legal framework applicable in the
         present case and in interpreting the facts and evidence put forward for its consideration. Those errors of interpretation
         resulted in the General Court making a number of errors of law. In support of their appeal the appellants, recalling the jurisdiction
         of the Court of Justice to review a judgment of the General Court where the evidence has been distorted or where the substantive
         inaccuracy of its findings is apparent from the documents submitted to the General Court, put forward three pleas in law.
         
      
By the first of those pleas, the appellants submit that, by considering that none of the conditions laid down by Article 8(5)
         of Regulation No 451/was satisfied and that no request for a further study had been made to the applicants at first instance,
         the General Court misinterpreted that provision, distorted the evidence brought before it and accordingly made an error of
         law. By their second plea, they claim that the General Court made a manifest error of assessment in maintaining that the Commission’s
         decision to postpone the vote on its draft decision for trifluralin’s inclusion in Annex I to Directive 91/and on the
         modification of the proposals for inclusion did not infringe Article of the comitology decision. As regards the third plea,
         the appellants submit, inter alia, that the General Court made an error of assessment in holding that the contested decision
         was not based on POP criteria – for which there was no basis in the relevant legal framework – whereas evidence on record
         clearly showed that the Commission did apply those criteria.
      
The Commission contends, in essence, that, although the appellants largely rely, formally, on a distortion of the evidence,
         they are in actual fact seeking to challenge the General Court’s assessment of the facts. The pleas regarding the alleged
         distortion of the evidence should therefore be rejected as inadmissible. However, the Commission also states its views on
         the substance of the case and challenges the appellants’ claims in their entirety. 
      
 First plea in law: infringement of Article 8(5) of Regulation No 451/In support of the first plea, the appellants essentially rely on two complaints. By the first complaint, they criticise the
         General Court for concluding that no request was ever made to them, even informally, for submission of a further study. The
         second complaint is that the General Court infringed the procedural rules relating to submission of a request for a further
         study. In that regard the appellants criticise the General Court for having found, first, that there was no indication in
         the dossier that the EFSA had given its agreement to such a request; secondly, that it could be concluded from the fact that
         no deadline was set by the RMS that no request had been made; and, thirdly, that the new aquatic study had not provided an
         answer with regard to the other risks. 
      
 The first complaint
–       Arguments of the parties
The appellants criticise the General Court for having concluded that a reference to additional studies could not be regarded
         as a request for further data necessary to clarify the dossier, and maintain that, in doing so, it misinterpreted Article
         8(5) of Regulation No 451/2000. In that regard they submit, in particular, that Article 8(5) does not specify which type of
         data are to be considered to constitute further data ‘necessary to clarify the dossier’. 
      
The Commission challenges the substance of that argument, contending that it is clear beyond any doubt from the first sentence
         of the second subparagraph of Article 8(5) of Regulation No 451/that the submission of a new study is not accepted in
         any case. Accordingly, new studies can never be considered to be such further data.
      
–       Findings of the Court
In the first place, it must be recalled that Article of Regulation No 451/expressly provides, twice, in paragraphs
         and 5, that, without prejudice to Article of Directive 91/414, submission of ‘new studies’ is not allowed after notification
         of the dossier by the notifier. 
      
The only exception in that regard concerns the studies referred to in the third indent of Article 6(2)(c) of Regulation No 451/2000.
         According to that provision, the submission of an additional study is possible only in so far as the study was already ongoing
         at the time of submission of the complete dossier, the communication of that study was announced when that dossier was submitted,
         and the study was submitted at the latest within the months following that submission. However, it must be noted that the
         appellants did not plead the foregoing, either before the General Court or in the present appeal. 
      
Even though, according to Article of Regulation No 451/2000, the RMS – in some circumstances with the agreement of the EFSA
         where the draft assessment report has already been sent to the EFSA – can request the notifier to submit, within the time-limits
         specified in that provision, further data which the RMS or, where appropriate, the EFSA, judge necessary to clarify the dossier,
         Article makes no provision for any such exception in respect of the submission of new studies.
      
Accordingly, further data can be communicated solely for the purpose of clarifying the information already included in the
         complete dossier. It should be noted in that regard that it is incumbent on the notifier to ensure that all the studies and
         data relevant for the purposes of the evaluation of the active substance sought to be included in Annex I to Directive 91/are already in the notified dossier.
      
A literal interpretation of Article 8(2) and (5) of Regulation No 451/thus supports the unequivocal conclusion that a
         request from the RMS, within the meaning of those provisions, can relate only to ‘further data’ and not to ‘new studies’,
         and that therefore those further data can never give rise to the submission of new studies. 
      
The General Court did not, therefore, err in law when it stated, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, that
         the submission of new studies cannot be equated with the communication of further data.
      
Consequently, the appellants’ complaint concerning a misinterpretation of Article 8(5) of Regulation No 451/is manifestly
         unfounded.
      
 The second complaint
–       Arguments of the parties
First, the appellants claim that the General Court distorted the evidence that was put before it by deciding that no request
         for a further study, as referred to in Article 8(5) of Regulation No 451/2000, had been sent to them. The appellants maintain
         in that regard that the email from the RMS of October 2004, the EFSA’s table of June and the EFSA report of March
         can be regarded as such a request, inasmuch as that provision does not impose specific formalities on that type of request,
         unlike other articles in the same regulation. Secondly, the appellants claim that the General Court wrongly found in paragraph
         of the judgment under appeal that the dossier that was submitted to it did not contain any indication that the EFSA had
         agreed that the appellants should supply such a further study. Thirdly, the appellants challenge the General Court’s finding
         that, since no deadline was specified by the RMS in its correspondence with them, the documents relied on in that respect
         cannot legitimately be described as a request for further data to be supplied, given that the lack of a deadline does not
         nullify the legitimacy of that request, particularly as the fact that no deadline was set cannot be attributed to the appellants.
         Fourthly, the appellants criticise the General Court’s finding that the new aquatic study did not provide an answer with regard
         to the other risks identified by the EFSA, since those other risks were not identified by the EFSA as critical areas of concern,
         which means that they did not in themselves prevent a decision to include trifluralin in Annex I to Directive 91/414.
      
The Commission challenges the admissibility as well as the substance of those complaints, contending in particular that there
         was neither a request from the RMS for a further study nor any agreement by the EFSA in that respect, and that the nature
         of the documents to which the appellants refer means that those documents cannot be regarded as requests meeting the requirement
         in Regulation No 451/2000. Furthermore, the absence of any deadline in those documents shows that no such request was ever
         made. As to the General Court’s finding that the new aquatic study did not provide an answer with regard to the other risks
         identified by the EFSA, the Commission notes that that conclusion is formally correct, given that the study in question could
         not address such risks, as it had a different purpose.
      
–       Findings of the Court
It must be observed that, in paragraphs to of their appeal, the appellants criticise, in particular, the General Court’s
         assessment  of the facts.
      
It is clear from Article TFEU and the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European
         Union that the General Court has exclusive jurisdiction, first, to find the facts, except where the substantive inaccuracy
         of its findings is apparent from the documents submitted to it, and, secondly, to assess those facts. When the General Court
         has found or assessed the facts, the Court of Justice has jurisdiction under Article TFEU to review the legal characterisation
         of those facts by the General Court and to review the legal conclusions which it has drawn from them (Joined Cases C‑628/P
         and C‑14/P Alliance One International and Standard Commercial Tobacco v Commission and Commission v Alliance One International and Others [2012] ECR I‑0000, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
The Court of Justice thus has no jurisdiction to establish the facts or, in principle, to examine the evidence which the General
         Court has accepted in support of those facts. Provided that the evidence has been properly obtained and the general principles
         of law and the rules of procedure in relation to the burden of proof and the taking of evidence have been observed, it is
         for the General Court alone to assess the value which should be attached to the evidence produced to it. Save where the clear
         sense of that evidence is distorted, that appraisal does not therefore constitute a question of law which is subject, as such,
         to review by the Court of Justice (Case C‑105/P Nederlandse Federatieve Vereniging voor de Groothandel op Elektrotechnisch Gebied v Commission [2006] ECR I‑8725, paragraph 70, and Alliance One International and Standard Commercial Tobacco v Commission and Commission v Alliance One International and Others, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
In that regard it must be noted that, in this instance – as the Commission, moreover, correctly observes in its submissions
         –, even though the appellants formally invoke such distortion by the General Court, particularly with regard to the form of
         the request for further data within the meaning of Article 8(5) of Regulation No 451/2000, in reality the appellants are trying
         to obtain a new assessment of the facts and of the evidence. 
      
In that context, it must also be observed that distortion of the facts must be obvious from the documents on the Court’s file,
         without there being any need to carry out a new assessment of the facts and the evidence (Case C‑551/P General Motors v Commission [2006] ECR I‑3173, paragraph 54; Case C‑254/P Calvin Klein Trademark Trust v OHIM [2010] ECR I‑7989, paragraph 50; and judgment of July in Case C‑264/P Kaimer and Others v Commission, paragraph 24).
      
With regard to the alleged distortion in relation to the nature of the documents referred to by the appellants (an EFSA report,
         the reporting tables of a meeting of the EFSA, the conclusions of that organisation and an email from the RMS), the absence
         of the EFSA’s agreement to the alleged request to the appellants to provide further data and the fact that there was no deadline
         for the submission of such data, it must be noted that, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, the General
         Court analysed the documents on which the appellants relied in support of their view. It deduced that the appellants were
         maintaining that the documents communicated by the applicants in the main proceedings on May constituted not further
         data but an additional study, and, moreover, that the absence both of any indication that the EFSA gave its agreement in relation
         to the submission of further data, and of any deadline in that respect, supported the conclusion that no such request for
         further data had ever been made. It is on that basis that the General Court was able to decide, without distorting either
         the facts or the evidence put forward for its appraisal, that no request for further data in accordance with the relevant
         provisions had been made to the appellants. 
      
That part of the appeal amounts in reality to no more than a request for re-examination of the application submitted to the
         General Court, which the Court of Justice does not have jurisdiction to undertake (see order of October in Joined Cases
         C‑448/P to C‑450/P ThyssenKrupp Acciai Speciali Terni and Others v Commission, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
It must therefore be concluded that the arguments regarding distortion of the facts and evidence put forward by the appellants
         in the second complaint of the first plea in law are manifestly inadmissible and, in any event, unfounded. 
      
As regards the complaint concerning the General Court’s conclusion, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the
         new aquatic study did not provide an answer with regard to the other risks, in so far as that complaint seeks to challenge
         the second part of paragraph of the judgment under appeal, it must be noted that, according to settled case-law, complaints
         directed against grounds included in a General Court decision purely for the sake of completeness cannot lead to that decision
         being set aside and are therefore ineffective (Joined Cases C‑189/P, C‑202/P, C‑205/P to C‑208/P and C‑213/P
         Dansk Rørindustri and Others v Commission [2005] ECR I‑5425, paragraph 148, and order of February in Case C‑171/P Piau v Commission, paragraph 86).
      
In view of the fact that the General Court found, in the first part of paragraph 163, that communication of the study in question
         was late, a finding which was not contested by the appellants, it follows that that argument of the appellants is directed
         against a ground included in the judgment under appeal for the sake of completeness and, therefore, even if well-founded,
         it cannot lead to the setting aside of that judgment, for which there are other grounds. Consequently, that argument must
         be rejected as ineffective (see, to that effect, Case C‑288/P Mitteldeutsche Flughafen and Flughafen Leipzig v Commission [2012] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 68).
      
That part of the second complaint of the first plea in law must therefore be rejected as ineffective. 
      
In those circumstances, the first ground of appeal must be dismissed as being in part manifestly inadmissible, if not, and
         in any event, manifestly unfounded, and in part ineffective. 
      
 Second plea in law: infringement of the comitology decision
 Arguments of the parties
In support of their second plea, which is presented in a relatively confused manner, the appellants maintain, in essence,
         that the General Court infringed Article 5(2) of the comitology decision by deciding that that provision does not prohibit
         the submission of a proposal without a vote taking place, or the withdrawal and resubmission of a proposal after its amendment.
         Article 5(2) of the comitology decision should be interpreted as authorising neither the submission of a proposal to the Standing
         Committee without that committee’s proceeding to a vote nor the possibility of withdrawal and modification of such a proposal
         before its resubmission, on more than one occasion, to the Standing Committee. Consequently, the appellants maintain that
         the proposals which were presented to the Standing Committee before March should have been put to a vote, and that it
         was for the General Court to decide that question of law. However, instead of doing so, the General Court ruled on the length
         of time that had passed before the vote and, to that end, based its assessment on case-law that was not relevant. The appellants
         also complain that the General Court erred in holding that a proposal is liable to change in the course of discussion within
         the Standing Committee, whereas the comitology decision does not allow for a proposal to be amended by the Commission once
         it has been submitted to that committee. In addition, the appellants claim that the General Court did not directly address
         their argument that a proposal had been submitted by the Commission prior to March and that that proposal should have
         been put to a vote.
      
The Commission contests the appellants’ interpretation of Article 5(2) of the comitology decision and states in particular
         that the Commission’s decision to postpone the vote on its draft decision to include trifluralin in Annex I to Directive 91/and on the modification of the proposals did not infringe Article of the comitology decision. The Commission also challenges
         the admissibility and the substance of the other complaints relied on by the appellants in the context of that plea.
      
 Findings of the Court
As a preliminary point, it must be observed that the appellants seem to be proceeding on the assumption that any document
         submitted to the Standing Committee and to the working groups within it should be treated like a draft measure that must be
         put to a vote as soon as possible.
      
It is true that Article 5(2) of the comitology decision does not expressly provide for the possibility of a proposal being
         submitted to the Standing Committee without then being subject to a vote, or for the withdrawal of such a proposal and its
         amendment prior to its resubmission to that committee. However, that article does not explicitly exclude that possibility
         either. 
      
By maintaining that once a proposal is submitted to the Standing Committee, the procedure under Article 5(2) of the comitology
         decision must be followed, and therefore that the Commission can no longer amend its proposal where that proposal is not supported
         by the Standing Committee, the appellants clearly misconstrue the effect of that provision.
      
It must be observed in that regard that it is clear from Article 8(8) of Regulation No 451/that, at the latest six months
         after receipt of the EFSA opinion, the Commission must submit a draft review report. On the basis of the finalised review
         report the Commission then submits to the Standing Committee either a draft directive to include the active substance concerned
         in Annex I to Directive 91/414, setting out where appropriate the conditions, including the time-limit, for such inclusion,
         or, pursuant to the fourth subparagraph of Article 8(2) of the directive, a duly reasoned draft decision addressed to the
         Member States to withdraw the authorisations of plant protection products containing that active substance, whereby that substance
         is not included in Annex I to Directive 91/414.
      
In addition, Article 8(9) of Regulation No 451/provides that where the Commission submits a draft directive or a draft
         decision in accordance with paragraph of that article, it is at the same time to submit the conclusions of the Standing
         Committee’s examination in the format of a finalised review report which is to be noted in the summary record of the meeting.
      
The General Court stated, quite correctly, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that Article of Regulation No 451/thus draws a distinction between two stages in the procedure for the evaluation of dossiers in the context of the procedure
         for the inclusion of an active substance in Annex I to that regulation: on the one hand, that relating to the submission of
         a draft review report, which must occur at the latest six months after receipt of the EFSA opinion, and, on the other hand,
         that relating to the submission of a draft directive or decision on the basis of the finalised review report and which is
         not subject to compliance with that time-limit.
      
Only the latter draft directive or decision is covered by Article of the comitology decision when it states, in paragraph
         2, that ‘[t]he representative of the Commission shall submit to the [Standing Committee] a draft of the measures to be taken.
         The committee shall deliver its opinion on the draft within a time-limit which the chairman may lay down according to the
         urgency of the matter’. Thereafter the Commission is, without prejudice to Article of that decision, to adopt the measures
         envisaged if they are in accordance with the opinion of that committee. If that is not the case, the Commission is, without
         delay, to submit to the Council a proposal relating to the measures to be taken and to inform the European Parliament.
      
Contrary to what is claimed by the appellants, it does not follow from that provision that the Commission is obliged to put
         to a vote any document it submits to the committee. Article 5(2) of the comitology decision does not refer to any and all
         working or preparatory documents whatsoever that are distributed by the Commission within the Standing Committee, but only
         to draft directives or decisions.
      
Furthermore, it is evident from Article of the comitology decision that there is no time-limit for the lodging of a draft
         with the committee and that the chairman of the Standing Committee – a representative of the Commission – can set a time-limit
         for delivery of its opinion on the draft, the Commission accordingly having some flexibility in that respect. Article 5, therefore,
         merely lays down a simple obligation to submit a proposal but does not specify when that proposal must be made, nor does it
         specify a period within which a vote on it must take place.
      
That interpretation is supported by certain provisions of the rules of procedure of the Standing Committee. Thus, it is apparent
         from Article 5(2) of those internal rules of procedure that there is a preparatory stage before a draft may be put to a vote.
         In that context, the internal rules of procedure provide that the agenda of a meeting of a working group must make a distinction
         between ‘drafts of measures’ and ‘other issues put to the committee for information or a simple exchange of views’, such issues
         being intended to provide an overview of the different positions of the Member States. Accordingly, those exchanges of views
         cannot be regarded as a vote on a draft of a measure.
      
In addition, Article 5(2) of those internal rules of procedure provides that even if the agenda of a meeting of the Standing
         Committee envisages that a point will be put to a vote, that vote does not necessarily have to take place during that session,
         since the chairman has considerable flexibility in that respect. Indeed, he may, on his own initiative or at the request of
         a committee member, postpone the vote on a particular agenda point until the end of the meeting or a later meeting if a substantive
         change is made to the proposal during the meeting, if the text of the proposal has been submitted to the committee during
         the meeting, or if a new point has been added to the agenda of the meeting, in accordance with Article 3(3) of the internal
         rules of procedure of the Standing Committee.
      
Furthermore, as regards the alleged prohibition against the Commission’s amendment of a proposal, it must be noted that Article
         5(2) of the comitology decision – which, moreover, does not contain any such prohibition – is not, in accordance with a common
         practice of which the appellants ought to be aware, either applied or interpreted as meaning that the Commission has just
         one opportunity to propose the adoption of a measure. Such an interpretation would deprive the Commission of the opportunity
         to amend its proposals under the procedure laid down by the comitology decision. 
      
It follows that it is only when the Standing Committee proceeds to a vote that Article of the comitology decision must be
         applied.
      
The General Court did not, therefore, err in law when it interpreted Article 5(2) of the comitology decision as permitting
         a proposal to be submitted to the Standing Committee without a vote taking place, and as permitting such a proposal to be
         withdrawn and resubmitted after being amended. 
      
The arguments put forward by the appellants on this point must therefore be rejected. 
      
Consequently, the Court must also reject the appellants’ argument that, given that the comitology decision does not allow
         for a proposal to be amended by the Commission once it has been submitted to the Standing Committee, the General Court erred
         in law in holding that a proposal is liable to change in the course of discussion within that committee.
      
It also follows from the General Court’s – correct – interpretation of Article of the comitology decision that the General
         Court cannot have distorted the evidence submitted by the appellants when it concluded that no vote had taken place prior
         to March 2007.
      
In view of the fact that the proposal for a non-inclusion decision was put to a vote only once, on March 2007, contrary
         to what is claimed by the appellants, and that, in that vote, the proposal received the qualified majority required for its
         adoption, it was not necessary for the proposal to be submitted to the Council pursuant to Article 5(4) of the comitology
         decision.
      
Accordingly, the arguments put forward by the appellants in that regard must be rejected as manifestly unfounded. 
      
It follows from all the foregoing considerations that the second ground of appeal must be dismissed as being manifestly unfounded.
         
      
 Third plea in law: the application of the POP criteria 
 Arguments of the parties
By their third plea in law, the appellants claim that the General Court, first, erred in law when it ruled, in paragraphs
         to of the judgment under appeal, that the criteria of persistence in soil, biodegradability, bioaccumulation and propagation
         through air of trifluralin are not only related to the POP criteria but are also included in Directive 91/since Article
         5(2)(c) of that directive and point of Part A of Annex II thereto refer specifically to the ‘[f]ate and behaviour [of the
         substance] in the environment’ and deal with its fate and behaviour in soil, water and air, and with the bioaccumulation and
         biodegradability of that active substance. Furthermore, the appellants take the view that such an interpretation breaches
         the principle of legal certainty in that it opens the door to ‘indefinite situations’ and to criteria being applied ad hoc
         to any assessment, rendering the whole assessment under Directive 91/entirely uncertain and unpredictable.
      
Secondly, the appellants submit that the General Court distorted the evidence submitted to it in holding that the evaluation
         of trifluralin was not based on POP criteria, even though the evidence in the dossier clearly demonstrated that the Commission
         had applied those criteria. 
      
The Commission challenges those arguments, referring to the relevant minutes of meetings of the Standing Committee, and contends
         that the decision at issue is based on Directive 91/alone.
      
 Findings of the Court
In the first place, with regard to the complaint of an error of interpretation of the law, it should be borne in mind that
         Regulation No 850/does indeed introduce an evaluation mechanism separate from that laid down by Directive 91/414. 
      
Nevertheless, it cannot be inferred from the fact that the POP criteria were assessed, in terms of Regulation No 850/2004,
         during the evaluation procedure that in that respect the decision at issue infringes Article 5(1) of Directive 91/414.
      
It must be noted that the criteria set out in that provision are expressed in broad terms and based on an analysis of the
         risk of harmful effects of the active substance on human or animal health or on groundwater or any unacceptable influence
         on the environment.
      
In addition, the General Court was fully entitled to find that, under Article 5(2)(c) of Directive 91/414, for inclusion of
         an active substance in Annex I to that directive, particular account is to be taken of, where relevant, an estimate of its
         fate and distribution in the environment. 
      
Furthermore, point of Part A of Annex II to Directive 91/refers specifically to the fate and behaviour of the active
         substance in the environment and deals with its fate and behaviour in soil, water and air and with its bioaccumulation and
         biodegradability.
      
It follows that the criteria of persistence in soil, biodegradability, bioaccumulation and transport through air of the active
         substance, to which reference is made in recital in the preamble to the decision at issue, are not only related to the POP
         criteria but are also implicitly included in Directive 91/414, and that the assessment of the POP criteria and the possible
         classification as POP do not preclude that substance from having harmful effects within the meaning of Article 5(1) of Directive
         91/(see, to that effect, order of April in Case C‑517/P Makhteshim-Agan Holding and Others v Commission, paragraph 95). 
      
Accordingly, the mere fact that an evaluation of trifluralin was carried out in the light of the POP criteria in an assessment
         during the evaluation procedure under Directive 91/is not a ground for annulment of the decision at issue.
      
The General Court did not, therefore, err in its interpretation of the law in that respect, and the first complaint of the
         present plea must accordingly be rejected. 
      
In the second place, as regards the complaint concerning the distortion of evidence, it must be noted that, as the Commission
         correctly states in its submissions, even though the appellants formally invoke such distortion by the General Court, they
         confine themselves to reiterating the arguments they put forward in the General Court, and are thus in reality seeking to
         challenge the General Court’s assessment of the facts.
      
It has consistently been held that an appeal must specify the alleged flaws in the judgment which the appellant claims should
         be set aside and the legal arguments which specifically support that claim. That requirement is not satisfied by an appeal
         which, without even including an argument specifically identifying the error of law allegedly vitiating the judgment under
         appeal, merely reproduces the pleas in law and arguments previously submitted to the General Court. In reality, such an appeal
         amounts to no more than a request for re-examination of the application submitted to the General Court, which falls outside
         the jurisdiction of the Court of Justice (see order in ThyssenKrupp Acciai Speciali Terni and Others v Commission, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Moreover, as has already been stated in paragraph of the present order, it has consistently been held that, in accordance
         with Article TFEU and the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, the General Court has
         exclusive jurisdiction, first, to find the facts, except where the substantive inaccuracy of its findings is apparent from
         the documents submitted to it, and, secondly, to assess those facts.
      
Consequently, in the absence of arguments demonstrating that there was distortion of evidence by the General Court, the second
         complaint of the third plea in law must be rejected as inadmissible. 
      
It follows from all the foregoing considerations that the present ground of appeal must be dismissed as being, in part, manifestly
         inadmissible and, in part, manifestly unfounded. 
      
Accordingly, in the light of all those considerations, the Court must reject all the pleas put forward in support of the present
         appeal as being in part manifestly inadmissible, in part ineffective and in part manifestly unfounded. 
      
 Costs
Under Article 138(1) of the Rules of Procedure, which applies to appeal proceedings by virtue of Article 184(1) thereof, the
         unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. 
      
Since the Commission has applied for the costs to be paid by the appellants, and the latter have been unsuccessful, the appellants
         must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fifth Chamber) hereby orders:
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
2.      Dow AgroSciences Ltd, Dow AgroSciences LLC, Dow AgroSciences SAS, Dow AgroSciences Export SAS, Dow Agrosciences BV, Dow AgroSciences
            Hungary kft, Dow AgroSciences Italia Srl, Dow AgroSciences Polska sp. z o.o., Dow AgroSciences Iberica SA, Dow AgroSciences
            s.r.o., Dow AgroSciences Danmark A/S and Dow AgroSciences GmbH shall pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 