
Order of the Court (Sixth Chamber) of November – Vino v Poste Italiane
(Case C-20/10)
Article 104(3) of the Rules of Procedure – Social policy – Directive 1999/70/EC – Clauses and of the framework agreement on fixed‑term work – Fixed-term employment contracts in the public sector – First or single use of a contract – Obligation to state the objective reasons – Elimination – Reduction in the general level of protection of employees – Principle of non-discrimination – Articles EC and EC
1.                     Social policy – Framework agreement on fixed-term work concluded by ETUC, UNICE and CEEP – Directive 1999/– Reduction of
            the general level of protection of workers in the field of that agreement prohibited (Council Directive 1999/70, Annex, Clause
            8(3)) (see para. 48)
2.                     Social policy – Framework agreement on fixed-term work concluded by ETUC, UNICE and CEEP – Directive 1999/– Scope – Differences
            in  treatment of certain categories of fixed-term workers – Not included (Council Directive 1999/70, Annex, clause 4) (see
            paras 55-57)
3.                     Questions referred for a preliminary ruling – Jurisdiction of the Court – Limits – Framework agreement on fixed-term work
            concluded by ETUC, UNICE and CEEP – Directive 1999/– Purpose – Fixing general principles and minimum rules for certain
            limited aspects of fixed-term contracts – No harmonisation of all national rules relating to fixed-term contracts (Art. TFEU) (see paras 50, 54, 63-65)
4.                     Questions referred for a preliminary ruling – Admissibility – Need to provide the Court with sufficient information on the
            factual and legislative context – Extent of the obligation in the sphere of competition (Art. TFEU) (see paras 76-77,
            79)
Re:
Reference for a preliminary ruling – Tribunale di Trani – Interpretation of Clauses and 8(3) of the Annex to Council Directive
                  1999/70/EC of June concerning the framework agreement on fixed-term work concluded by ETUC, UNICE and CEEP (OJ L 175, p. 43) – Compatibility of an internal rule validating in the internal legal order a clause not stating the reason for
                  the engagement on fixed-term contracts of workers by Poste Italiane SpA.
               
Operative part: 
1.
	Clause 8(3) of the framework agreement on fixed-term work concluded on March 1999, which is annexed to Council Directive
                     1999/70/EC of June concerning the framework agreement on fixed-term work concluded by ETUC, UNICE and CEEP, must be
                     interpreted as not precluding national legislation, such as that provided for by Article 2(1)(a) of Legislative Decree No
                     implementing Directive 1999/70/EC concerning the framework agreement on fixed‑term work concluded by ETUC, UNICE and CEEP
                     of September (decreto legislativo n. 368, attuazione della direttiva 1999/relativa all’accordo quadro sul lavoro
                     a tempo determinato concluso dall’UNICE, dal CEEP e dal CES), which, unlike the statutory rules applicable before that decree
                     entered into force, allows a company such as Poste Italiane SpA to conclude, subject to observance of certain conditions,
                     a first or single use of a fixed-term contract with a worker, such as Mr Vino, without having to state the objective reasons
                     that justify the use of a contract concluded for such a duration, for that legislation is not connected to the implementation
                     of the framework agreement. It is, in that regard, irrelevant whether the objective pursued by that legislation provides protection
                     at least equivalent to the protection of fixed-term workers referred to in the framework agreement. 
                  
2.
	The Court of Justice of the European Union manifestly lacks jurisdiction to reply to the fourth question referred for a preliminary
                     ruling by the Tribunal di Trani (Italy).
                  
3.
	The fifth question referred for a preliminary ruling by the Tribunal di Trani is manifestly inadmissible.
Top  
 