
Avis juridique important
|
61988JJudgment of the Court (Second Chamber) of July 1989.  -  Chimica del Friuli SpA and others v Amministrazione delle finanze dello Stato.  -  References for a preliminary ruling: Tribunale civile e penale di Venezia - Italy.  -  Favourable tariff arrangements upon importation - End-use - Authorization.  -  Joined cases 248/88, to 258/88, 309/and 316/88.  
European Court reports Page Pub.RJ Page Pub somm 
Summary
Parties
Operative part
Keywords
++++Common Customs Tariff - Eligibility for a favourable tariff arrangement by reason of their end-use of the goods concerned - Transfer of the goods within the Community - Obligation for the transferee to hold the authorization prescribed by the Community rules  ( Commission Regulation No 1535/77, Arts and )  
Summary
Article of Regulation No 1535/determining the conditions under which certain goods are eligible upon importation for a favourable tariff arrangement by reason of their end-use must be interpreted as meaning that when goods are transferred within the Community the transferee must hold an authorization granted in accordance with Article of that regulation, whether the transfer takes place between one Member State and another or within the same Member State; that interpretation is consistent with the scheme of the regulation, which is designed to secure strict supervision of the end-use of the goods, and that supervision is effected by means of the said authorization . 
Parties
In Joined Cases 248/88, 254/to 258/88, 309/and 316/REFERENCE to the Court under Article of the EEC Treaty by the tribunale civile e penale ( Civil and Criminal District Court ), Venice, for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings pending before that court between  . Chimica del Friuli SPA, a company incorporated under Italian law, having its registered office at Torviscosa ( Case 248/),  . Carburanti & Succedanei SRL, a company incorporated under Italian law, having its registered office at Canzo di Peschiera Borromeo ( Case 254/),  . Colorificio Bevini SRL, a company incorporated under Italian law, having its registered office at Modena ( Case 255/),  . Ditta Alkim SNC, a partnership governed by Italian law, based at Sergnano ( Case 256/),  . Cambiaghi Giuseppe SAS, a limited partnership governed by Italian law, based at Milan ( Case 257/),  . Angelo Muggia & Figlio, an undertaking established at Bologna ( Case 258/),  . Conserchimica SRL, a company incorporated under Italian law, having its registered office at Venice ( Case 309/),  . SAI - Società Approvvigionamenti Industriali - SPA, a company incorporated under Italian law, having its registered office at Milan ( Case 316/),  and  Amministrazione delle finanze dello Stato ( Ministry of Finance ),  on the interpretation of Commission Regulation No 1535/of July determining the conditions under which certain goods are eligible upon importation for a favourable tariff arrangement by reason of their end-use,  THE COURT ( Second Chamber )  composed of : T.F . O' Higgins, President of the Chamber, G.F . Mancini and F.A . Schockweiler, Judges  ( The grounds of the judgment are not reproduced )  in answer to the question referred to it by the tribunale civile e penale, Venice, by orders of May, May, May and June 1988, hereby rules :  
Operative part
Article of Commission Regulation No 1535/of July determining the conditions under which certain goods are eligible upon importation for a favourable tariff arrangement by reason of their end-use must be interpreted as meaning that when goods are transferred the transferee must hold an authorization granted in accordance with Article of that regulation, whether the transfer takes place between one Member State and another or within the same Member State . 
Top  
 