
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
December (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations — Recovery of taxes unduly paid under EU law — National legislation — Retroactive curtailment of the limitation period for the applicable remedies — Principle of effectiveness — Principle of the protection of legitimate expectations)
In Case C‑640/13,
ACTION under Article TFEU for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on December 2013,
European Commission, represented by R. Lyal and W. Roels, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, represented by J. Beeko, acting as Agent,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of A. Tizzano (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, A. Borg Barthet, E. Levits, M. Berger, and F. Biltgen, Judges,
Advocate General: Y. Bot,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having regard to the written procedure,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the European Commission seeks a declaration from the Court that, by retroactively curtailing the right
         of taxpayers to recover tax which was levied contrary to European Union law, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
         Ireland has failed to comply with its obligations under Article 4(3) TEU.
      
 Legal context
English law provides two common law remedies for the recovery of taxes which were levied contrary to EU law.
      
The first remedy, recognised by the House of Lords in its judgment of July in Woolwich Equitable Building Society v Inland Revenue Commissioners [1993] AC (‘the Woolwich cause of action’), is an action for the recovery of tax unlawfully levied. 
      
Under section of the Limitation Act (‘the Act’), the limitation period for that action is six years from when
         the cause of action arose, namely the payment of the tax in question.
      
The second remedy, recognised in the House of Lords’ judgment of October in Kleinwort Benson Ltd v Lincoln City Council [1999] AC (‘the Kleinwort Benson cause of action’), permits the restitution of sums paid under a mistake of law. 
      
Under section 32(1)(c) of the Act, the limitation period for this type of action is six years from the date on which
         the claimant discovered the mistake of law or could with reasonable diligence have discovered it.
      
From the late 1990s, certain provisions of the legislation concerning the taxation of United Kingdom resident companies were
         challenged in relation to their compatibility with EU law, in particular with the freedom of establishment and the free movement
         of capital. 
      
On a reference, the Court held, in Metallgesellschaft and Others (C‑397/and C‑410/98, EU:C:2001:134), that certain aspects of the advance corporation tax regime, which applied in the United
         Kingdom from to 1999, were incompatible with those freedoms.
      
It was in the context of subsequent proceedings relating to the same tax provisions that the High Court of Justice of England
         and Wales, Chancery Division, in its judgment of July in Deutsche Morgan Grenfell Plc v Inland Revenue Commissioners [2003] All ER 645, held for the first time that proceedings based on the Kleinwort Benson cause of action could be brought against the tax authorities to seek recovery of tax paid under a mistake of law.
      
The High Court held that the limitation period applicable to that cause of action was the period laid down by section 32(1)(c)
         of the Act.
      
On September 2003, the United Kingdom Government announced that it would be introducing legislation intended to restrict
         the application of that limitation period in relation to proceedings brought on the basis of the Kleinwort Benson cause of action for the recovery of taxes paid under a mistake of law. That proposal gave rise to section of the Finance
         Act 2004, enacted on June 2004.
      
Section provides: 
      
‘Section 32(1)(c) of the [Act] … (extended period for bringing an action in case of mistake) does not apply in relation
         to a mistake of law relating to a taxation matter under the care and management of the Commissioners of Inland Revenue.
      
This subsection has effect in relation to actions brought on or after 8th September 2003.’ 
      
The adoption on July of the Finance Act further amended, retroactively, the limitation period provided for in
         section 32(1)(c) of the Act with respect to proceedings brought on the basis of the Kleinwort Benson cause of action for the recovery of taxes paid under a mistake of law.
      
Section 107(1) of the Finance Act provides, in particular:
      
‘Section 32(1)(c) of the Act ... (extended period for bringing action in case of mistake) does not apply in relation
         to any action brought before 8th September for relief from the consequences of a mistake of law relating to a taxation matter under the care and management
         of the Commissioners of Inland Revenue.’
      
 Pre-litigation procedure
On October 2009, the Commission sent a letter of formal notice to the United Kingdom in which it drew the United Kingdom’s
         attention to the incompatibility of section of the Finance Act with Article 4(3) TEU, in that section provides
         for the retroactive curtailment of the limitation period applicable to proceedings brought on the basis of the Kleinwort Benson cause of action for the refund of taxes levied in breach of EU law.
      
By letter of April 2010, in response to that letter of formal notice, the United Kingdom disputed the incompatibility of
         that section with EU law.
      
On October 2010, the Commission sent the United Kingdom a reasoned opinion in which it restated its position and invited
         that Member State to take the necessary measures within two months of receipt of that opinion.
      
The United Kingdom replied, by letter of November 2010, informing the Commission that it disagreed with the allegation
         that it had failed to fulfil obligations.
      
By letter of December 2012, however, the United Kingdom informed the Commission that the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom,
         in its judgment of May in Test Claimants in the Franked Investment Income Group Litigation v Commissioners of Inland Revenue and another [2012] UKSC 19, had unanimously ruled that section of the Finance Act infringed EU law. In the same letter, the
         United Kingdom also acknowledged that section infringed EU law and that the provision would be disapplied each time it
         proved to be incompatible.
      
The Commission was not satisfied by those replies and brought the present action before the Court of Justice. 
      
 The action
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission submits that the United Kingdom, by adopting section of the Finance Act 2007, has failed to fulfil its
         obligations under Article 4(3) TEU. It states that the provision is incompatible with the principles of effectiveness and
         of the protection of legitimate expectations, inasmuch as it retroactively restricts the right of taxpayers to recover taxes
         levied by tax authorities in breach of EU law.
      
First of all, in relation to the principle of effectiveness, the Commission notes that, in the judgment in Marks & Spencer (C‑62/00, EU:C:2002:435, paragraph 38), the Court held, in essence, that the principle precludes national legislation reducing
         the period for seeking repayment of sums collected in breach of EU law where the new time-limit is not reasonable and where
         the legislation does not contain any transitional arrangements giving individuals adequate time, after the legislation has
         been adopted, to lodge claims for repayment which they were entitled to submit under the previous legislation. 
      
The considerations underpinning that judgment are a fortiori applicable in the present case. If national legislation which
         denies individuals the possibility of seeking redress which was available to them until the time of the adoption of that legislation
         is incompatible with the principle of effectiveness, a provision, such as section of the Finance Act 2007, which retroactively
         denies individuals the right to pursue an action which they have already commenced before the courts is all the more incompatible.
      
Consequently, the Commission submits that, even though English law provides for another remedy in the form of the Woolwich cause of action, it is not permissible for the right of action based on the Kleinwort Benson cause of action not only to be abolished without notice, but also to be withdrawn from persons who have already brought proceedings
         on that basis.
      
Secondly, with respect to the principle of the protection of legitimate expectations, the Commission submits that that principle
         is not limited to the right to obtain a given result, but also includes the right to be protected by law and to have access
         to the judicial system.
      
It follows that a provision such as section of the Finance Act infringes the principle of the protection of legitimate
         expectations of taxpayers who have exercised the Kleinwort Benson cause of action by bringing an action before the courts for the recovery of unduly paid taxes. Those taxpayers are entitled
         to expect that their action is not retroactively declared inadmissible and that the courts before which it was brought will
         rule on its merits.
      
The United Kingdom does not dispute the infringement complained of. However, it states that section of the Finance Act
         should soon be amended, and that the amendment will render that section inapplicable to proceedings which have already
         been brought in cases concerning taxes levied in breach of EU law.
      
 Findings of the Court
The Commission complains that the United Kingdom infringed Article 4(3) TEU on account of the incompatibility of section of the Finance Act with the principles of effectiveness and of the protection of legitimate expectations.
      
As is apparent from the file submitted to the Court, that section retroactively curtailed, without prior notice or transitional
         arrangements, the limitation period applicable to proceedings brought by taxpayers on the basis of the Kleinwort Benson cause of action for the repayment of taxes levied in breach of EU law by British tax authorities. That curtailment is part
         of national law which offers those taxpayers another remedy for repayment of overpaid tax in the form of the Woolwich cause of action, to which a shorter limitation period applies.
      
In that regard, in making a finding on the infringement complained of, it should first be borne in mind that the right to
         a refund of taxes levied in a Member State in breach of EU law is the consequence and complement of the rights conferred on
         individuals by the provisions of EU law. A Member State is thus in principle required to repay taxes levied in breach of EU
         law (see judgment in Test Claimants in the Franked Investment Income Group Litigation, C‑362/12, EU:C:2013:834, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
In the first place, with respect to the infringement of the principle of effectiveness, it should be recalled that, in the
         absence of EU rules on the recovery of national taxes unduly levied, it is for the domestic legal system of each Member State,
         in accordance with the principle of the procedural autonomy of the Member States, to lay down the detailed procedural rules
         governing actions at law for safeguarding the rights which taxpayers derive from EU law (see, to that effect, judgments in
         Agrokonsulting-04, C‑93/12, EU:C:2013:432, paragraph 35, and Test Claimants in the Franked Investment Income Group Litigation, EU:C:2013:834, paragraph 31).
      
In that context, in accordance with the principle of sincere cooperation enshrined in Article 4(3) TEU, the principle of effectiveness
         requires such procedural rules not to render in practice impossible or excessively difficult the exercise of rights conferred
         by EU law (see, to that effect, judgments in Agrokonsulting-04, EU:C:2013:432, paragraph 36, and Test Claimants in the Franked Investment Income Group Litigation, EU:C:2013:834, paragraph 32).
      
With respect to the present infringement proceedings, it must be borne in mind that, according to the settled case-law of
         the Court, that principle prohibits the retroactive application of a new, shorter, and, as the case may be, more restrictive
         limitation period than that previously applicable, where its application concerns actions for the recovery of domestic taxes
         contrary to EU law which have already been commenced at the time the new period comes into force (see, to that effect, judgment
         in Test Claimants in the Franked Investment Income Group Litigation, EU:C:2013:834, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Moreover, that principle precludes national legislation which curtails, retroactively and without any transitional arrangements,
         the period within which repayment of the sums collected in breach of EU law could be sought (see judgment in Test Claimants in the Franked Investment Income Group Litigation, EU:C:2013:834, paragraph 38).
      
It follows that the principle of effectiveness precludes a provision, such as section of the Finance Act 2007, in so far
         as that provision curtails, retroactively and without notice or transitional arrangements, the limitation period relating
         to proceedings which have already been brought before national courts in the form of the Kleinwort Benson cause of action.
      
The fact that taxpayers have, under national law, another remedy enabling them to seek the repayment of taxes levied in breach
         of EU law, in the form of the Woolwich cause of action, cannot call into question that finding (see, to that effect, judgment in Test Claimants in the Franked Investment Income Group Litigation, EU:C:2013:834, paragraph 39).
      
Section of the Finance Act 2007, de facto, denies taxpayers the possibility of relying on the Kleinwort Benson cause of action, in relation to which a longer limitation period applies than that relating to the Woolwich cause of action, namely six years from the date of discovery of the mistake on which the payment was based, rather than from
         the date the undue taxes were paid. That section makes it impossible in practice for taxpayers to exercise the right to a
         refund of taxes levied in breach of EU law which was available to them prior to the adoption of that section and which they
         had already asserted by that date (see, to that effect, judgment in Test Claimants in the Franked Investment Income Group Litigation, EU:C:2013:834, paragraph 43).
      
In the second place, with respect to the principle of the protection of legitimate expectations, the Court has held that that
         principle also precludes national legislation which retroactively deprives a taxpayer of the right enjoyed prior to the adoption
         of that legislation to obtain the repayment of taxes levied in breach of EU law (see judgment in Test Claimants in the Franked Investment Income Group Litigation, EU:C:2013:834, paragraph and the case-law cited). As noted by the Commission in its application, in accordance with that
         principle, a taxpayer who has brought, by the time the new legislation is adopted, an action seeking such a refund is entitled
         to expect that his action will not be declared inadmissible as a result of the retroactive application of that legislation
         and that the courts before which proceedings were brought will decide on the substance of that action.
      
In the present case, it is not disputed that, by retroactively curtailing the limitation period, section of the Finance
         Act adversely affected the situation of taxpayers who had already brought proceedings in the form of the Kleinwort Benson cause of action for the repayment of the taxes levied in breach of EU law. Those taxpayers were entitled to expect that the
         question as to whether or not their actions were well founded would be decided by the national courts before which proceedings
         were brought (see, to that effect, judgment in Test Claimants in the Franked Investment Income Group Litigation, EU:C:2013:834, paragraphs and 47).
      
It follows that section of the act must be deemed incompatible not just with the principle of effectiveness, but also
         with the principle of the protection of legitimate expectations of taxpayers, so far as concerns the obligation under EU law
         to guarantee taxpayers the right to a refund of taxes paid in breach of that law, an obligation which the United Kingdom is
         required to fulfil by virtue of Article 4(3) TEU.
      
That said, it should be noted that the United Kingdom, which does not dispute the infringement complained of, nonetheless
         points out that an amendment of section of that act was contemplated.
      
In that regard, it is sufficient to note that the question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil obligations must be
         determined by reference to the situation prevailing in the Member State at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned
         opinion and the Court cannot take account of any subsequent changes (see judgment in Commission v Greece, C‑351/13, EU:C:2014:2150, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
It is not disputed that, on the date of expiry of the period prescribed in the reasoned opinion, section of the Finance
         Act was still in force.
      
Consequently, the argument of the United Kingdom relating to a forthcoming amendment of that section must be rejected as irrelevant
         and the action brought by the Commission must be considered to be well founded.
      
In the light of the foregoing, it must accordingly be held that, by adopting a provision, such as section of the Finance
         Act 2007, which curtailed, retroactively and without notice or transitional arrangements, the right of taxpayers to recover
         taxes levied in breach of EU law, the United Kingdom has failed to comply with its obligations under Article 4(3) TEU.
      
 Costs
Under Article 138(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, the unsuccessful party must be ordered to pay the
         costs if they have been applied for in the other party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the United
         Kingdom has been unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs. 
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that by adopting a provision, such as section of the Finance Act 2007, which curtailed, retroactively and without
            notice or transitional arrangements, the right of taxpayers to recover taxes levied in breach of EU law the United Kingdom
            of Great Britain and Northern Ireland has failed to comply with its obligations under Article 4(3) TEU;
2.      Orders the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 