
Case C-350/European Commission
v
Republic of Lithuania
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Act of Accession – Obligations of the accession States – Acquis communautaire – Directives 2001/83/EC and 2003/63/EC – Regulation (EEC) No 2309/and Regulation (EC) No 726/– Medicinal products for human use – Similar biological medicinal products from biotechnical processes – National marketing authorisation granted before accession)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Accession of new Member States to the Communities – Czech Republic – Estonia – Cyprus – Latvia – Lithuania – Hungary – Malta
            – Poland – Slovenia – Slovakia – Community acts adopted after signature of the Treaty of Accession but before its entry into
            force
(Art. EC; Act of Accession, Arts 2(2), and 54)
2.        Approximation of laws – Medicinal products for human use – Marketing authorisation – Marketing authorisation for a medicinal
            product granted before accession maintained by a Member State after its accession
(European Parliament and Council Regulation No 726/2004, Art. 3(1); Council Regulation No 2309/93, Art. 3(1); European Parliament
            and Council Directive 2001/83, modified by Directive 2003/63, Art. 6(1))
1.        Once the Treaty of Accession to the European Union of the Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Cyprus,
         the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the Republic of Poland,
         the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak Republic was signed, and subject to the application of the particular procedures provided
         for in that Treaty for deciding on certain types of transitional measures, such as, for example, those established by Articles
         or of the Act of Accession, there is no objection in principle to secondary legislation adopted after that signature
         and before the entry into force of the Treaty of Accession containing temporary derogations in favour of a future Member
         State being adopted directly on the basis of the provisions of the EC Treaty.
      
Consequently, as regards measures that must be thus adopted during the period between the date of signature of the Treaty
         of Accession and the date when the accession takes effect, the institutions are fully aware of the imminent accession of new
         Member States, and the latter have the opportunity of asserting their interests where necessary, in particular through the
         information and consultation procedure. It is therefore, in principle, in the framework of that procedure and by making use
         of their observer status in the Council of the European Union, with the opportunities for dialogue and cooperation which those
         special mechanisms afford them, that the future Member States may, once informed of the future adoption of new measures of
         secondary legislation, assert their interest in obtaining the necessary transitional derogations, having regard, for example,
         to the fact that it would be impossible to ensure immediate application of those measures on accession, or to major socio-economic
         problems to which such application might give rise.
      
(see paras 71-73)
2.        By maintaining in force, beyond the date of its accession to the European Union, the national marketing authorisation for
         a medicinal product from biotechnical processes, which was not granted in accordance with the European Union legislation relating
         to medicinal products in force at that date, a Member State fails to fulfil its obligations under Article 6(1) of Directive
         2001/83/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of November on the Community code relating to medicinal products
         for human use (OJ L 311, p. 67), as amended by Commission Directive 2003/63/EC of June (OJ L 159, p. 46),
         and under Article 3(1) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2309/of July laying down Community procedures for the authorisation
         and supervision of medicinal products for human and veterinary use and establishing a European Agency for the Evaluation of
         Medicinal Products (OJ L 214, p. 1), and under Article 3(1) of Regulation (EC) No 726/of the European Parliament
         and of the Council of March laying down Community procedures for the authorisation and supervision of medicinal products
         for human and veterinary use and establishing a European Medicines Agency.
      
It is apparent from Articles and of the Act concerning the conditions of accession to the European Union of the Czech
         Republic, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Cyprus, the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic
         of Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak Republic and the adjustments
         to the Treaties on which the European Union is founded that the Act is based on the principle that the provisions of European
         Union law apply ab initio and in toto to new Member States, derogations being allowed only in so far as they are expressly provided for by transitional provisions.
         With regard to those derogations, Article 24, read in conjunction with Annex IX, Chapter 1, paragraph 2, thereto, provides
         for a transitional period during which marketing authorisations granted under its national legislation by the Republic of
         Lithuania, before the date of its accession to the European Union, for pharmaceutical products in the list in Appendix A remained
         valid even after that date and until January at the latest.  A marketing authorisation granted for a medicinal product
         not included in the list in Appendix A ought, as from the date of accession, May 2004, have been made consistent with the
         European Union legislation in force on that date.
      
It cannot be deduced from the fact that Annex IX, Chapter 1, paragraph 2, of that Act of Accession refers to Directive 2001/in the original version that any authorisation consistent with that version could, without the medicinal product in question’s
         being included in the list in Appendix A, derogate from the requirements laid down in European Union law in force at the date
         of accession. The same is true even when those requirements have been amended during the period between the date of signature
         of that Act of Accession and the date on which accession took effect, as was the case of Directive 2001/83, amended by Directive
         2003/which set as October the end of the period in which Member States were to transpose that directive.
      
(see paras 55, 57, 59-60, 63, 65, 76, and operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Act of Accession – Obligations of the accession States – Acquis communautaire – Directives 2001/83/EC and 2003/63/EC – Regulation (EEC) No 2309/and Regulation (EC) No 726/– Medicinal products for human use – Similar biological medicinal products from biotechnical processes – National marketing authorisation granted before accession)
In Case C-350/08,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on July 2008,
European Commission, represented by A. Steiblytė and M. Šimerdová, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Republic of Lithuania, represented by D. Kriaučiūnas and R. Mackevičienė, acting as Agents,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of A. Tizzano (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, J.-J. Kasel, A. Borg Barthet, M. Ilešič and M. Berger, Judges,
Advocate General: E. Sharpston,
Registrar: C. Strömholm, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on December 2009,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on April 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities (now the European Commission) requests the Court to declare
         that, by maintaining in force the national marketing authorisation for the medicinal product Grasalva, the Republic of Lithuania
         has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 6(1) of Directive 2001/83/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
         of November on the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use (OJ L 311, p. 67), as amended by
         Commission Directive 2003/63/EC of June (OJ L 159, p. 46), and under Article 3(1) of Council Regulation (EEC)
         No 2309/of July laying down Community procedures for the authorisation and supervision of medicinal products for
         human and veterinary use and establishing a European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products (OJ L 214, p. 1),
         and under Article 3(1) of Regulation (EC) No 726/of the European Parliament and of the Council of March laying
         down Community procedures for the authorisation and supervision of medicinal products for human and veterinary use and establishing
         a European Medicines Agency (OJ L 136, p. 1). 
      
 Legal context
 European Union legislation
 The Accession Treaty and the Act of Accession
The Treaty concerning the accession to the European Union of new Member States, including the Republic of Lithuania, was
         signed in Athens on April (OJ L 236, p. 17; ‘the Treaty of Accession’) and, in accordance with Article 2(2)
         thereof, entered into force on April 2004. As is apparent from Article 1(2) of the Treaty, the conditions of admission are
         set out in the Act concerning the conditions of accession to the European Union of the Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia,
         the Republic of Cyprus, the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta,
         the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak Republic and the adjustments to the Treaties on which the
         European Union is founded (OJ L 236, p. 33; ‘the Act of Accession’). 
      
Under Article of the Act of Accession:
      
‘From the date of accession, the provisions of the original Treaties and the acts adopted by the institutions and the European
         Central Bank before accession shall be binding on the new Member States and shall apply in those States under the conditions
         laid down in those Treaties and in this Act.’ 
      
Article of the Act of Accession provides:
      
‘The application of the original Treaties and acts adopted by the institutions shall, as a transitional measure, be subject
         to the derogations provided for in this Act.’
      
The fourth part of the Act of Accession, Title I of which deals with the transitional measures, contains an Article which provides: 
      
‘The measures listed in Annexes V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII, XIII and XIV to this Act shall apply in respect of the new
         Member States under the conditions laid down in those Annexes.’
      
Under Article of the Act of Accession:
      
‘The new Member States shall put into effect the measures necessary for them to comply, from the date of accession, with the
         provisions of directives and decisions within the meaning of Article of the EC Treaty and of Article of the Euratom
         Treaty, unless another time-limit is provided for in the Annexes referred to in Article or in any other provisions of this
         Act or its Annexes.’
      
With regard to the Republic of Lithuania, Annex IX, Chapter 1, paragraph 2, of the Act of Accession provides, as regards
         Directive 2001/83:
      
‘By way of derogation from the requirements of quality, safety and efficacy laid down in Directive [2001/in the original
         version], marketing authorisations for the pharmaceutical products on the list (in Appendix A to this Annex as provided by
         Lithuania in one language) issued under Lithuanian law prior to the date of accession, shall remain valid until they are renewed
         in compliance with the acquis and in accordance with the timeframe set out in the abovementioned list, or until January
         2007, whichever is the earlier. …’
      
Appendix A referred to in Chapter of Annex IX (OJ C E, p. 115; ‘Appendix A’) states:
      
‘List as provided by Lithuania in one language of pharmaceutical products for which a marketing authorisation issued under
         Lithuanian law prior to the date of accession shall remain valid until it is renewed in compliance with the acquis or until
         December 2006, whichever is the earlier.
      
Mention on this list does not prejudge whether or not the pharmaceutical product in question has a marketing authorisation
         in compliance with the acquis.’ 
      
European Union legislation on pharmaceutical products
Article 6(1) of Directive 2001/83, in the original version, was worded as follows:
      
‘No medicinal product may be placed on the market of a Member State unless a marketing authorisation has been issued by the
         competent authorities of that Member State in accordance with this Directive or an authorisation has been granted in accordance
         with Regulation … No 2309/93.’ 
      
Article of that directive provided:
      
‘1.      In order to obtain an authorisation to place a medicinal product on the market regardless of the procedure established by
         Regulation … No 2309/93, an application shall be made to the competent authority of the Member State concerned. 
      
…
3.      The application shall be accompanied by the following particulars and documents, submitted in accordance with Annex I: 
…
(i)      Results of:
–        physico-chemical, biological or microbiological tests, 
–        toxicological and pharmacological tests, 
–        clinical trials.
…’
Article of that directive provided:
      
‘1.      In derogation of Article 8(3)(i), and without prejudice to the law relating to the protection of industrial and commercial
         property:
      
(a)      The applicant shall not be required to provide the results of toxicological and pharmacological tests or the results of clinical
         trials if he can demonstrate: 
      
…
(iii) … that the medicinal product is essentially similar to a medicinal product which has been authorised within the Community,
         in accordance with Community provisions in force, for not less than six years and is marketed in the Member State for which
         the application is made. …
      
…’
Article of Directive 2001/83, in the original version, stated:
      
‘An authorisation to market a medicinal product shall not be refused, suspended or revoked except on the grounds set out in
         this directive. 
      
No decision concerning suspension of manufacture or of importation of medicinal products coming from third countries, prohibition
         of supply or withdrawal from the market of a medicinal product may be taken except on the grounds set out in Articles and 118.’ 
      
Pursuant to the first paragraph of Article of Directive 2003/63, which was adopted on June and entered into force
         on July 2003, Member States were to bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply
         with that directive by October at the latest. 
      
Annex I, Part II, point 4, to Directive 2001/83, as amended by Directive 2003/63, is worded as follows:
      
‘The provisions of Article 10(1)(a)(iii) may not be sufficient in the case of biological medicinal products. If the information
         required in the case of essentially similar products (generics) does not permit the demonstration of the similar nature of
         two biological medicinal products, additional data, in particular, the toxicological and clinical profile, shall be provided.
      
When a biological medicinal product … is submitted for a marketing authorisation by an independent applicant …, the following
         approach shall be applied.
      
–        Information to be supplied shall not be limited to Modules 1, and (pharmaceutical, chemical and biological data), supplemented
         with bio-equivalence and bio-availability data. The type and amount of additional data (i.e. toxicological and other non-clinical
         and appropriate clinical data) shall be determined on a case-by-case basis in accordance with relevant scientific guidelines.
      
–        Due to the diversity of biological medicinal products, the need for identified studies foreseen in Modules and 5, shall
         be required by the competent authority, taking into account the specific characteristic of each individual medicinal product.
      
…’
The second paragraph of Article of Regulation No 2309/provided:
      
‘The person responsible for placing the medicinal products covered by this Regulation on the market must be established in
         the Community.’ 
      
Article 3(1) of that regulation provided:
      
‘No medicinal product referred to in Part A of the Annex may be placed on the market within the Community unless a marketing
         authorisation has been granted by the Community in accordance with the provisions of this Regulation.’ 
      
Regulation No 2309/was repealed and replaced by Regulation No 726/2004, of which the second paragraph of Article and
         Article 3(1), applicable with effect from November 2005, are drafted in essentially identical terms to those of the second
         paragraph of Article and of Article 3(1) of Regulation No 2309/93. 
      
In the same way, the annexes to both those regulations concern, in particular, medicinal products developed by means of biotechnological
         processes such as recombinant DNA technology. 
      
 National law
Decree No of the Minister for Health of December on the general rules for registration of medicinal preparations
         (‘Decree No 669’) transposes the provisions of Directive 2001/83, in the original version, into Lithuanian national law, with
         a view to the accession of the Republic of Lithuania to the European Union. 
      
Article 18, third paragraph, of Decree No provides that the applicant for a marketing authorisation in Lithuania may not
         be obliged to provide the results of pre-clinical trials or of clinical investigations provided that:
      
‘the medicinal preparation does not differ by its active medicinal ingredients either qualitatively or quantitatively or by
         the form of the medicinal product from a medicinal preparation meeting the two following requirements: 
      
–        registration in at least one Member State of the European Union in compliance with the requirements of the European Community
         for a period of at least years, and of years for high-technology medicinal preparations, 
      
–        registration in the Republic of Lithuania.
…’
 Background to the dispute and the pre-litigation procedure 
The application for marketing authorisation of Grasalva, which was submitted to the Lithuanian authorities on May 2003,
         asserted that it is a biological medicinal product analogous to another medicinal product, Neupogen, for which a marketing
         authorisation had already been issued in the Community. 
      
On the basis of that application, by virtue of Article 18, third paragraph, of Decree No 669, on July those authorities
         issued a marketing authorisation for Grasalva in Lithuania, without requiring the applicant to supply the results of preclinical
         and clinical trials. That authorisation was granted for a period of five years and thus expired on July 2008.
      
Grasalva is not included in the list in Appendix A.
      
After an exchange of correspondence which began on April 2004, by letter of February 2006, the Commission informed the
         Republic of Lithuania that the marketing authorisation for Grasalva could not be regarded as complying with European Union
         law. Since it did not contain the results of preclinical and clinical trials, the application did not meet the requirements
         laid down for biological medicinal products in Annex I, Part II, point 4, to Directive 2001/83, as amended by Directive 2003/63.
         The Lithuanian authorities were therefore requested to withdraw that authorisation.
      
On December 2006, the Commission sent the Republic of Lithuania a letter of formal notice in which it stated that, with
         effect from the date of its accession to the European Union, national authorities no longer had power to issue marketing authorisations
         for medicinal products from biotechnical processes, such as Grasalva. In accordance with Regulation No 2309/and, with effect
         from November 2005, with Regulation No 726/2004, that power was held by the Commission.
      
On March 2007, the Republic of Lithuania replied to that letter of formal notice and submitted, firstly, that at the time
         when Grasalva was registered, all the information required under Article 10(1)(a)(iii) of Directive 2001/83, in the original
         version, had been provided, in particular concerning the quality, safety and efficacy of that medicinal product. Next, that
         Member State submitted that the competent Lithuanian authorities were not bound by Directive 2003/63. It had not been adopted
         until June 2003, that is to say after signature of the Treaty of Accession by the Republic of Lithuania on April
         2003, and the period for the transposition into national law of that directive, which expired on October 2003, had not
         yet expired when, on July 2003, Grasalva obtained its marketing authorisation. Finally, the Republic of Lithuania also referred
         to the fact that Regulation No 2309/applied in the new Member States only from May for all newly registered medicinal
         products and that it did not apply to medicinal products registered prior to that date. 
      
In its reasoned opinion of June 2007, the Commission reminded the Republic of Lithuania that all the provisions of Directive
         2001/83, as amended by Directive 2003/63, were to be applied by it with effect from May and that, consequently, from
         that date, the marketing authorisation for Grasalva should have met the requirements set out in Annex I, Part II, point 4,
         of that directive. By maintaining in force an authorisation which did not comply with those requirements, that Member State
         had not fulfilled its obligations under European Union law. The Commission therefore called on the Republic of Lithuania to
         comply with European Union law within two months of receiving the reasoned opinion. 
      
On September 2007, the Republic of Lithuania replied to the reasoned opinion. Taking the view that that reply was unsatisfactory,
         the Commission decided to bring the present action.
      
 The action
 Admissibility
The Republic of Lithuania submits, in essence, that the Commission has committed a number of infringements of the principle
         of sound administration which, as a whole, render the action inadmissible. More specifically, the action is devoid of purpose,
         since the marketing authorisation granted for Grasalva expired on July 2008, namely almost a month before the Commission
         brought the present action on July 2008. In addition, the Commission excessively delayed initiation of the administrative
         proceedings provided for in Article EC. It did not send the letter of formal notice to that Member State until December
         although, according to the Commission, the alleged failure to fulfil obligations had existed since May 2004. Moreover,
         the action was not brought until months after expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion.
      
In that regard, it must be borne in mind, firstly, that, in accordance with established case-law, the subject-matter of an
         action for failure to fulfil obligations is determined by the Commission’s reasoned opinion (Case 39/Commission v Italy [1973] ECR 101, paragraph 9, and Case C‑236/Commission v United Kingdom [2006] ECR I‑10819, paragraph and the case-law cited). Consequently, whether a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations
         must be determined by reference to the situation prevailing in the Member State at the end of the period laid down in the
         reasoned opinion, and the Court cannot take account of any subsequent changes (Case C‑161/Commission v France [2003] ECR I‑6567, paragraph 6, and Case C‑158/Commission v Spain [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 7).
      
It is clear from the documents before the Court that, as the Advocate General observed in point of her Opinion, Grasalva
         continued to be marketed in Lithuania until the expiry on July of the marketing authorisation which had been granted
         for that medicinal product, that is to say, until considerably later than August 2007, the date set in the reasoned opinion.
      
Since the date on which the Commission brought the present action is not at all relevant in that regard, it must be concluded
         that this action cannot be regarded as being without purpose.
      
Next, with regard to the alleged delay in bringing the proceedings under Article TFEU, the rules of that provision must
         be applied without any obligation on the Commission to act within a specific period (Case 324/Commission v Belgium [1984] ECR 1861, paragraph 12, and Case C‑333/Commission v France [2001] ECR I‑1025, paragraph 25) and it is for the Commission to choose when it will bring an action for failure to fulfil
         obligations before the Court; the considerations which determine its choice of time cannot affect the admissibility of the
         action (Case C‑317/Commission v Germany [1994] ECR I‑2039, paragraph 4, and Case C‑40/Commission v France [2001] ECR I‑4539, paragraph 23).
      
Indeed, in certain situations, the excessive duration of the pre-litigation procedure is capable of making it more difficult
         for the Member State concerned to refute the Commission’s arguments and of thus infringing the rights of defence of that Member
         State. Nevertheless, it is for the Member State concerned to show that it has been so affected (Case C‑96/Commission v Netherlands [1991] ECR I‑2461, paragraph 16, and Case C‑546/Commission v Germany [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 22). 
      
However, the fact remains that, as the Commission argues, in the present case the Republic of Lithuania has not advanced any
         evidence to that effect and that, accordingly, the action for failure to fulfil obligations cannot be regarded as having been
         brought with excessive delay.
      
Finally, to the extent that the Republic of Lithuania submits that the present action is inadmissible since the Commission
         has infringed the principle of sound administration, clearly that Member State bases that argument only on lack of purpose
         of the action and on delay in bringing the proceedings under Article TFEU.
      
It follows from paragraphs and of this judgment that the Commission’s action is neither without purpose nor brought
         with excessive delay.
      
In those circumstances, there are no grounds for the conclusion that the Commission infringed the principle of sound administration
         in such a way as to call into question the admissibility of the action.
      
Having regard to the foregoing considerations, the action must be regarded as admissible.
      
 Substance
 The first complaint
–       Arguments of the parties
In order to substantiate, by its first complaint, the allegation that the Republic of Lithuania has infringed Directive 2001/83,
         as amended by Directive 2003/63, the Commission submits that, pursuant to Article of that directive, read in conjunction
         with Article of the Act of Accession, that Member State was, upon its accession to the European Union, to ensure that
         only medicinal products with marketing authorisations which comply with the requirements of European Union law in force at
         the date of that accession are placed on the market. 
      
The only derogation from that obligation is that provided for in Annex IX, Chapter 1, paragraph 2, to the Act of Accession,
         according to which marketing authorisations for the pharmaceutical products in Appendix A ‘issued under Lithuanian law prior
         to the date of accession, shall remain valid until they are renewed in compliance with the acquis … or until January 2007,
         whichever is the earlier’. 
      
However, the Republic of Lithuania permitted the biological medicinal product Grasalva to continue to be marketed after the
         accession of that Member State to the European Union, despite the fact that its marketing authorisation had not been issued
         in accordance with European Union law in force at the date of that accession. 
      
That authorisation did not comply with Annex I, Part II, point 4, of Directive 2001/83, as amended by Directive 2003/67, in
         that it was issued on the basis of an abridged application, which did not contain the results of preclinical and clinical
         trials. Nor, since Grasalva was not on the list in Appendix A, was that authorisation covered by the derogations laid down
         in Annex IX to the Act of Accession. 
      
The Commission adds in that regard that, contrary to the principle that exceptions must be strictly interpreted, maintenance
         of the marketing authorisation for Grasalva after the accession of the Republic of Lithuania to the European Union amounts
         to extending the scope of the derogation laid down in that annex.
      
However, the Republic of Lithuania takes the view that it was possible for Grasalva to be marketed in Lithuania even after
         accession and until expiry of the marketing authorisation for that medicinal product, that is to say, until July 2008.
      
Firstly, the Lithuanian legislation under which the authorisation had been issued on July had already been amended
         in preparation for accession, to comply with the requirements of Directive 2001/in the original version. When that authorisation
         was issued, the period for transposition of Directive 2003/63, which ran until October 2003, had not yet expired. Consequently,
         in the view of the Republic of Lithuania, given that Grasalva met all the requirements of quality, safety and efficacy laid
         down by Directive 2001/83, in force when the marketing authorisation for that medicinal product was issued, that authorisation
         remained valid even beyond the date of accession, without it being necessary to renew it to ensure its compliance with the
         acquis.
      
Next, the Lithuanian authorities were entitled to presume that it was not necessary either for Grasalva to be included in
         the list in Appendix A for it to be able to be marketed after the accession, given that that list contains only those medicinal
         products which do not meet the requirements laid down by Directive 2001/83. In addition, in the view of the Republic of Lithuania,
         when that list was drawn up, Directive 2003/had not yet been adopted, so that the Lithuanian authorities were not in a
         position to know that the marketing authorisation granted for that medicinal product would not comply with European Union
         law, as it was likely to be drafted following a future amendments to the relevant legislation. Furthermore, the new Member
         States are required to grant marketing authorisations in compliance with the new requirements laid down by Directive 2003/only for medicinal products for which an application for authorisation has been made after their accession to the European
         Union. 
      
In addition, since the marketing authorisation for Grasalva was issued in accordance with the European Union law in force
         when it was issued, withdrawal of that authorisation would have infringed the principle of legality, particularly since no
         data have been submitted to show that the risk/benefit assessment of that medicinal product was not positive.
      
The Lithuanian Government also relies on the case-law of the Court in environmental matters and, in particular, on Case C-209/Commission v Austria [2006] ECR I‑2755, paragraphs to 63, pursuant to which the obligation on a Member State which has acceded to the European
         Union to apply the entire acquis, even if that entails amending earlier legislation under which that Member State issued an
         administrative authorisation, does not require the annulment of that authorisation.
      
Finally, the Commission’s interpretation constitutes discrimination between the Member States which acceded to the European
         Union on May and the other Member States. The latter had to apply the new requirements laid down by Directive 2003/only to medicinal products for which an application for marketing authorisation was made after expiry of the period laid down
         for transposition of that directive, that is to say, October 2003. However, the new Member States were obliged to ensure,
         with effect from May 2004, that all medicinal products whose marketing authorisations did not comply with Directive 2001/83,
         as amended by Directive 2003/63, were withdrawn from the market. 
      
–       Findings of the Court
By its first complaint, the Commission claims, in essence, that the Republic of Lithuania maintained the marketing authorisation
         for Grasalva after the date of its accession to the European Union, although, on that date, that authorisation did not meet
         the requirements laid down by Directive 2001/83, as amended by Directive 2003/63. 
      
It must be borne in mind from the outset that it is common ground between the parties that the marketing authorisation which
         had been granted for that medicinal product did not, on the date of accession of the Republic of Lithuania to the European
         Union, meet the requirements of Directive 2001/83, as amended by Directive 2003/63. The authorisation had been issued before
         accession by the Lithuanian authorities on the basis of an abridged application, which did not contain the results of preclinical
         and clinical trials, whereas, with effect from May 2004, the date of accession, marketing authorisations for medicinal products
         from biotechnical processes, such as Grasalva, could no longer be issued on the basis of such an abridged application, having
         regard to the amendments made by Directive 2003/to Annex I, Part II, point 4, to Directive 2001/83.
      
Nevertheless, the Republic of Lithuania submits that, since that authorisation complied with Directive 2001/83, as it was
         in force on July 2003, the date of issue of that authorisation, it remained valid even beyond the date of accession.
      
It is therefore necessary to establish whether, with effect from the date of its accession to the European Union, the Republic
         of Lithuania was required to comply with Directive 2001/83, not in the original version but in that which followed its amendment
         by Directive 2003/63.
      
In that regard, it is apparent from Articles and of the Act of Accession that the Act is based on the principle
         that the provisions of European Union law apply ab initio and in toto to new Member States, derogations being allowed only in so far as they are expressly provided for by transitional provisions
         (see, by analogy, Case 258/Metallurgiki Halyps v Commission [1982] ECR 4261, paragraph 8; Case C‑233/KappAhl [1998] ECR I‑8069, paragraph 15; and Case C‑420/Apostolides [2009] ECR I‑3571, paragraph 33).
      
It follows that, with effect from May 2004, the date of accession of the Republic of Lithuania to the European Union, that
         Member State was bound by the provisions of primary law and by the measures adopted before its accession, in particular, by
         the institutions, such that it was required, in accordance with Article of the Act of Accession, to bring into force
         the measures necessary to comply, in particular, with the provisions of directives within the meaning of the third paragraph
         of Article EC.
      
With regard to the derogations under that Act of Accession, it must be borne in mind that, Article 24, read in conjunction
         with Annex IX, Chapter 1, paragraph 2, thereto, provides for a transitional period during which marketing authorisations granted
         under its national legislation by the Republic of Lithuania, before the date of its accession to the European Union, for pharmaceutical
         products in the list in Appendix A remained valid even after that date and until January at the latest.
      
In other words, by way of derogation from the obligations following from Article of the Act of Accession and only in
         respect of medicinal products in that list, the Republic of Lithuania was not required, upon accession, to comply with Directive
         2001/83, as amended by Directive 2003/63.
      
It is established that Grasalva is not included in the list in Appendix A.
      
Consequently, since the marketing authorisation granted for that medicinal product was not covered by the derogation laid
         down in Annex IX, Chapter 1, paragraph 2, of the Act of Accession, it should, with effect from May 2004, have been
         made compliant with the European Union legislation in force on that date.
      
The arguments which the Republic of Lithuania has submitted in support of its contrary interpretation of that Act are not
         capable of affecting this finding. 
      
In particular, firstly, the fact that that authorisation complied with European Union law in force at the date of its issue,
         that is to say, Directive 2001/in the original version, cannot be relevant.
      
Firstly, Article of the Act of Accession requires the Member States to put into effect the measures necessary for
         them to comply with European Union law only from the date of their accession. Secondly, since Directive 2003/set as October the end of the period in which Member States were to transpose that directive, it was an integral part of the
         acquis with which, pursuant to Article of the Act of Accession, the Republic of Lithuania was required to comply with
         effect from May 2004. 
      
Next, that Member State incorrectly argues that the Lithuanian authorities were entitled to presume that it was not necessary
         for Grasalva to be included in the list in Appendix A in order to satisfy themselves that the marketing authorisation for
         that medicinal product would remain valid after the accession.
      
On the contrary, it cannot be deduced from the fact that Annex IX, Chapter 1, paragraph 2, of the Act of Accession refers
         to Directive 2001/in the original version that any authorisation complying with that version could, without the medicinal
         product in question being included in the list in Appendix A, benefit from a derogation from the requirements laid down in
         European Union law in force at the date of accession. The same is true even where those requirements have been amended during
         the period between the date of signature of that Act of Accession and the date on which accession occurred.
      
Firstly, that annex could not refer to Directive 2003/63, since that directive was not adopted until June 2003, after signature
         of the Act of Accession. Secondly, the provisions of that annex must be interpreted in the light of those of that Act,
         of which that annex is an integral part, and, in particular, of Article thereof, under which the new Member States are bound
         by all directives adopted by the institutions of the European Union before their accession.
      
The insertion of a medicinal product into the list in Appendix A was accordingly to permit the maintenance on the market not
         only of medicinal products whose authorisations did not comply with European Union law when that appendix was drawn up, but
         also those whose authorisations were likely to become invalid because of successive amendments to European Union legislation.
      
In those circumstances, at the date when Appendix A was drawn up, the Republic of Lithuania could, as a precaution, have added
         Grasalva to the list which it supplied for inclusion in that appendix, given that the Lithuanian authorities were in a position
         to know what amendments Directive 2003/would make to Directive 2001/83. 
      
In that regard, it is apparent from the documents placed before the Court that the Republic of Lithuania took part, although
         only in the role of observer to which it was entitled as an acceding State, in the negotiations commenced in with a view
         to the adoption of Directive 2003/and that, consequently, the Lithuanian authorities were in a position to assess the potential
         impact that failing to add a medicinal product developed from biotechnical processes to the list which was to appear in the
         Appendix A was likely to have on the validity of the marketing authorisation for that medicinal product.
      
Even if, as the defendant Member State submits, the Lithuanian authorities learned of the existence of Grasalva only when
         the application for marketing authorisation was filed, that is to say, on May 2003, and that it was therefore impossible
         for them to request an amendment to Appendix A – which had been annexed to the Act of Accession, signed on April – the Republic of Lithuania then had not only the possibility of requesting an amendment of Directive 2003/63, which was not
         adopted until June 2003, but also of requesting such an amendment after its definitive adoption.
      
Once the Treaty of Accession was signed, and subject to the application of the particular procedures provided for in
         that Treaty for deciding on certain types of transitional measures, such as, for example, those established by Articles or of the Act of Accession, there is no objection in principle to secondary legislation adopted after that signature
         and before the entry into force of the Treaty of Accession containing temporary derogations in favour of a future Member
         State being adopted directly on the basis of the provisions of the EC Treaty (Case C-413/Parliament v Council [2006] ECR I-11221, paragraph 62). 
      
Consequently, as regards measures that must be thus adopted during the period between the date of signature of the Treaty
         of Accession and the date when the accession takes effect, the institutions are fully aware of the imminent accession of new
         Member States, and the latter have the opportunity to assert their interests where necessary, in particular through the information
         and consultation procedure (see, to that effect, Joined Cases 39/81, 43/81, 85/and 88/Halyvourgiki and Helleniki Halyvourgia v Commission [1982] ECR 593, paragraph 10, and Parliament v Council, paragraph 66).
      
It is therefore, in principle, in the framework of that procedure and by making use of their observer status in the Council
         of the European Union, with the opportunities for dialogue and cooperation which those special mechanisms afford them, that
         the future Member States may, once informed of the future adoption of new measures of secondary legislation, assert their
         interest in obtaining the necessary transitional derogations, having regard, for example, to the fact that it would be impossible
         to ensure immediate application of those measures on accession, or to major socio-economic problems to which such application
         might give rise (Parliament v Council, paragraph 67).
      
In the present case, the Republic of Lithuania has merely argued that it was practically impossible for it to negotiate transitional
         periods, but has not provided any evidence to show that it actually availed itself of the rights conferred on it by those
         procedures and that those procedures bore no fruit.
      
In addition, with regard to the alleged infringement of the principle of legality and of Article of Directive 2001/83,
         it is sufficient to note that, as the Advocate General observed in point of her Opinion, such arguments rest on the premiss
         that the marketing authorisation for Grasalva was issued validly and in compliance with European Union law.
      
That is not the situation in the present case, given that, on the date of accession of the Republic of Lithuania to the European
         Union, the authorisation did not meet the requirements laid down in that law, as in force at that date.
      
In the same way, contrary to the Member State’s allegations, the conclusion set out in paragraph of this judgment cannot
         in any way infringe the principle of non-discrimination given that, as the Advocate General observed in point of her Opinion,
         the situation of a future Member State with regard to the obligations under the Treaty of Accession and that of Member States
         with regard to the transposition of a directive within the period prescribed cannot be regarded as being comparable.
      
Finally, with regard to the approach adopted by the Court in the case of Commission v Austria, it is sufficient to note that that approach was justified in particular by the fact, described in paragraph of that judgment,
         that the Act of Accession did not provide, with respect to the Republic of Austria, for any derogation or transitional period
         in respect of the directives in question in the case which gave rise to that judgment. 
      
Clearly, that is not the case as regards Directive 2001/83, given that the Act of Accession expressly provided, in Annex
         IX thereto, for derogation from the applicability of that directive in Lithuania.
      
In the light of the foregoing conclusions, the Court holds that the Commission’s first complaint in support of its action
         is well founded.
      
 The second complaint
–       Arguments of the parties
By its second complaint, the Commission submits that, given that the marketing authorisation for Grasalva was no longer valid
         after May because of its non-compliance with Directive 2001/83, as amended by Directive 2003/63, that medicinal product
         could not be marketed after that date except on the basis of an authorisation issued by the Commission in accordance with
         the centralised authorisation procedure laid down by Regulation No 2309/93. That regulation, applicable in the Republic of
         Lithuania upon its accession to the European Union, made biological medicinal products developed by means of recombinant DNA
         technology, such as Grasalva, subject to that procedure. 
      
The Lithuanian authorities, after having pointed out that this second plea is closely linked to the first, reiterate that
         the marketing authorisation for Grasalva was issued on July 2003, when the Republic of Lithuania was not yet a Member State
         of the European Union. Under the second paragraph of Article of Regulation No 2309/93, ‘[t]he person responsible for placing
         the medicinal products covered by this Regulation on the market must be established in the Community’. 
      
Consequently, according to those authorities, it was not possible on July for the author of the application for a marketing
         authorisation for Grasalva to take advantage of the centralised procedure laid down in Regulation No 2309/93, given that he
         was established in Lithuania, that is to say, outside the Community. In addition, it would not be reasonable, having regard
         to the length of the procedures in question, to require, as the Commission does, the national marketing authorisation to be
         withdrawn on May 2004, when, before that date, it would not have been possible for an operator established in Lithuania
         to make an application for authorisation under the centralised procedure laid down in that regulation.
      
–       Findings of the Court
In response to this second complaint, it must first be pointed out that, as is clear from the analysis of the first complaint,
         the national marketing authorisation for Grasalva was not granted in compliance with the European Union law applicable to
         medicinal products. 
      
Consequently, in accordance with Article 6(1) of Directive 2001/83, that marketing authorisation was not sufficient, from
         accession of the Republic of Lithuania to the European Union, to permit the marketing of Grasalva in Lithuania.
      
It also follows from Article 6(1) of Directive 2001/83, from Article 3(1) of and the Annex to Regulation No 2309/93, and from
         Article 3(1) of and the Annex to Regulation No 726/that, since it was not included in the list in Appendix A, Grasalva,
         as a medicinal product developed from biotechnical processes, could not be marketed in the Community after that accession
         except on the basis of an authorisation issued by the Commission under the centralised procedure laid down in Regulation No
         2309/and, with effect from November 2005, Regulation No 726/2004. 
      
It is sufficient to note in that regard that, as the Republic of Lithuania itself accepts, Grasalva was marketed in Lithuania
         after accession of that Member State to the European Union and until July 2008.
      
In those circumstances, it must be held that the Republic of Lithuania has infringed Articles 3(1) of Regulations Nos 2309/and 726/2004. 
      
Consequently, the second complaint advanced by the Commission in support of its action is also well founded.
      
Accordingly, it must be held that, by maintaining in force the national marketing authorisation for the medicinal product
         Grasalva, the Republic of Lithuania has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 6(1) of Directive 2001/83, as amended
         by Directive 2003/63, under Article 3(1) of Regulation No 2309/93, and under Article 3(1) of Regulation No 726/2004.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs to be awarded against the Republic
         of Lithuania and the latter has been unsuccessful, the Republic of Lithuania must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those ground, the Court (First Chamber) hereby: 
1.      Declares that, by maintaining in force the national marketing authorisation for the medicinal product Grasalva, the Republic
            of Lithuania has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 6(1) of Directive 2001/83/EC of the European Parliament and
            of the Council of November on the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use, as amended by Commission
            Directive 2003/63/EC of June 2003, under Article 3(1) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2309/of July laying down
            Community procedures for the authorisation and supervision of medicinal products for human and veterinary use and establishing
            a European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products, and under Article 3(1) of Regulation (EC) No 726/of the European
            Parliament and of the Council of March laying down Community procedures for the authorisation and supervision of medicinal
            products for human and veterinary use and establishing a European Medicines Agency; 
2.      Orders the Republic of Lithuania to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
*  Language of the case: Lithuanian.
      
Top  
 