
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-297/Dominique Bruyère and OthersvBelgian State(Reference for a preliminary rulingfrom the Belgian Conseil d'État)
         
«(Veterinary medicinal products – Directives 81/851/EEC and 90/676/EEC)»
Opinion of Advocate General Elmer delivered on October Judgment of the Court (First Chamber), March Summary of the Judgment
1..
Preliminary rulings – Questions submitted to the Court – Need for a preliminary ruling and relevance of the questions submitted – Determination by the national court – Possibility for the parties to alter the wording of the questions – Not possible  (EC Treaty, Art. 177) 
2..
Approximation of laws – Veterinary medicinal products – Prohibitions laid down by Directive 81/– Scope – Parallel application of Articles and of the Treaty – Not permissible  (EC Treaty, Arts and 36; Council Directive 81/851, Art. 4, and Council Directives 90/and 93/40) 
1.
 In proceedings under Article of the Treaty, it is solely for the national courts before which actions are brought, and
         which must bear the responsibility for the subsequent judicial decision, to determine in the light of the particular facts
         of each case both the need for a preliminary ruling in order to enable them to give judgment and the relevance of the questions
         which they submit to the Court, without the parties being able to alter the wording of those questions. 
         
2.
 The prohibition, set out in Article of Directive 81/relating to veterinary medicinal products, in its original version
         and as amended by Directive 90/676, of both the marketing and administration of a medicinal product within the territory of
         a Member State without prior issue of authorization by the competent authority of that State implies that it is prohibited
         to import that product for one of those purposes.  Consequently, the importation, by a pharmacist in a Member State, of a
         medicinal product prescribed in that State by a veterinarian in order to cater for a specific need is also covered by the
         provision in question. In this regard, although Directive 81/describes itself, according to the 11th recital in its preamble, as  
         one stage in the achievement of the aim of freedom of movement of veterinary medicinal products, it cannot be inferred from this that, for medicinal products coming within its scope, the directive leaves room for the
         application of Articles and of the Treaty.  The legislature intended by that wording only to signify that the system
         of multiple national authorizations for the marketing of products, first introduced by Directive 81/851, was destined to be
         replaced by a system under which account was to be taken of authorizations granted by other Member States (Directive 90/676)
         and subsequently by a system for the mutual recognition in principle of such authorizations (Directive 93/40). 
      
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)March (1)
((Veterinary medicinal products – Directives 81/851/EEC and 90/676/EEC))
In Case C-297/94, 
REFERENCE to the Court under Article of the EC Treaty by the Belgian Conseil d'État for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings
            pending before that court between 
            
 Dominique Bruyère and Others
and
 Belgian State
on the interpretation of Article 4(2) of Council Directive 81/851/EEC of September on the approximation of the laws
            of the Member States relating to veterinary medicinal products (OJ L 317, p. 1), in its original version and as amended
            by Council Directive 90/676/EEC of December (OJ L 373, p. 15),
THE COURT (First Chamber),,
composed of: D.A.O. Edward, President of the Chamber, P. Jann and L. Sevón (Rapporteur), Judges, 
            
Advocate General: M.B. Elmer, Registrar: L. Hewlett, Administrator, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of: 
               
─
Dominique Bruyère and Thierry Charlier and Union Syndicale Vétérinaire Belge (Belgian Professional Association for Veterinary
               Practitioners), by Denis Philippe and Jean-Paul Lagasse, of the Brussels Bar; 
               
─
Eric Basseleer and others, by André Renette and Bernard André, of the Liège Bar; 
               
─
the Belgian State, by Pierre Legros, of the Brussels Bar; 
               
─
the Commission of the European Communities, by Richard Wainwright, Principal Legal Adviser, and Jean-Francis Pasquier, a national
               civil servant on secondment to the Commission's Legal Service, acting as Agents, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of Dominique Bruyère and Thierry Charlier and Union Syndicale Vétérinaire Belge, represented
               by Denis Philippe; Eric Basseleer and others, represented by André Renette; the Belgian State, represented by Philippe Coenraets
               and Delphine de Norre, of the Brussels Bar, and the Commission, represented by Richard Wainwright, at the hearing on July
               1995,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on October 1995, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
By judgment of October 1994, received at the Court on November 1994, the Belgian Conseil d'État (Council of State) referred
         for a preliminary ruling under Article of the EC Treaty two questions concerning the interpretation of Article 4(2) of
         Council Directive 81/851/EEC of September on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to veterinary
         medicinal products (OJ L 317, p. 1), in its original version and as amended by Council Directive 90/676/EEC of December
         (OJ L 373, p. 15). 
         
            
Directive 81/is intended to harmonize the legislation of the Member States on veterinary medicinal products and, in particular,
         the conditions governing the issue of authorization for their marketing.  The first recital in the preamble states that the
         primary purpose of any rules for the production and distribution of veterinary medicinal products must be the safeguarding
         of public health. The 11th recital stresses that the directive is only one stage in the achievement of the aim of freedom
         of movement of veterinary medicinal products and that new measures will prove necessary, in the light of experience gained,
         for the removal of the remaining barriers to freedom of movement. 
         
            
That directive was amended by Directive 90/676, which seeks  
          inter alia  to enable a veterinary medicinal product, manufactured and placed on the market in one Member State on the basis of harmonized
         provisions, to be allowed into the other Member States, taking due consideration of the initial authorization (fourth recital
         in the preamble), and subsequently by Council Directive 93/40/EEC of June amending Directives 81/851/EEC and 81/852/EEC
         (OJ L 214, p. 31), which was adopted in parallel to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2309/of July laying down Community
         procedures for the authorization and supervision of medicinal products for human and veterinary use and establishing a European
         Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products (OJ L 214, p. 1).  Directive 93/seeks in particular to ensure that
         authorization to place a veterinary medicinal product on the market in one Member State is in principle recognized by the
         competent authorities of the other Member States (third recital in the preamble). 
         
            
Article of Directive 81/was worded as follows: 
         
1.
 No veterinary medicinal product may be marketed in a Member State unless authorization has previously been issued by the competent
         authority in that Member State.
         
2.
 No veterinary medicinal product may be administered to animals unless the authorization referred to above has been issued,
         except for tests of veterinary medicinal products referred to in point of Article 5.
         
            
That article was amended as follows by Article 1(4) of Directive 90/676: 
         
1.
 No veterinary medicinal product may be placed on the market in a Member State unless authorization has previously been granted
         by the competent authority of that Member State.
         However, where the health situation so requires, a Member State may authorize the placing on the market or administration
         to animals of veterinary medicinal products which have been authorized by another Member State in accordance with this Directive.In the event of a serious disease epidemic, the States may provisionally allow the use of immunological veterinary medicinal
         products without an authorization for placing on the market, in the absence of a suitable medicinal product and after informing
         the Commission of the detailed conditions of use....
         
3.
 No veterinary medicinal product may be administered to animals unless the authorization referred to above has been issued,
         except for ... tests of veterinary medicinal products ...
         ...
         
5.
 Notwithstanding paragraph 3, Member States shall ensure that veterinarians providing services in another Member State can
         take with them and administer to animals small quantities of ready- made veterinary medicinal products not exceeding daily
         requirements other than immunological veterinary medicinal products which are not authorized for use in the Member State in
         which the services are provided (host Member State), providing that the following conditions are satisfied:
         ...
         
            
In Belgium, the provisions applicable to medicinal products are contained in the Law on Medicinal Products of March (
          Moniteur Belge  of April 1964), Article 6(2) of which provides that ... before being placed on the market, all medicinal products must be registered with the Ministry for Public Health and Family
         Affairs in accordance with such conditions and detailed rules as the King shall prescribe.
         
            
Article 6a(2) of that Law provides that An unregistered medicinal product may be imported, for the purpose of making up a medical prescription, by a dispensing pharmacist.
          The conditions and detailed rules under which such a product may be imported, together with any restrictions thereon, shall
         be laid down by the King.
         
            
In implementation of that provision, a Royal Decree was adopted on January (
          Moniteur Belge  of April 1987) which added,  
          inter alia , an Article 48a to the Royal Decree of June on the Manufacture, Preparation, Wholesale Distribution and Dispensing
         of Medicinal Products (
          Moniteur Belge  of June 1960).  Article 48a provided that A medicinal product not registered for veterinary use may not be imported by a dispensing chemist unless the following conditions
         are fulfilled:
         
1.
 There may not be on the market any medicinal product having the same composition in terms of active ingredients or having
         an equivalent therapeutic effect; 
         
2.
 The product must be prescribed by a veterinarian licensed to practise veterinary medicine in Belgium; 
         
3.
 The prescription must be dated and signed by the prescribing veterinarian and must bear the following indications: ...
         
            
By Royal Decree of December (
          Moniteur Belge  of February 1990), Article 48a was repealed with effect from March (
          Moniteur Belge  of March 1990).  However, a Royal Decree of February 1990, which also took effect on March 1990, reintroduced the
         possibility of importation.  Article of that Royal Decree provides that A dispensing chemist may, for the purpose of making up a medical prescription in his possession, dated and signed by a veterinarian,
         import unregistered medicinal products provided that they contain, as their sole or major active ingredient:[the Decree lists six chemical components].This Royal Decree was amended by a Royal Decree of January (
          Moniteur Belge  of March 1992), which added eight further chemical substances to that list.
         
            
The applicants in the main proceedings are,  
          inter alia , veterinarians, dispensing chemists, a non-profit-making association known as Union Syndicale Vétérinaire Belge and a company
         which specializes in supplying to Belgian dispensing chemists, on production of prescriptions from Belgian veterinarians,
         veterinary medicinal products which are not registered in Belgium but are registered in France.  They instituted various proceedings
         before the Conseil d'État in which they sought the annulment of the Royal Decree of December 1989, which lays down the
         principle of a total prohibition of imports of unregistered medicinal products, the Royal Decree of February 1990, which
         provides for an exception to this principle for six molecular substances, and the Royal Decree of January 1992, which increased
         that number to 14. 
         
            
After it had joined the various cases, the Conseil d'État stayed the proceedings and submitted the following two questions
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling: 
         
1.
 Is Council Directive 81/of September on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to veterinary
         medicinal products, in particular Article 4(2) thereof, to be interpreted as implying a prohibition of the administration
         of a medicinal product without the authorization of the competent authority of a Member State and thus a prohibition of the
         importation of such a product when it is not placed on the market in that Member State and consequently has not previously
         been authorized by the authority of that Member State? 
         
2.
 Is Council Directive 81/of September on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to veterinary
         medicinal products, in particular Article thereof as replaced by Council Directive 90/of December 1990, to be interpreted
         as implying a prohibition of the administration of a medicinal product without the authorization of the competent authority
         of a Member State and thus a prohibition of the importation of such a product when it is not placed on the market in that
         Member State and consequently has not previously been authorized by the authority of that Member State and when, in addition,
         it has not been authorized by another Member State?
         
            
Those questions raise only one issue, namely whether it is possible for a Member State to prohibit the import of a medicinal
         product, the marketing of which has not been the subject of prior authorization by the competent authority.  Accordingly,
         they should be considered together. 
         
            
The applicants in the main proceedings do not deny that the Royal Decrees are consistent with Article of Directive 81/851,
         even after its amendment by Directive 90/676.  They submit, however, that those Decrees have to be considered in the light
         of Articles and of the EC Treaty on the ground that, since it represents only one stage in the achievement of the aim
         of freedom of movement of veterinary medicinal products, Directive 81/does not provide for full harmonization of all national
         measures and thus leaves room for the application of Articles and of the Treaty.  They also argue that some veterinary
         medicinal products, such as serums, do not come within the scope of Directive 81/and that the latter covers only the placing
         of medicinal products on the market, that is to say, their distribution by pharmaceutical companies, and not the import by
         a dispensing chemist, pursuant to a prescription issued by a Belgian veterinarian, of a medicinal product which has not been
         registered in Belgium.  Lastly, they aver that animal owners are dependent on the good will of the pharmaceutical companies,
         which refuse to place certain veterinary medicinal products on the Belgian market because of the formalities and costs associated
         with the procedure for requesting authorization and also by reason of the low profits which they can expect to earn on such
         products in a market as small as that of Belgium. The prohibition on importing certain medicinal products for which no equivalent
         exists on the Belgian market thus endangers the health of both animals and humans in view of the risk of transmission of certain
         diseases. 
         
            
The Belgian State and the Commission both take the view that the wording of Article of Directive 81/is clear in so far
         as it authorizes a Member State to prohibit the marketing, administration and consequently also the import of a medicinal
         product which has not been the subject of prior authorization. 
         
            
So far as concerns the reference to Articles and of the Treaty, the Commission takes the view that the Conseil d'État
         was correct, by virtue of the principle  
          lex specialis generalibus derogat , to request an interpretation only of Directive 81/851, which seeks to harmonize the conditions governing the marketing and
         administration of veterinary medicinal products by making it compulsory for the competent authorities of the Member State
         in question to issue authorization.  It is only in the case of medicinal products not covered by Directive 81/that Article
         could possibly apply, in which event it would then be necessary to determine whether the national rules could be justified
         on one of the grounds mentioned in Article 36. 
         
            
For its part, the Belgian Government does not address the question whether its legislation is in conformity with Articles
         and of the Treaty. 
         
            
The arguments put forward by the applicants in the main proceedings cannot be accepted. 
         
            
Although Directive 81/describes itself as  
         one stage in the achievement of the aim of freedom of movement of veterinary medicinal products (11th recital in the preamble), it cannot be inferred from this that, for medicinal products coming within its scope, the
         directive leaves room for the application of Articles and of the Treaty.  As the development of Community law shows,
         that wording means only that the system of multiple national authorizations for the marketing of products, first introduced
         by Directive 81/851, was destined to be replaced by a system under which account was to be taken of authorizations granted
         by other Member States (Directive 90/676) and subsequently by a system for the mutual recognition in principle of such authorizations
         (Directive 93/40). 
         
            
With regard to any medicinal products not covered by Directive 81/to which Articles and of the Treaty should be
         applied, it should be recalled that it is solely for the national courts before which actions are brought, and which must
         bear the responsibility for the subsequent judicial decision, to determine in the light of the particular facts of each case
         both the need for a preliminary ruling in order to enable them to deliver judgment and the relevance of the questions which
         they submit to the Court (see, in particular, Case C-472/Spano and Others  v  
          Fiat Geotech and Fiat Hitachi Excavators   [1995] ECR I-0000, paragraph 15), and that the parties cannot alter the wording of those questions (Case 5/Grassi  v  
          Italian Finance Administration  [1972] ECR 443, paragraph 4). 
         
            
Since the Conseil d'État has not requested an interpretation of Articles and of the Treaty, it is unnecessary to give
         a ruling in that regard. 
         
            
As for Article of Directive 81/851, to which reference must consequently be made as far as the medicinal products which
         it covers are concerned, its scope is clear in so far as it makes both the marketing and the administration of a medicinal
         product within the territory of a Member State subject to the prior issue of authorization by the competent authority of that
         State.  The fact that it is prohibited to market and administer a medicinal product means that it is prohibited to import
         that product for one of those purposes.  Consequently, the importation, by a pharmacist in a Member State, of a medicinal
         product prescribed in that State by a veterinarian in order to cater for a specific need is also covered by that provision.
         
         
            
As the Advocate General states at point of his Opinion, the derogation introduced in Article 4(5) by Directive 90/for
         veterinarians providing services would be redundant if the import of a medicinal product for the purpose of administering
         it was not prohibited in principle.  Moreover, to authorize the import of a medicinal product lacking prior authorization
         with a view to marketing or administering it would destroy the system set in place by the directive. 
         
            
It cannot be argued against this that, in its judgments in Case 215/Schumacher  v  
          Hauptzollamt Frankfurt am Main-Ost   [1989] ECR and Case C-62/Commission  v  
          Germany  [1992] ECR I-2575, the Court, ruling in respect of Articles and of the Treaty, permitted the importation of medicinal
         products into a Member State.  Those two judgments were concerned with medicinal products authorized in the Member State of
         importation which were imported for personal needs by individuals who had themselves purchased those products in a pharmacy
         in another Member State. 
         
            
As for the arguments of the applicants in the main proceedings that they are dependent on the pharmaceutical companies' good
         will and that the prohibition on importing certain medicinal products for which no equivalent exists endangers the health
         of both animals and humans, the Court simply finds that, in adopting the contested Royal Decrees, the Belgian State was acting
         within the sphere of competence which Community law recognizes it as having.  It is therefore only in the light of the rules
         of national law that the public-health policy pursued might fall to be assessed. 
         
            
It follows from the whole of the foregoing that Article of Directive 81/851, in its original version and as amended by Directive
         90/676, must be interpreted as prohibiting the importation into a Member State of a medicinal product covered by that directive
         with a view to placing it on the market of that State or of administering it there in the absence of prior authorization issued
         by the competent authority of that Member State. 
         
Costs
            
The costs incurred by the Commission of the European Communities, which has submitted observations to the Court, are not recoverable.
         Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the proceedings pending before the national
         court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (First Chamber),
in answer to the questions referred to it by the Belgian Conseil d'État, by judgment of October 1994, hereby rules: 
         
Edward
Jann 
Sevón 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on March 1996. 
         
R. Grass 
D.A.O. Edward  
Registrar
President of the First Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: French.
Top  
 