
Case C-28/European Commission
v
Republic of Austria
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Articles EC and EC – Free movement of goods – Measures having equivalent effect to quantitative restrictions on imports and exports – Transport – Directives 96/62/EC and 1999/30/EC – Sectoral traffic prohibition for lorries of over 7.tonnes carrying certain goods – Air quality – Protection of health and the environment – Principle of proportionality – Consistency)
Summary of the Judgment
Free movement of goods – Quantitative restrictions – Measures having equivalent effect – Sectoral traffic prohibition for
            lorries of over 7.tonnes carrying certain goods
(Arts EC and EC; Council Directives 96/62, Art. 8(3), and 1999/30)
A Member State fails to fulfil its obligations under Articles EC and EC if, with the aim of guaranteeing ambient air
         quality in the zone concerned, in accordance with Article 8(3) of Directive 96/on ambient air quality assessment and management
         in conjunction with Directive 1999/relating to limit values for sulphur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide and oxides of nitrogen,
         particulate matter and lead in ambient air, it prohibits lorries of over 7.tonnes transporting certain goods from using
         an important section of road forming one of the principal land transport routes between certain Member States.
      
In that it forces the undertakings concerned to seek viable alternative solutions for the transport of the goods in question,
         such a prohibition hinders the free circulation of goods and must therefore be regarded as a measure having equivalent effect
         to quantitative restrictions which is incompatible with the obligations under Articles EC and EC, unless it is objectively
         justified.
      
While overriding requirements of protection of the environment, which in principle encompasses also the protection of health,
         can justify national measures that are liable to obstruct intra-Community trade, provided that those measures are suitable
         for securing the attainment of that objective and do not go beyond what is necessary for attaining it, that prohibition cannot
         be justified on that basis, since it has not been shown that the objective pursued could not be attained by other measures
         less restrictive of free movement.
      
(see paras 116-117, 122, 125, 139-140, 150-151, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
December (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Articles EC and EC – Free movement of goods – Measures having equivalent effect to quantitative restrictions on imports and exports – Transport – Directives 96/62/EC and 1999/30/EC – Sectoral traffic prohibition for lorries of over 7.tonnes carrying certain goods – Air quality – Protection of health and the environment – Principle of proportionality – Consistency)
In Case C‑28/09,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on January 2009,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by P. Oliver, A. Alcover San Pedro and B. Schima, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
supported by:
Italian Republic, represented initially by I. Bruni and subsequently by G. Palmieri, acting as Agents, and G. De Bellis, avvocato dello Stato,
         with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
Kingdom of the Netherlands, represented by C. Wissels, Y. de Vries and M. Noort, acting as Agents,
      
interveners,
v
Republic of Austria, represented by E. Riedl, G. Eberhard and C. Ranacher, acting as Agents, and L. Schmutzhard and J. Thudium,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, A. Tizzano, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, K. Lenaerts, J. Malenovský, U. Lõhmus, A. Prechal, Presidents
         of Chambers, A. Rosas (Rapporteur), E. Levits, A. Ó Caoimh and L. Bay Larsen, Judges,
      
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: B. Fülöp, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on October 2010,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on December 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application the Commission of the European Communities asks the Court to declare that, by prohibiting lorries of over
         7.tonnes carrying certain goods from using a section of the A motorway in the Inn valley (Austria), the Republic of Austria
         has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles EC and EC.
      
 Legal context
 European Union law
European Union legislation on the protection of ambient air quality consists in particular of Council Directive 96/62/EC of
         September on ambient air quality assessment and management (OJ L 296, p. 55) and Council Directive 1999/30/EC
         of April relating to limit values for sulphur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide and oxides of nitrogen, particulate matter
         and lead in ambient air (OJ L 163, p. 41), as amended by Commission Decision 2001/744/EC of October (OJ L 278, p. 35) (‘Directive 1999/30’). The aim of those two directives, as stated in their preambles, is to protect the environment
         and human health.
      
Those directives were repealed as from June by Directive 2008/50/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
         of May on ambient air quality and cleaner air for Europe (OJ L 152, p. 1), without prejudice to the obligations
         on the Member States relating to time-limits for transposition or application of those directives. In view of the date of
         the material facts, however, they remain applicable to the present proceedings.
      
In accordance with Article of Directive 96/62, its general aim is to define the basic principles of a common strategy to:
      
–        define and establish objectives for ambient air quality in the Community designed to avoid, prevent or reduce harmful effects
         on human health and the environment as a whole,
      
–        assess the ambient air quality in Member States on the basis of common methods and criteria,
–        obtain adequate information on ambient air quality and ensure that it is made available to the public, inter alia by means
         of alert thresholds, and
      
–        maintain ambient air quality where it is good and improve it in other cases.
Article of Directive 96/provides that the Council of the European Union, on a proposal by the Commission, is to set limit
         values for the pollutants listed in Annex I to the directive. That annex, entitled ‘List of atmospheric pollutants to be taken
         into consideration in the assessment and management of ambient air quality’, includes inter alia nitrogen dioxide (NO2).
      
Article of Directive 96/provides:
      
‘1.      Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure compliance with the limit values.
…
3.      Member States shall draw up action plans indicating the measures to be taken in the short term where there is a risk of the
         limit values and/or alert thresholds being exceeded, in order to reduce that risk and to limit the duration of such an occurrence.
         Such plans may, depending on the individual case, provide for measures to control and, where necessary, suspend activities,
         including motor‑vehicle traffic, which contribute to the limit values being exceeded.’
      
Article 8(3) of Directive 96/further provides:
      
‘In the zones and agglomerations [in which the levels of one or more pollutants are higher than the limit value plus the margin
         of tolerance], Member States shall take measures to ensure that a plan or programme is prepared or implemented for attaining
         the limit value within the specific time limit.
      
The said plan or programme, which must be made available to the public, shall incorporate at least the information listed
         in Annex IV.’
      
The information listed in Annex IV includes information on the localisation of excess pollution, the main emission sources
         responsible for pollution, and existing and proposed measures.
      
Limit values for nitrogen dioxide are set in Directive 1999/30. According to the fourth recital in the preamble to that directive,
         the limit values are minimum requirements and the Member States may, in accordance with Article 130t of the EC Treaty (subsequently,
         after amendment, Article EC), maintain or introduce more stringent protective measures.
      
In accordance with Article 4, ‘Nitrogen dioxide and oxides of nitrogen’, of Directive 1999/30:
      
‘1.      Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that concentrations of nitrogen dioxide and, where applicable, of
         oxides of nitrogen, in ambient air, as assessed in accordance with Article 7, do not exceed the limit values laid down in
         Section I of Annex II as from the dates specified therein.
      
The margins of tolerance laid down in Section I of Annex II shall apply in accordance with Article of Directive 96/62/EC.
2.      The alert threshold for concentrations of nitrogen dioxide in ambient air shall be that laid down in Section II of Annex II.’
In accordance with Section I of Annex II to Directive 1999/30, for nitrogen dioxide:
      
–        the hourly limit value for the protection of human health is fixed at μg/m3, ‘not to be exceeded more than times per calendar year’, plus a percentage margin of tolerance decreasing until January
         2010;
      
–        the annual limit value for the protection of human health is fixed at μg/mplus the same percentage margin of tolerance decreasing until January 2010, namely μg/mfor 2006, μg/mfor 2007, μg/mfor and μg/mfor 2009.
      
European Union legislation sets, for new motor vehicles sold in the Member States, maximum limits for emissions of pollutants,
         in particular for particulates and oxides of nitrogen (NOx). For emissions of gaseous and particulate pollutants from compression-ignition engines for use in vehicles and emissions
         of gaseous pollutants from positive-ignition engines fuelled with natural gas or liquefied petroleum gas for use in vehicles,
         those standards are designated Euro I, II, etc, while for passenger and light commercial vehicles the form Euro 0, 1, 2, etc.
         is used.
      
 National law
Directives 96/and 1999/were transposed into Austrian law inter alia by means of amendments to the Law on air pollution
         (Immissionsschutzgesetz-Luft BGBl. I, 115/1997; ‘the IG-L’).
      
Under Paragraph 3(1) of the IG‑L, the emission limit values laid down in Annexes and to that law apply to the protection
         of human health throughout Austrian territory. Annex I sets an annual emission limit value of μg/mfor nitrogen dioxide. That annex also provides for a margin of tolerance of μg/mwhich decreases progressively. On that basis, the limit values for emissions of nitrogen dioxide are μg/mfor to and μg/mfor 2010.
      
Pursuant to Paragraph of the IG‑L, measures are to be taken by way of regulation no later than months after the end
         of a year in which a limit value is found to have been exceeded. Among the measures that may be taken, in accordance with
         Paragraph 16(1)(4) of that law, are prohibitions on the movement of motor vehicles.
      
The Landeshauptmann (First Minister) of the Province of Tyrol on December 2007, on the basis of the IG‑L, adopted a regulation
         prohibiting the carrying of certain goods on the A motorway in the Inn valley (sectoral traffic prohibition) (Verordnung
         des Landeshauptmannes vom 17. Dezember 2007, mit der auf der A Inntalautobahn der Transport bestimmter Güter verboten wird
         (Sektorales Fahrverbot-Verordnung), Landesgesetzblatt für Tirol, No 92/2007, ‘the contested regulation’). That regulation, which prohibits lorries of over 7.tonnes carrying certain goods
         from using a section of that motorway (‘the sectoral traffic prohibition’), entered into force on January 2008.
      
According to Paragraph of the contested regulation, its aim is to reduce emissions of pollutants influenced by human activity
         and thereby to improve air quality, so as to ensure the long-term protection of human health and fauna and flora.
      
Paragraph of the regulation defines an ‘improvement zone’ (‘Sanierungsgebiet’). This comprises a 90-kilometre section of
         the A motorway between the municipality of Zirl (about km west of the city of Innsbruck) and the Austrian‑German frontier
         (about km east of the city of Innsbruck) with a 100‑metre strip of land on either side of the motorway.
      
In accordance with Paragraph of the regulation:
      
‘Driving on the A Inn valley motorway in either direction between km 6.in the municipality of Langkampfen and km 90.in the municipality of Zirl is prohibited with the following vehicles:
      
Lorries or semi-trailer units of a maximum authorised gross weight of over 7.t and lorries with trailers where the sum of
         the maximum authorised gross weights of both vehicles amounts to over 7.t, for the transport of the following goods:
      
a)      from May [“the first stage”]:
1.      all wastes listed in the European Waste Catalogue, in accordance with Commission Decision 2000/532/EC [of May replacing
         Decision 94/3/EC establishing a list of wastes pursuant to Article 1(a) of Council Directive 75/442/EEC on waste and Council
         Decision 94/904/EC establishing a list of hazardous waste pursuant to Article 1(4) of Council Directive 91/689/EEC on hazardous
         waste (OJ L 226, p. 3)], in the version of [Council Decision] 2001/573/EC [of July (OJ L 203, p. 18)],
      
2.      stones, earth, excavated material.
b)      from January [“the second stage”]:
1.      logs and cork,
2.      non-ferrous and ferrous ores,
3.      motor vehicles and trailers,
4.      steel, except reinforcing and construction steel for delivery to building sites,
5.      marble and travertine,
6.      tiles (ceramic).’
Paragraph of the contested regulation excepts certain motor vehicles from the sectoral traffic prohibition, in particular
         motor vehicles loaded or unloaded in the ‘core zone’ and the ‘extended zone’, motor vehicles in traffic antecedent to rail
         transhipment travelling to the Hall rail terminal eastbound and the Wörgl rail terminal westbound, and motor vehicles in traffic
         subsequent to rail transhipment travelling from the Hall rail terminal westbound and the Wörgl rail terminal eastbound.
      
The political districts of Imst, Innsbruck Land, Innsbruck Stadt, Kufstein and Schwaz are in the ‘core zone’. The ‘extended
         zone’ covers the political districts of Kitzbühel, Landeck, Lienz, Reutte and Zell am See in Austria, the districts of Bad
         Tölz, Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Miesbach, Rosenheim (including the town of Rosenheim) and Traunstein in Germany, and the district
         communities of Valle Isarco/Eisacktal, Val Pusteria/Pustertal and Wipptal in Italy.
      
Paragraph also refers to the exceptions provided for by the IG‑L. Certain categories of motor vehicles are thus excluded
         from the sectoral traffic prohibition, including highway maintenance vehicles, refuse collection vehicles and agricultural
         and forestry vehicles. An individual derogation may also be requested for other vehicles on grounds of the public interest
         or a significant private interest.
      
After the expiry on June of the period prescribed in the reasoned opinion, several amendments were made to the contested
         regulation.
      
Implementation of the sectoral traffic prohibition was postponed in part. For the section to the east of Innsbruck, it was
         provided that from January that prohibition would apply, in addition to the carriage of the goods previously concerned,
         namely waste, stones, earth and excavated material, only to the carriage of logs and cork and of motor vehicles and trailers.
         As regards the carriage of ceramic tiles and steel, the sectoral traffic prohibition took effect only from July (the
         third stage), and, as regards the carriage of ferrous and non‑ferrous ores and of marble and travertine, from July (the fourth stage).
      
For the section to the west of Innsbruck (Innsbruck-Zirl), implementation of the sectoral traffic prohibition was postponed
         to January for all goods referred to in the contested regulation.
      
Finally, various exceptions were laid down by decree. These related in particular to aid convoys of recognised organisations
         and to military transport.
      
 Background to the dispute
The A motorway, approximately kilometres in length, links the municipality of Kufstein to the east of Innsbruck with
         the municipality of Landeck to the west of Innsbruck. Pollution in excess of the annual limit value for nitrogen dioxide,
         as fixed in Section I of Annex II to Directive 1999/30, was found on that motorway from 2002. The highest concentrations of
         that atmospheric pollutant were measured at the Vomp/Raststätte monitoring point. During that year, the annual average concentration
         recorded for that pollutant was µg/m3, whereas under Section I of Annex II the annual limit value plus the margin of tolerance had been fixed at µg/m3. For the years to 2008, even higher excess values were found. In 2008, for example, the concentration of nitrogen dioxide
         recorded at that monitoring point was µg/m3, representing an excess of 50% of the limit value fixed for that year plus the margin of tolerance, amounting to µg/m3. The excess values were even greater in relation to the limit values for nitrogen dioxide laid down by the IG‑L, including
         the margins of tolerance provided for by that law.
      
In order to ensure that the limit values for nitrogen dioxide were complied with, the Austrian authorities adopted a number
         of measures aimed at reducing the specific emissions of motor vehicles and the density of road traffic.
      
On October those authorities imposed a temporary night traffic ban for lorries on a section of the A motorway. That
         measure was subsequently extended and then replaced as from June by a permanent night traffic ban applying to the transport
         of goods by lorries of over 7.t, the prohibition being applicable for the whole year.
      
On May the First Minister of the Province of Tyrol adopted a regulation prohibiting, from August and for an
         indefinite period, lorries of over 7.t carrying the goods listed in that regulation from using a section of that motorway
         between the municipalities of Kundl and Ampass. The goods concerned were more particularly waste, cereals, logs and cork,
         ferrous and non-ferrous ores, stones, earth, excavated material, motor vehicles and trailers and steel. However, the transport
         of goods from or to the territory of the city of Innsbruck and the districts of Kufstein, Schwaz or Innsbruck Land was excepted
         from the prohibition. In addition, the sectoral traffic prohibition did not apply to certain categories of motor vehicles,
         such as highway maintenance vehicles, refuse collection vehicles and agricultural and forestry vehicles. Finally, an individual
         derogation for other motor vehicles could be requested in certain cases on grounds of the public interest or a significant
         private interest. The measure was to apply immediately, as from August 2003.
      
Since it took the view that the prohibition laid down by that regulation constituted an infringement of the free movement
         of goods within the meaning of Articles EC and EC, the Commission on July brought an action under Article EC against the Republic of Austria for failure to fulfil obligations.
      
After ordering the Republic of Austria, as an interim measure, to suspend operation of the prohibition, the Court held in
         its judgment of November in Case C‑320/Commission v Austria [2005] ECR I‑that the Republic of Austria had failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles EC and EC, since
         the regulation at issue was to be regarded as a measure having equivalent effect to quantitative restrictions which, because
         of its disproportionate nature, could not validly be justified on the ground of the protection of air quality.
      
Following that judgment, the Austrian authorities prepared new measures to improve the air quality on the A motorway. From
         a package of measures, including the sectoral traffic prohibition which is the subject of the present action, was progressively
         introduced.
      
Thus from November to April a speed limit of km/h was imposed on the A motorway between the Austrian-German
         frontier and the municipality of Zirl. In November that temporary measure was replaced by a speed limit varying according
         to the general emission level actually measured and the meteorological factors (‘the variable speed limit’).
      
In addition, a traffic prohibition for semi-trailer units and lorries with trailers of over 7.t not complying with standard
         Euro II was introduced between the municipalities of Zirl and Kufstein with effect from January 2007. Since November that measure has also applied to motor vehicles of that kind which do not comply with standard Euro III. Since November
         a general traffic ban has applied to all lorries of over 7.t whose emissions do not comply with standard Euro II.
      
Finally, with effect from January 2007, the geographical scope of the night traffic ban applying to lorries on a section
         of the A motorway was extended. An exception had been introduced temporarily for lorries in classes Euro IV and Euro V,
         but it was abolished on October 2009.
      
The sectoral traffic prohibition and the other measures mentioned in paragraphs to above form part of a plan drawn up
         by the Austrian authorities, pursuant to Article 8(3) of Directive 96/62, in order to ensure, in the Province of Tyrol, compliance
         with the limit value for nitrogen dioxide fixed in Section I of Annex II to Directive 1999/30.
      
 Pre-litigation procedure
The proposed sectoral traffic prohibition was communicated to the Commission by the Republic of Austria on January 2007,
         in the prior consultation procedure provided for by Council Decision of March instituting a procedure for prior examination
         and consultation in respect of certain laws, regulations and administrative provisions concerning transport proposed in Member
         States (OJ, English Special Edition 1959-1962, p. 96), as amended by Council Decision 73/402/EEC of November (OJ L 347, p. 48).
      
The Commission reacted by issuing an opinion on July 2007, in which it concluded that the sectoral traffic prohibition
         would, if adopted, constitute a restriction of the free movement of goods, contrary to the obligations under Articles EC
         and EC.
      
Since the contested regulation was none the less adopted on December and entered into force on January 2008, the
         Commission on January sent the Republic of Austria a letter of formal notice confirming its previous position and
         inviting the Republic of Austria to submit is observations within days from receipt of the letter.
      
In its reply of February 2008, the Republic of Austria disputed the Commission’s complaint. It stated that the sectoral
         traffic prohibition, which aimed to improve the air quality on the A motorway, had the objective of transferring to rail
         goods that had an ‘affinity with rail’. The prohibition therefore did not constitute a restriction of the free movement of
         goods, and was in any event justified by objectives of the protection of health and the environment. The geographical situation
         of Austria should also be taken into account. The rapid growth of road transport in the European Union had brought about increased
         pressure on the environment in the Alpine corridors and their immediate surroundings.
      
As that reply failed to convince the Commission, it sent the Republic of Austria a reasoned opinion on May 2008, inviting
         it to take the necessary measures to comply with the opinion within one month from the date of its receipt.
      
The Republic of Austria replied to the reasoned opinion by letter of June 2008, maintaining its previous position. In a
         further letter of December 2008, it informed the Commission that, for the section to the west of the city of Innsbruck,
         the sectoral traffic prohibition would not enter into force until January 2011.
      
Since the Commission was not satisfied with those explanations, it decided to bring the present action.
      
 Procedure before the Court
By order of the President of the Court of June 2009, the Italian Republic and the Kingdom of the Netherlands were given
         leave to intervene in support of the form of order sought by the Commission.
      
By order of the President of the Court of August 2009, the Kingdom of Denmark was given leave to intervene in support of
         the form of order sought by the Republic of Austria. After the Kingdom of Denmark informed the Court, by letter of March
         2010, that it was withdrawing its intervention, the President of the Court, by order of May 2010, ordered the Kingdom of
         Denmark to be removed from the register as an intervener in the case.
      
 Admissibility
 Arguments of the parties
The Republic of Austria raises a plea of inadmissibility against the statement in intervention of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
         It submits that the Kingdom of the Netherlands is attempting to extend the subject-matter of the action by arguing that the
         sectoral traffic prohibition constitutes indirect discrimination, in that it does not affect all lorry traffic, but only traffic
         by lorries of over 7.t.
      
The Republic of Austria also raises a plea of inadmissibility against the statement in intervention of the Italian Republic.
         It submits that the Italian Republic is putting forward a new plea in law by mentioning, as an alternative to the sectoral
         traffic prohibition, a measure that was not considered by the Commission, namely the possibility of introducing a prohibition
         of traffic relating to passenger and commercial vehicles of less than 7.t, according to the Euro class to which they belong.
      
The latter plea of inadmissibility was contested by the Italian Republic at the hearing.
      
 Findings of the Court
In assessing whether the pleas of inadmissibility raised against the statements in intervention are well founded, it must
         be recalled that under the fourth paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union an
         application to intervene is to be limited to supporting the form of order sought by one of the parties. That provision does
         not, however, preclude an intervener from putting forward arguments that are new or different from those of the party it supports,
         as long as its purpose is to support the form of order sought by that party (see, inter alia, Case 30/De Gezamenlijke Steenkolenmijnen in Limburg v High Authority [1961] ECR 1; Case C‑150/United Kingdom v Council [1998] ECR I‑7235, paragraph 36; and Case C‑334/Commission v Italy [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraphs to 55).
      
The argument of the Kingdom of the Netherlands relates to the Commission’s complaint that the sectoral traffic prohibition
         is discriminatory. The argument of the Italian Republic relates to the allegedly disproportionate nature of that prohibition,
         and more particularly to the complaint that the Republic of Austria failed to examine closely the possibility of having recourse
         to measures that were less restrictive of the free movement of goods.
      
While those arguments differ from those of the Commission, they none the less relate to complaints raised by the Commission
         and are intended to support the form of order sought by it. They are intended to contribute to the success of the action for
         failure to fulfil obligations by shedding further light on the dispute (see, to that effect, Case C‑185/Commission v Finland [2003] ECR I‑14189, paragraph 92).
      
It follows that the pleas of inadmissibility must be rejected.
      
 Substance
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission starts by emphasising that it by no means underestimates the problems connected with transalpine traffic. It
         also acknowledges that since values in excess of the limit value for nitrogen dioxide fixed in Section I of Annex II
         to Directive 1999/have been found on the A motorway, and that Directive 96/laid down an obligation in such circumstances
         for the Republic of Austria to take action. While most of the proposed measures intended to improve air quality in the zone
         in question could have been approved, the fact remains that the contested regulation is not consistent with European Union
         law.
      
In the Commission’s view, the sectoral traffic prohibition is a measure having equivalent effect to quantitative restrictions
         within the meaning of Articles EC and EC, in so far as it hinders the free movement of goods, in particular their free
         transit.
      
The fact that the contested regulation forms part of a package of measures adopted by the Austrian authorities has no bearing
         on whether or not there is a restriction of the exercise of that freedom, since all national measures have to be assessed
         individually to establish whether they are compatible with those articles.
      
The present case concerns a measure that is more radical than that at issue in Case C‑320/Commission v Austria. The traffic concerned by the implementation of the prohibition is not only that on the ‘north-south axis’ (the Italy-Brenner-Innsbruck-Langkampfen-Germany
         link) and the ‘north-west axis’ (the Vorarlberg-Eastern Europe link) but also that on the ‘south-west axis’ (the Italy-Innsbruck-Vorarlberg/Lake
         Constance region link). According to estimates, when the first stage of the sectoral traffic prohibition was implemented on
         May 2008, journeys a year by lorry were affected. With the implementation of the second stage on January 2009,
         the measure was to affect journeys a year, representing 7.3% of total journeys by lorry on the A motorway. The
         effects of the measure extended to about km of the Austrian network of fast highways.
      
The Commission submits that, to transport the goods mentioned in the contested regulation, it is necessary either to use rail
         transport or to use longer routes by road, which creates additional costs for the operators concerned. The sectoral traffic
         prohibition thus has substantial economic repercussions not only for the transport industry but also for manufacturers of
         the goods concerned by the regulation, who will have to bear higher transport costs, which will affect their competitiveness.
      
According to the Commission, the contested regulation is discriminatory. Since local and regional traffic is excepted from
         the scope of the sectoral traffic prohibition, the prohibition de facto affects predominantly the international transit of
         goods. In addition, it may be feared that transport undertakings able to benefit from that exception will take advantage of
         the exception provisions to offer long‑distance road transport which can no longer be offered by undertakings established
         outside the region.
      
Moreover, in so far as the sectoral traffic prohibition does not relate directly to the emissions produced by goods vehicles
         but to the goods to be transported by them, it may have a discriminatory effect on trade between Member States. The Commission
         observes that inter alia the trade in wood and wood products and the trade in marble and travertine could be affected.
      
As to the existence of a possible justification for the sectoral traffic prohibition, the Commission accepts that the prohibition
         may contribute to attaining the objective of protection of the environment. It calls into question, however, the compatibility
         of the measure with the principle of proportionality.
      
The sectoral traffic prohibition is vitiated by internal contradictions, so that it has not been shown to be appropriate to
         the objective sought.
      
According to the Commission, the principal objective of the contested regulation is not to reduce the emissions produced by
         motor vehicles but to reduce road traffic. Such a reduction has only an indirect influence on air quality.
      
Since the sectoral traffic prohibition relates to the goods to be transported, not directly to the emissions produced by goods
         vehicles, it has the consequence that lorries producing more pollution are permitted if they carry goods that do not fall
         within the scope of the prohibition, while less polluting lorries are prohibited if they carry ceramic tiles, for example.
      
Moreover, the decision to direct goods with an ‘affinity with rail’ towards that mode of transport ignores the fact that the
         possibility of having recourse to rail transport often depends on various logistic parameters of the transport operation to
         be performed, such as the volume to be transported. In addition, that criterion is too vague, and it is not impossible that
         the goods to which the prohibition was to apply were selected in an arbitrary or discriminatory manner, the selection later
         being extended to cover other classes of goods.
      
In the Commission’s view, not all the conceivable alternatives to the sectoral traffic prohibition were examined and, if appropriate,
         adopted by the Austrian authorities. The various measures that would be less restrictive of the free movement of goods include,
         in its opinion, replacing the variable speed limit by a permanent km/h speed limit.
      
It argues that the report of the Institut für Energie- und Umweltforschung Heidelberg of November (‘the IFEU report’)
         shows that a permanent speed limit of km/h could bring about a reduction by of nitrogen dioxide emissions by approximately
         7.5%. With respect more particularly to the effect of such a limit as opposed to that of the variable speed limit, according
         to the calculations submitted by the Austrian authorities, the application of the variable limit makes it possible to reduce
         nitrogen dioxide emissions in the zone in question by approximately 3.6% to 3.8% annually. The Republic of Austria accepted,
         in its reply to the reasoned opinion, that the effect of the variable speed limit was equivalent to 67% of the effect of a
         permanent speed limit of km/h. It follows that replacing the variable speed limit by such a measure would make it possible
         to attain an additional reduction of those emissions by 1.8%, which is greater than the effect of the sectoral traffic prohibition,
         namely an annual reduction of those atmospheric pollutants by 1.5%.
      
As regards the analysis by Ökoscience of the effect on air quality of the application of the variable speed limit from November
         to October (‘the Ökoscience report’), relied on by the Republic of Austria to show that such a replacement would
         allow an additional annual reduction of only 1.1% of nitrogen dioxide emissions, that report was published in March and
         contains information that could only have been obtained after the expiry of the period prescribed in the reasoned opinion
         on March 2008.
      
It would also have been possible to consider extending the traffic ban on lorries in certain Euro classes to those in other
         more advanced classes. The Republic of Austria opposed that suggestion in its reply to the reasoned opinion, asserting that
         lorries corresponding to standard Euro IV often emit more nitrogen dioxide than those corresponding to standard Euro III.
         Even if that were correct, the fact remains that a traffic prohibition for lorries in class Euro III would encourage many
         undertakings to make an early switch to class Euro V.
      
The Commission also mentions the possibility of introducing traffic control measures such as the drop-counter system, establishing
         systems of tolls based on the quantity of pollutants emitted by vehicles, or adjusting the tax on mineral oils or consumption
         tax in order to encourage the purchase of motor vehicles equipped with petrol engines.
      
The Commission submits that, before deciding to implement the sectoral traffic prohibition, the Austrian authorities failed
         to make sure that there was sufficient and appropriate rail capacity for road transport of the goods concerned to be transferred
         to rail. The existence of such capacity has not been shown either for the section to the west of Innsbruck or for the section
         to the east of Innsbruck as regards the implementation of the second stage of the prohibition.
      
As regards the possibility of making use of the highway on rails (‘Rollende Landstrasse’), that is, a method of transport
         in which lorries are loaded onto rail wagons for only part of the journey, that alternative exists only for the section east
         of Innsbruck. For that section, it was possible to ensure only part of the transport of the goods concerned by the implementation
         on January of the second stage of the sectoral traffic prohibition, as originally provided for. While the highway on
         rails had sufficient capacity on January 2009, that was simply because of changes made by the Republic of Austria after
         the expiry of the period prescribed in the reasoned opinion.
      
As regards the alternative of unaccompanied combined transport, that was of interest from an economic and logistical point
         of view only over long distances.
      
With respect to the possibility of using alternative routes, it appears that the local alternative routes are either closed
         to transit traffic or unsuitable for heavy vehicles. Transit traffic by the foreign lorries concerned would thus have to be
         diverted either via Switzerland or via the Tauern route in Austria, which would involve a considerably longer journey. Furthermore,
         the additional costs caused by the Swiss customs formalities would also have to be taken into account.
      
Finally, in the absence of realistic alternative solutions for the transport of the goods referred to in the contested regulation,
         the periods laid down for the implementation of the sectoral traffic prohibition are insufficient for reasonably enabling
         the operators concerned by the measure to adjust to the new circumstances.
      
For the sector to the west of Innsbruck (Zirl-Innsbruck), the sectoral traffic prohibition has not been shown to be necessary,
         in the absence of adequate assessments showing how that section is affected. There is also no specific impact analysis capable
         of demonstrating that such a measure is appropriate and necessary.
      
In any event, the fact that the contested regulation was amended on several occasions after the expiry of the period prescribed
         in the reasoned opinion shows that the Republic of Austria did not correctly analyse the proportionality of the sectoral traffic
         prohibition.
      
The Kingdom of the Netherlands submits in its statement in intervention that the contested regulation constitutes indirect
         discrimination. It affects transit traffic conducted by foreign undertakings to a greater extent than traffic operated by
         Austrian undertakings because, first, it relates not to all lorry traffic but only to lorries of over 7.t, by which transit
         traffic is generally operated, and, secondly, it concerns a road axis that is of great importance for traffic of that kind.
      
The Italian Republic for its part proposes, as an alternative to the sectoral traffic prohibition, the introduction of a traffic
         ban for passenger and commercial motor vehicles of less than 7.t, depending on the Euro class to which they belong. As regards
         the Commission’s suggested alternative of extending the traffic bans imposed on older lorries to those in other, more advanced
         Euro classes, more particularly those in class Euro III, that could have substantial economic repercussions for the economy
         of the Italian Republic because of the composition of its lorry fleet.
      
In addition, the intervening States state that there are problems deriving from the implementation of the sectoral traffic
         prohibition. The alternatives of rail transport and the use of alternative routes do not meet the needs of the operators concerned.
         The Italian Republic points out in particular the additional administrative and financial burden produced by the transport
         of goods through Switzerland.
      
The Republic of Austria disputes the existence of a restriction of the free movement of goods within the meaning of Articles
         EC and EC.
      
As regards the factual context, the Republic of Austria submits that, despite the measures intended to improve ambient air
         quality in the Province of Tyrol, the nitrogen dioxide concentration on the A motorway clearly exceeds the annual limit
         values fixed in Section I of Annex II to Directive 1999/plus the margin of tolerance. The situation is becoming more serious
         because of the degressive progression of that margin. About 60% of nitrogen dioxide emissions on that motorway are attributable
         to lorries. The transport of goods by road is thus the principal source of emissions of that atmospheric pollutant in the
         zone in question.
      
The Republic of Austria emphasises that Directive 96/in conjunction with Directive 1999/imposes an obligation on the
         Member State concerned to act, if the annual limit value for nitrogen dioxide is exceeded. Moreover, the Austrian authorities
         are obliged to ensure respect for the private and family life of citizens, enshrined in Article of the Charter of Fundamental
         Right of the European Union (‘the Charter’) and Article 8(2) of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights
         and Fundamental Freedoms, signed in Rome on November 1950, including the right to be protected against harm to health and
         the quality of life. In the present case, a fair balance was struck between the interests involved, in accordance with the
         line of case-law starting with Case C‑112/Schmidberger [2003] ECR I‑5659.
      
The Republic of Austria submits that the compatibility with European Union law of the contested regulation must be assessed
         not in isolation but in the light of the package of measures of which it forms part. To achieve as substantial and effective
         a reduction as possible of the emissions caused by road traffic, an overall plan combining several measures was necessary.
         Those measures relate not only to the specific emissions of motor vehicles but also to the density of road traffic. Implementation
         of that plan makes it possible substantially to reduce the pollution caused by nitrogen dioxide in the zone concerned and
         to achieve in a mean annual concentration of approximately µg/mof that atmospheric pollutant in that zone. Despite the adoption of that plan, however, the concentration of nitrogen dioxide
         in the air considerably exceeds the limit value of µg/mfixed in Section I of Annex II to Directive 1999/for that year.
      
The sectoral traffic prohibition, in its final version following the decision not to include the transport of cereals in the
         scope of the prohibition, concerns approximately lorry journeys a year, representing 6.6% of total journeys by lorries
         on the A motorway. It is not such as to obstruct trade in goods between Member States, but merely prevents the use of one
         method of transport in a transalpine transit corridor. The journeys in question can be carried out partly by transferring
         road transport of the goods affected by the contested regulation to rail and partly by using alternative routes.
      
According to the Republic of Austria, the prohibition has not had significant economic consequences. Its effects are too uncertain
         and indirect to be regarded as being capable of hindering trade between Member States. In practice, no hindrance of trade
         in goods has been established since the implementation of the first stage of the prohibition on May 2008.
      
As regards the allegedly discriminatory nature of the contested regulation, the goods covered by it were chosen in accordance
         with objective and non‑discriminatory criteria.
      
As regards the exception for regional and local road transport, that is explained by the fact that transferring traffic of
         that kind to rail, by definition within the zone itself, would involve additional journeys to the rail terminals, which would
         have an effect contrary to the objective pursued by the contested regulation. Moreover, the ‘extended zone’ defined by the
         regulation includes local authority areas outside Austrian territory, which supports the non-discriminatory character of the
         system in question.
      
As regards the fear that transport undertakings benefiting from the derogations may offer long-distance road transport services,
         the Austrian authorities have taken steps to combat possible evasion or abuse.
      
In addition, the Republic of Austria observes that, for certain transport operations, derogations from the sectoral traffic
         prohibition may be granted, on a case-by-case basis, where a request is made to that effect. The derogation provisions make
         it possible to arrange road transport of goods where it is established that they cannot be transferred to rail because of
         special circumstances. Those provisions are applied flexibly by the competent authorities.
      
In the alternative, the Republic of Austria submits that the sectoral traffic prohibition is justified on grounds of protection
         of health and the environment and is proportionate to the objectives pursued.
      
The Republic of Austria argues that the Commission is wrong to criticise it for deciding to target the transport of goods
         by road. Such a measure is consistent with the objectives recognised in the context of the common transport policy, in particularly
         in the Communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament, ‘Keep Europe moving – Sustainable mobility
         for our continent – Mid-term review of the European Commission’s Transport White Paper’ (COM(2006) final of June
         2006).
      
Moreover, scientific research shows clearly that the approach taken by the Republic of Austria is justified. The Commission
         relies on studies that adopt incorrect hypotheses, leading to an overestimation by the Commission of the effects of measures
         relating to passenger vehicles.
      
As regards the Austrian authorities’ decision to extend the scope of the sectoral traffic prohibition to the section to the
         west of Innsbruck, that measure is necessary because of the level of pollution of the ambient air in the zone concerned. Furthermore,
         as that section represents only a small proportion of lorry traffic in the Brenner corridor, namely about 1.8%, the effect
         of the extension on cross-border lorry traffic is slight.
      
Before adopting the sectoral traffic prohibition, the Austrian authorities carefully examined the possibility of taking alternative
         measures that were less restrictive of the free movement of goods. The measures studied were introduced and applied in so
         far as they were appropriate and effective. The authorities thus decided to introduce a variable speed limit depending on
         pollution and a traffic ban for certain lorries that did not comply with standards Euro II or Euro III. In addition, the geographical
         scope of the night traffic ban was extended and the exception for lorries in classes Euro IV and Euro V was removed.
      
As regards the possibility of introducing a permanent speed limit of km/h, the Commission is wrong to submit that such
         a measure could reduce nitrogen dioxide emissions in the zone concerned by approximately 7.5% and would reduce the annual
         concentration of that atmospheric pollutant in that zone more than the sectoral traffic prohibition. According to the Republic
         of Austria, the IFEU report relied on by the Commission to show that those assertions are correct is based on unverifiable
         data and hypotheses.
      
For assessing the effect of replacing the variable speed limit by a permanent km/h speed limit, the basis should be the
         Ökoscience report, which contains data on the application of the variable speed limit from November to October 2008.
         According to that data, the effect of that replacement would be to obtain an additional annual reduction of 1.1% of nitrogen
         dioxide emissions in optimum conditions, which would represent a markedly worse result that that of the sectoral traffic prohibition,
         for which a reduction of 1.5% of those emissions is claimed.
      
In this connection, the Republic of Austria states that the level of reduction of emissions deriving from a permanent speed
         limit of km/h depends essentially on that measure’s effect on the speed actually practised by road users, which itself
         depends on their acceptance of the measure. The average speed of traffic does not correspond to the maximum permitted speed.
         At the time when a speed limit of km/h applied in Vomp, the average speed of passenger vehicles was approximately km/h, while during the investigation period in which a permanent speed limit of km/h was applied the average speed fell
         only to km/h. The actual reduction in average speed was thus not km/h but only km/h.
      
As to the possibility of extending the traffic bans for older lorries to lorries in other Euro classes, such an extension
         would lead to contradictory results. Nitrogen dioxide emissions of lorries in class Euro IV are greater than those of motor
         vehicles in class Euro III. In addition, account should be taken of the date from which vehicles in the Euro class concerned
         by the traffic ban no longer correspond to the standard, and of whether an obligation to replace those vehicles by newer vehicles
         could be imposed. At the time when the package of measures intended to improve ambient air quality in the Province of Tyrol
         was proposed, three-quarters of the lorry fleet still consisted of vehicles corresponding to standard Euro III.
      
The Austrian authorities studied the effects on air pollution of traffic control measures, measures relating to tolls and
         other steering measures. They were rejected in part because of their disadvantages, and are in the course of application in
         part.
      
Furthermore, the Commission is suggesting, as alternatives to the sectoral traffic prohibition, measures which will be effective
         only in the long term, such as economic measures aimed at reducing the proportion of passenger vehicles with diesel engines.
         In any event, such measures have already been adopted.
      
As regards the possibility of ensuring transport of the goods mentioned in the contested regulation, the Republic of Austria
         distinguishes between transports of goods for which the A motorway is the shortest route (‘best route’), those for which
         there is an at least equivalent alternative route (‘alternative route’), and those for which there is a better alternative
         route (‘longer route’). Of the transport operations affected by the sectoral traffic prohibition, 45% are to be classified
         as best-route operations, 25% as alternative-route operations and 30% as longer‑route operations.
      
Where goods are transported as transit traffic, recourse should be had, in the view of the Republic of Austria, to rail transport
         if the operations correspond to a ‘best route’ or an ‘alternative route’. In this connection, account should be taken of the
         total capacity resulting from all available forms of rail transport.
      
The available capacity of the highway on rails, conventional wagon-load traffic and unaccompanied combined traffic is more
         than enough to cope with all the goods covered by the contested regulation. As regards more particularly the use of the highway
         on rails, that does not require a logistical restructuring.
      
Despite the existence and the availability of sufficient and appropriate rail capacity, the Austrian authorities postponed
         the entry into force of the second stage of the sectoral traffic prohibition by introducing a third stage from January and then a fourth stage from July 2010. Those additional periods enabled a larger proportion of the undertakings concerned
         by the prohibition to perform the transport operations in question by means of the highway on rails, which meant that they
         did not have to adapt their logistics.
      
Contrary to the Commission’s submissions, the alternative routes via the Resia/Reschen pass are not reserved for regional
         and local traffic. Transit traffic operations by foreign lorries for which this route is a ‘best route’ can use it. For rerouting
         goods transport journeys in the ‘alternative route’ and ‘longer route’ categories, there are numerous other routes available.
         As regards routes by road through Switzerland, the Agreement of June between the European Community and the Swiss
         Confederation on the Carriage of Goods and Passengers by Rail and Road (OJ L 114, p. 91) ensures that transport operations
         from one Member State to another Member State may pass through Switzerland without quota restrictions.
      
Finally, the periods laid down for implementing the sectoral traffic prohibition enabled the operators concerned to adapt
         to the new conditions. The phasing of the various measures strengthens the proportionality of the overall plan. The Commission
         has not been able to show the existence of problems attributable to the allegedly too rapid implementation of the prohibition.
      
 Findings of the Court 
–       Existence of a restriction of the free movement of goods
The first point to consider is the assertion by the Republic of Austria that the contested regulation cannot constitute a
         breach of Article EC et seq. in view of the obligation to act deriving from Article 8(3) of Directive 96/in conjunction
         with Directive 1999/30.
      
In the present case, the Republic of Austria and the Commission agree that the annual limit value for concentrations of nitrogen
         dioxide in the ambient air fixed in Section I of Annex II to Directive 1999/was exceeded at the Vomp/Raststätte monitoring
         point in the years to 2009. The Republic of Austria thus had to ensure, in view of the wording of Article 8(3) of Directive 96/62,
         that a plan or programme was prepared or implemented to enable the limit value to be complied with. It is not disputed that,
         formally, the contested regulation forms part of such a plan.
      
In accordance with that provision, the plan must incorporate at least the information listed in Annex IV to Directive 96/62,
         such as information on the localisation of excess pollution, the main emission sources responsible for pollution, and existing
         and proposed measures. Directive 96/does not, however, contain precise indications of the scope and content of the measures
         to be taken by the Member States.
      
In those circumstances, it is for the Member States to take appropriate and consistent measures aimed at compliance with the
         limit value, having regard to all the material circumstances and the interests in play (see, to that effect, Case C‑320/Commission v Austria, paragraph 81, and Case C‑237/Janecek [2008] ECR I‑6221, paragraphs and 46). While they have a discretion in that respect, they must none the less exercise
         it consistently with the provisions of the EC Treaty, including the fundamental principle of the free movement of goods.
      
The contested regulation must therefore be assessed from the point of view of Articles EC to EC.
      
It must be recalled that the free movement of goods is one of the fundamental principles of the Treaty. That freedom entails
         the existence of a general principle of free transit of goods within the European Union (see, inter alia, Case 266/SIOT [1983] ECR 731, paragraph 16; Case C‑367/Richardt and ‘Les Accessoires Scientifiques’ [1991] ECR I‑4621, paragraph 14; and Case C‑320/Commission v Austria, paragraphs and 65).
      
In the present case, the contested regulation prohibits lorries of over 7.t carrying certain goods which, according to the
         Austrian authorities, have an ‘affinity with rail’ from using a section of the A motorway. It thus prevents the use of
         a mode of transport for those goods in that transalpine corridor.
      
The Republic of Austria submits that there are alternative routes or other modes of transport capable of carrying the goods
         in question.
      
However, the existence of such alternative solutions does not negate the existence of a restriction of the free movement of
         goods (see, to that effect, Case C‑320/Commission v Austria, paragraph 67). The section of the A motorway is one of the principal land transport routes between southern Germany and
         northern Italy. By forcing the undertakings concerned to seek viable alternative solutions for the transport of the goods
         covered by the contested regulation, the sectoral traffic prohibition is liable to have a substantial effect on the transit
         of goods between northern Europe and northern Italy (see, to that effect, Case C‑320/Commission v Austria, paragraphs and 68).
      
In those circumstances, the sectoral traffic prohibition must be regarded as constituting a measure having equivalent effect
         to quantitative restrictions, which in principle is incompatible with the obligations under Articles EC and EC, unless
         that measure can be justified.
      
–       Possible justification of the restriction
The Republic of Austria submits that the sectoral traffic prohibition is justified on grounds of protection of health and
         the environment and by the need to ensure respect for private and family life enshrined in Article of the Charter and Article 8(2)
         of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
      
It is settled case-law that national measures liable to obstruct intra-Community trade may be justified on one of the public-interest
         grounds set out in Article EC, such as the protection of human health and life, or one of the overriding requirements relating
         inter alia to protection of the environment, provided that the measures in question are proportionate to the objective sought
         (see, inter alia, Case 120/Rewe-Zentral (‘Cassis de Dijon’) [1979] ECR 649; Case 302/Commission v Denmark [1988] ECR 4607, paragraph 9; Case C‑270/Commission v Italy [2004] ECR I‑1559, paragraph 21; Case C‑463/Commission v Germany [2004] ECR I‑11705, paragraph 75; and Case C‑320/Commission v Austria, paragraph 70).
      
It should be recalled that the protection of health and the protection of the environment are essential objectives of the
         European Union. Article EC states that the Community has, as one of its tasks, to promote ‘a high level of protection and
         improvement of the quality of the environment’ and Article 3(1)(p) EC states that the activities of the Community are to include
         a contribution to the attainment of ‘a high level of health protection’ (see, to that effect, Case 240/ADBHU [1985] ECR 531, paragraph 13; Case C‑195/Commission v Germany [1992] ECR I‑3141, paragraph 29; and Case C‑487/P British Aggregates v Commission [2008] ECR I‑10515, paragraph 91).
      
Furthermore, in accordance with Articles EC and 152(1) EC, the requirements of environmental protection and public health
         must be taken into account in the definition and implementation of Community policies and activities (see, to that effect,
         Case C‑440/Commission v Council [2007] ECR I‑9097, paragraph 60). The transversal and fundamental nature of those objectives is also reaffirmed in Articles
         and respectively of the Charter.
      
As to the relationship between the objectives of protection of the environment and protection of health, it is apparent from
         Article 174(1) EC that the protection of human health is one of the objectives of Community policy on the environment (see,
         inter alia, Case C‑343/Afton Chemical [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 32, and Case C‑77/Gowan Comércio Internacional e Serviços [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 71). Those objectives are closely linked, in particular in connection with the fight against
         air pollution, the purpose of which is to limit the dangers to health connected with the deterioration of the environment.
         The objective of protection of health is therefore already incorporated, in principle, in the objective of protection of the
         environment (see, to that effect, Case C‑524/Commission v Austria, paragraph 56).
      
In those circumstances, the arguments of the Republic of Austria on protection of health need not be considered separately
         from those on protection of the environment (see, to that effect, Case C‑524/Commission v Austria, paragraph 56).
      
In the present case, the sectoral traffic prohibition was adopted with the aim of ensuring ambient air quality in the zone
         concerned in accordance with the obligations deriving from Article 8(3) of Directive 96/in conjunction with Directive 1999/30.
      
It is settled case-law that overriding requirements of protection of the environment can justify national measures that are
         liable to obstruct intra-Community trade, provided that those measures are suitable for securing the attainment of that objective
         and do not go beyond what is necessary for attaining it (see, to that effect, Case C‑389/Aher-Waggon [1998] ECR I‑4473, paragraphs and 20; Case C‑463/Commission v Germany, paragraph 75; and Case C‑524/Commission v Austria, paragraph 57).
      
A restrictive measure can be regarded as suitable for securing the attainment of the objective pursued only if it genuinely
         reflects a concern to attain that objective in a consistent and systematic manner (see, to that effect, Case C‑169/Hartlauer [2009] ECR I‑1721, paragraph 55; Joined Cases C‑171/and C‑172/Apothekerkammer des Saarlandes and Others [2009] ECR I‑4171, paragraph 42; and Case C‑137/Josemans [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 70).
      
First, as regards the appropriateness of the contested regulation, the Commission considers that the Austrian authorities’
         decision to adopt a measure relating to the transport of goods by road is inappropriate. The Republic of Austria is aiming
         not to reduce emissions from motor vehicles but to reduce the density of road traffic. The Commission also submits that the
         contested regulation does not really reflect a concern to attain the objective pursued in a consistent and systematic manner.
      
It must be observed that, to improve air quality in the zone concerned, the Austrian authorities adopted various measures
         to reduce emissions from motor vehicles, namely a speed limit of km/h on a section of the A motorway, subsequently
         replaced by a variable speed limit, and a prohibition on that motorway under certain conditions of night lorry traffic and
         traffic of lorries in certain Euro classes. As it considered those measures insufficient, the Republic of Austria also adopted
         a measure aimed at reducing the total number of transport operations by lorry, namely the sectoral traffic prohibition. As
         a result of the adoption of those measures, the mean annual concentration of nitrogen dioxide in the zone concerned should
         have been approximately µg/min 2010.
      
It is common ground that the implementation of measures aimed at limiting road traffic, such as the sectoral traffic prohibition,
         brings about a reduction of emissions of atmospheric pollutants and so contributes to the improvement of air quality. In the
         present case, it is not disputed that that prohibition allows nitrogen dioxide emissions to be reduced by about 1.5% a year
         in the zone concerned.
      
In this context, it must be recalled that the need to reduce the transport of goods by road, if appropriate by directing operators
         towards other more environment‑friendly modes of transport such as rail transport, has been acknowledged in the framework
         of the common transport policy, as the Commission accepted at the hearing. Mention should also be made of Council Directive
         92/106/EEC of December on the establishment of common rules for certain types of combined transport of goods between
         Member States (OJ L 368, p. 38), the third recital in the preamble to which states that ‘the increasing problems relating
         to road congestion, the environment and road safety call, in the public interest, for the further development of combined
         transport as an alternative to road transport’.
      
As regards the criterion of ‘affinity with rail’ used by the Austrian authorities to designate the goods to be covered by
         the sectoral traffic prohibition, it is common ground that certain goods are particularly suited to rail transport.
      
As to the Commission’s assertion that the criterion adopted raises the possibility that the goods concerned by the sectoral
         traffic prohibition may have been chosen arbitrarily, suffice it to state that the Commission has not put forward any arguments
         to support the contention that that was the case with respect to the goods listed in Paragraph of the contested regulation.
         Since in infringement proceedings the Court must give a ruling by taking account only of the facts of the case, excluding
         any suppositions, this assertion must be rejected (see, inter alia, Case C‑494/Commission v Ireland [2005] ECR I‑3331, paragraph 41, and Case C‑335/Commission v Finland [2009] ECR I‑9459, paragraph 46).
      
As regards the question whether the contested regulation reflects a concern to attain the objective pursued in a consistent
         and systematic manner, it is true that it has the consequence of authorising the use of more highly polluting lorries where
         they carry goods that are not within the scope of the prohibition, whereas the use of less polluting lorries is prohibited
         where they carry inter alia ceramic tiles. However, it cannot be regarded as inconsistent for a Member State which has decided,
         in accordance with an objective that is recognised in the context of the common transport policy, to direct goods transport
         towards rail to adopt a measure focusing on products suitable for transport by various means of rail transport.
      
As regards the exclusion of local and regional traffic from the scope of the sectoral traffic prohibition, it must be observed
         that a characteristic feature of national measures intended to channel transport flows or influence modes of transport is
         that they include, as a rule, exceptions for transport operations whose point of departure or destination is inside the zone
         concerned. Clearly, as the Republic of Austria rightly submits, the use of rail transport for traffic of that kind is likely
         to involve longer journeys, since journeys to the rail terminals will be added to the original journeys, which would have
         an effect contrary to the objective sought by the sectoral traffic prohibition. Moreover, it is not disputed that rail transport
         is a viable alternative to road transport only for journeys of a certain distance.
      
In addition, in so far as the exception relates to lorries that are loaded and unloaded in the ‘extended zone’, it should
         be recalled that that zone also includes local authority areas outside Austrian territory.
      
Furthermore, according to the documents submitted to the Court, the Republic of Austria has taken steps to combat possible
         evasion or abuse in the application of that exception.
      
In those circumstances, the exclusion of local and regional traffic from the scope of the sectoral traffic prohibition cannot
         call into question the consistent and systematic nature of the contested regulation.
      
Having regard to those factors, it must be concluded that the sectoral traffic prohibition is appropriate for attaining the
         objective of protection of the environment.
      
Next, as regards the question whether the restriction of the free movement of goods goes beyond what is necessary to attain
         that objective, the Commission submits that measures such as an extension of the traffic prohibition for lorries in certain
         Euro classes to lorries in other classes or the replacement of the variable speed limit by a permanent km/h speed limit,
         although liable to affect the free movement of goods, would have enabled the objective sought to be attained while restricting
         the exercise of that freedom to a lesser extent.
      
As the Court stated in Case C‑320/Commission v Austria, paragraph 87, before adopting a measure so radical as a total traffic ban on a section of motorway constituting a vital
         route of communication between certain Member States, the Austrian authorities were under a duty to examine carefully the
         possibility of using measures less restrictive of freedom of movement, and discount them only if their inappropriateness to
         the objective pursued was clearly established.
      
With respect, first, to the possibility of extending the traffic prohibition for lorries in certain Euro classes to lorries
         in other classes, it must be recalled that the limit for emissions of oxides of nitrogen was fixed at g/kWh for lorries
         in class Euro III and that class Euro IV reduced this to 3.g/kWh.
      
The Republic of Austria takes the view, however, that lorries corresponding to class Euro IV often emit more nitrogen dioxide
         than those corresponding to standard Euro III. For that reason, it considers that, before extending the traffic prohibition
         for lorries to lorries in class Euro III, a more thorough study should be made of the impact of nitrogen dioxide emissions
         on the environment.
      
In view of the fact that each successive Euro class undeniably includes a substantial reduction of emissions of oxides of
         nitrogen, it has not been shown that extending the traffic prohibition for lorries in certain Euro classes to lorries in other
         classes would not have been able to contribute to the objective sought as effectively as the implementation of the sectoral
         traffic prohibition.
      
With respect, secondly, to the Commission’s suggestion of replacing the variable speed limit by a permanent km/h speed
         limit, the Republic of Austria submits, relying on the data in the Ökoscience report, that that replacement would lead only
         to an additional annual reduction of 1.1% of nitrogen dioxide emissions in the zone concerned, whereas a reduction of those
         emissions by 1.5% is claimed for the sectoral traffic prohibition.
      
It must be observed that the information in the Ökoscience report relates inter alia to the speeds at which road users actually
         drove in that zone from November to October 2008. A significant part of that information thus relates to the situation
         of the Republic of Austria as it appeared at the end of the period prescribed in the reasoned opinion, which was June 2008.
         That information may be taken into account in the assessment of the merits of the present action.
      
According to that report, at the time when a speed limit of km/h applied at Vomp, the average speed of passenger vehicles
         was approximately km/h, while during the investigation period in which a permanent speed limit of km/h was introduced
         their average speed was km/h. The introduction of the permanent speed limit thus brought about a reduction of only km/h compared to the periods in which the speed limit was km/h.
      
While the effect of a speed limit on the speed actually practised by road users may indeed be influenced by the way in which
         they accept the limit, the fact remains that it is for the Member State concerned to ensure that such a measure is actually
         complied with, by adopting compulsory measures with penalties if need be. The Republic of Austria cannot thus rely on the
         average speed measured in the zone concerned, km/h, to assess the effect of implementing a permanent speed limit of km/h.
      
Consequently, it appears that replacing the variable speed limit by a permanent speed limit of km/h offers a potential
         for reducing nitrogen dioxide emissions which was not sufficiently taken into account by the Republic of Austria. Moreover,
         as may be seen from paragraph above, the existence of that potential is corroborated by the IFEU report.
      
In addition, it must be noted that the restrictive effect on the free movement of goods of replacing the variable speed limit
         by a permanent speed limit of km/h is less than that of implementing the sectoral traffic prohibition. That replacement
         would not affect the movement of lorries whose maximum authorised speed is in any case limited.
      
In those circumstances, it must be concluded, having regard to the criteria set out in paragraph above, that it has not
         been shown that the two principal alternative measures put forward by the Commission as measures less restrictive of the free
         movement of goods are not appropriate. Without it being necessary to examine the other measures suggested by the Commission,
         the present application must therefore be allowed.
      
In the light of all the foregoing, it must be held that, by prohibiting lorries of over 7.tonnes carrying certain goods
         from using a section of the A motorway in the Inn valley (Austria), the Republic of Austria has failed to fulfil its obligations
         under Articles EC and EC.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Republic of Austria has
         essentially been unsuccessful, the Republic of Austria must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
In accordance with the first subparagraph of Article 69(4) of the Rules of Procedure, the Italian Republic and the Kingdom
         of the Netherlands, which have intervened in the proceedings, must bear their own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, by prohibiting lorries of over 7.tonnes carrying certain goods from using a section of the A motorway
            in the Inn valley (Austria), the Republic of Austria has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles EC and EC;
2.      Orders the Republic of Austria to pay the costs;
3.      Orders the Italian Republic and the Kingdom of the Netherlands to bear their own costs.
[Signatures] 
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 