
Case C-155/PPU
Bibi Mohammad Imran
v
Minister van Buitenlandse Zaken
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Rechtbank ’s-Gravenhage)
(Reference for a preliminary ruling – No need to adjudicate)
Summary of the Order
Preliminary rulings – Jurisdiction of the Court – Case pending before the national court rendered devoid of purpose – No need
            to adjudicate – Intention of the applicant in the main proceedings to bring an action for damages – No effect
(Art. TFEU)
It is not necessary to give a ruling on a request for a preliminary ruling when the decision against which the appeal in the
         main proceedings is directed has become inoperative and, therefore, the main proceedings no longer have a purpose, despite
         the expressed intention of the referring court to maintain its request for a preliminary ruling, insofar as the applicant
         intends to bring an action for damages before it. 
      
The reason for a reference for a preliminary ruling is not that it enables advisory opinions on general or hypothetical questions
         to be delivered but rather that it is necessary for the effective resolution of a dispute. However, the initiation of an action
         for damages is, in such circumstances, merely possible and hypothetical.
      
(see paras 16-22, operative part)
  
  
ORDER OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
June (*)
      
(Reference for a preliminary ruling – No need to adjudicate)
In Case C‑155/PPU,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the Rechtbank ’s-Gravenhage, zittinghoudende te Zwolle-Lelystad
         (Netherlands), made by decision of March 2011, received at the Court on the same date, in the proceedings
      
Bibi Mohammad Imran
v
Minister van Buitenlandse Zaken 
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of A. Tizzano, President of the First Chamber, A. Borg Barthet (Rapporteur), M. Ilešič, M. Safjan and M. Berger,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: P. Mengozzi,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
after hearing the Advocate General,
makes the following
Order
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 7(2) of Council Directive 2003/86/EC of September
         on the right to family reunification (OJ L 251, p. 12).
      
The reference has been made in the course of proceedings between Ms B. Mohammad Imran and the Minister van Buitenlandse Zaken
         (Netherlands Minister for Foreign Affairs) concerning his refusal to issue a provisional residence permit for the Netherlands
         to Ms B. Mohammad Imran.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
On June 2009, Ms B. Mohammad Imran lodged an application for a provisional residence permit with the Netherlands Embassy
         in New Delhi (India) for the purpose of residing with her spouse, Mr A. Safi.
      
By decision of July 2009, the Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs (‘the Ministry’) refused the application.
      
By letter of August 2009, Ms B. Mohammad Imran raised an objection to that decision.
      
It is apparent from the order for reference that Ms B. Mohamad Imran’s eight children, of whom seven are minors, have been
         legally resident in the Netherlands since August 2009. Mr A. Safi and the children still have Afghan nationality. Mr A.
         Safi has never been in possession of a temporary residence permit for the purposes of asylum pursuant to Article 29(a), (b)
         or (c) of the Netherlands Law on Aliens 2000. 
      
By decision of February 2010, the Ministry dismissed the objection raised by Ms B. Mohammad Imran on the ground that, in
         accordance with the judgment of the Raad van State (Council of State) of December (JV 2009/29), the Ministry may refuse
         applications for provisional residence permits if the civic integration examination has not been passed. According to the
         Ministry, Ms B. Mohammad Imran has not produced any concrete evidence which might cast doubt on the accuracy or comprehensiveness
         of the medical report of April compiled by the medical officer attached to the diplomatic mission in New Delhi, Dr
         Lalit Gupta, from which it does not appear that the applicant qualified for an exemption from the civic integration examination
         for medical reasons.
      
On March 2010, Ms B. Mohammad Imran brought an appeal against that decision before the Rechtbank Zwolle-Lelystad (District
         Court, Zwolle-Lelystad) (‘the Rechtbank’).
      
The Rechtbank is uncertain whether the obligation imposed by the Netherlands law on the family members of third country nationals,
         first to take a civic integration examination abroad before being able to come to the Netherlands, interprets Article 7(2)
         of Directive 2003/too strictly.
      
In those circumstances, the Rechtbank has decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court
         of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1. Does Article 7(2) of the Family Reunification Directive allow a Member State to refuse entry and residence to a family
         member, as referred to in Article of that directive, of a third country national lawfully residing in that Member State,
         exclusively on the ground that that family member has not passed the civic integration examination abroad as prescribed in
         the legislation of that Member State?
      
1(a)      Is it important in answering Question that the family member concerned is a mother of eight, of whom seven are minors, lawfully
         residing in that Member State?
      
1(b)      Is it important in answering Question whether, in the country of residence, accessible tuition is available to the family
         member in the language of that Member State?
      
1(c)      Is it important in answering Question whether the family member concerned, given his or her educational background and personal
         circumstances, particularly medical problems, would be able to pass that examination in the near future?
      
1(d)      Is it important in answering Question that no reviews take place in respect of the provisions of Article 5(5) and Article
         of the Family Reunification Directive, Article of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union or the principle
         of proportionality as contained in European Union law?
      
1(e)      Is it important in answering Question that nationals of certain other third countries are exempt, purely on the basis of
         their nationality, from the obligation to pass the civic integration examination abroad?’
      
 Procedure before the Court
By letter of April 2011, received at the Court Registry the same day, the Rechtbank requested that the reference for a
         preliminary ruling be dealt with under an urgent procedure pursuant to Article 104b of the Rules of Procedure of the Court
         of Justice.
      
By decision of April 2011, the First Chamber granted that application.
      
By letter of May 2011, received at the Court Registry the same day, the Ministry informed the Court that it had, by decision
         of May 2011, following further examination, declared Ms B. Mohammad Imran’s objection of August well founded and
         that, accordingly, the decision of February against which the appeal is directed was inoperative.
      
By letter of May 2011, received at the Court Registry the same day, the national court informed the Court of Justice that
         a provisional residence permit had been issued that day to Ms B. Mohammad Imran by the Netherlands Embassy in Islamabad. In
         those circumstances, the national court considers that the questions referred for a preliminary ruling are no longer urgent
         and requests that the Court take no further steps in the procedure pursuant to Article 104b of the Rules of Procedure. The
         national court also considers that it is not currently appropriate to withdraw those questions since Ms B. Mohammad Imran
         ‘has not (yet) withdrawn her appeal and, furthermore, she intends to bring an appeal for damages before the court’.
      
 Consideration of the reference for a preliminary ruling
In accordance with settled case-law, the procedure provided for by Article TFEU is a means of cooperation between the
         Court of Justice and national courts, by which the Court provides the national courts with the points of interpretation of
         European Union law which they need in order to decide the disputes before them (see, in particular, Case C-314/Djabali [1998] ECR I-1149, paragraph 17; Case C-318/Bacardi-Martini and Cellier des Dauphins [2003] ECR I-905, paragraph 41, and order of October in Case C-336/Reinke, not published in the ECR, paragraph 13).
      
In the present case, the Netherlands Government has stated to the Court that the decision of February 2010, against which
         the appeal in the main proceedings is directed, is inoperative since, by the decision of May 2011, Ms B. Mohammad Imran’s
         objection has, following further examination been declared well founded.
      
That information has been confirmed, in essence, by the national court by its letter of May 2011.
      
Clearly, Ms B. Mohammad Imran’s request for a provisional residence permit has been met and, therefore, the main proceedings
         no longer have a purpose.
      
Admittedly, by the letter of May 2011, the national court indicated its intention to maintain its request for a preliminary
         ruling since Ms B. Mohammad Imran intends to bring an action for damages before it.
      
Clearly, however, the initiation of such proceedings is, at this stage, merely possible and hypothetical.
      
According to settled case-law, the justification for a reference for a preliminary ruling is not that it enables advisory
         opinions on general or hypothetical questions to be delivered but rather that it is necessary for the effective resolution
         of a dispute (see, inter alia, Case C-225/García Blanco [2005] ECR I-523, paragraph 28, and the order in Case C-525/Nationale Loterij [2009] ECR I‑2197, paragraph 10).
      
It follows from the foregoing considerations that it is not necessary to give a ruling on the request for a preliminary ruling.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
It is not necessary to give a ruling on the request for a preliminary ruling submitted by the Rechtbank ’s-Gravenhage, zittinghoudende
            te Zwolle-Lelystad (Netherlands), by decision of March 2011.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Dutch.
      
Top  
 