
Case C-442/European Commission
v
Federal Republic of Germany
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – EEC-Hungary Association Agreement – Subsequent verification – Failure to comply with rules on origin – Decision of the authorities of the exporting State – Appeal – Commission inspection mission – Customs duties – Post-clearance recovery – Own resources – Making available – Default interest)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Own resources of the European Communities – Establishment and making available by the Member States – Crediting the amount
            to the Commission’s account
(Council Regulations No 1552/89, Arts 2, and to 11, and No 1150/2000, Arts 2, and to 11)
2.        Own resources of the European Communities – Establishment and making available by the Member States – Crediting the amount
            to the Commission’s account
(Council Regulation No 1552/89, Art. 11)
1.        From the time when, on the basis of the information provided by the authorities of the State of exportation, the authorities
         of the State of importation are in a position to determine the debtors and calculate the amount of the customs debt, a delay
         in making available the customs duties at issue cannot be justified by the expectation of further information from the authorities
         of the State of export or a definitive decision in the judicial proceedings initiated in that State, and still less by the
         expectation of the final report of the investigation conducted in parallel by the Unit for the Coordination of Fraud Prevention
         of the Commission. The authorities of the State of importation must accept the findings made by the authorities of the State
         of exportation in a subsequent verification. Consequently, the fact that the authorities of the State of exportation also
         point out that there are proceedings pending against the findings of the subsequent verification cannot affect the obligation
         on the authorities of the State of importation to enter in the accounts and notify the customs debt in question and to establish
         the own resources resulting from it.
      
Thus, by allowing customs claims to become time-barred, despite the receipt of a mutual assistance communication, paying the
         own resources owed in this connection late and refusing to pay the default interest payable, a Member State fails to fulfil
         its obligations under Articles 2, and to of Council Regulation No 1552/implementing Decision 88/on the system
         of the Communities’ own resources and the same articles of Council Regulation No 1150/implementing Decision 94/on
         the system of the Communities’ own resources. 
      
(see paras 80, 83, 88, 98, operative part)
2.        There is an inseparable link between the obligation to establish the Communities’ own resources, the obligation to credit
         them to the Commission’s account within the prescribed time-limit and the obligation to pay default interest, payable regardless
         of the reason for the delay in making the entry in the Commission’s account.
      
Under Article of Regulation No 1552/implementing Decision 88/on the system of the Communities’ own resources, any
         delay in making the entries in the account referred to in Article 9(1) of that regulation gives rise to the payment of interest
         by the Member State concerned at the interest rate applicable to the entire period of delay. Moreover, it is apparent from
         the wording of Article that a delay in the making available of own resources cannot depend on a time-limit fixed by the
         Commission for making available those resources.
      
(see paras 93-95)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Failure of a State to fulfil its obligations – EEC-Hungary Association Agreement – Subsequent verification – Failure to comply with rules on origin – Decision of the authorities of the exporting State – Appeal – Commission inspection mission – Customs duties – Post-clearance recovery – Own resources – Making available – Default interest)
In Case C‑442/08,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on October 2008,
European Commission, represented by A. Caeiros and B. Conte, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Federal Republic of Germany, represented by M. Lumma and B. Klein, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of J.‑C. Bonichot, President of the Chamber, C. Toader (Rapporteur), K. Schiemann, P. Kūris and L. Bay Larsen, Judges,
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: M.-A. Gaudissart, Head of Unit,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on February 2010,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities asks the Court to declare that, by allowing customs claims
         to become time-barred, despite the receipt of a mutual assistance communication, paying the own resources owed in this connection
         late and refusing to pay the default interest payable, the Federal Republic of Germany has failed to fulfil its obligations
         under Articles 2, and to of Council Regulation (EEC, Euratom) No 1552/of May implementing Decision 88/376/EEC,
         Euratom on the system of the Communities’ own resources (OJ L 155, p. 1) and the same articles of Council Regulation
         (EC, Euratom) No 1150/of May implementing Decision 94/728/EC, Euratom on the system of the Communities’ own resources
         (OJ L 130, p. 1).
      
 Legal context
 The EEC-Hungary Association Agreement
The Europe Agreement establishing an association between the European Communities and their Member States, of the one part,
         and the Republic of Hungary, of the other part, signed in Brussels on December 1991, was concluded on behalf of the European
         Communities by Decision 93/742/Euratom, ECSC, EC of the Council and the Commission of December (OJ L 347, p. 1).
         Protocol to that agreement, as amended by Decision No 3/of the Association Council, Association between the European
         Communities and their Member States, of the one part, and the Republic of Hungary, of the other part, of December (OJ L 92, p. 1; ‘Protocol 4’), contains the following provisions, in Article 16, under the heading ‘General requirements’:
      
‘1.      Products originating in the Community shall, on importation into Hungary and products originating in Hungary shall, on importation
         into the Community benefit from this Agreement upon submission of either:
      
(a)      a movement certificate EUR.1, a specimen of which appears in Annex III;
…’
Article of Protocol 4, entitled ‘Procedure for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1’, provides in paragraphs and
         5:
      
‘1.      A movement certificate EUR.shall be issued by the customs authorities of the exporting country on application having been
         made in writing by the exporter or, under the exporter’s responsibility, by his authorised representative.
      
…
5.      The issuing customs authorities shall take any steps necessary to verify the originating status of the products and the fulfilment
         of the other requirements of this Protocol. For this purpose, they shall have the right to call for any evidence and to carry
         out any inspection of the exporter’s accounts or any other check considered appropriate. The issuing customs authorities shall
         also ensure that the forms referred to in paragraph are duly completed. In particular, they shall check whether the space
         reserved for the description of the products has been completed in such a manner as to exclude all possibility of fraudulent
         additions.’
      
Article of that protocol, entitled ‘Mutual assistance’, provides in paragraph 2:
      
‘In order to ensure the proper application of this Protocol, the Community and Hungary shall assist each other, through the
         competent customs administrations, in checking the authenticity of the movement certificates EUR.or the invoice declarations
         and the correctness of the information given in these documents.’
      
Article of Protocol 4, entitled ‘Verification of proofs of origin’, provides:
      
‘1.      Subsequent verifications of proofs of origin shall be carried out at random or whenever the customs authorities of the importing
         country have reasonable doubts as to the authenticity of such documents, the originating status of the products concerned
         or the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.
      
 … 
3.      The verification shall be carried out by the customs authorities of the exporting country. For this purpose, they shall have
         the right to call for any evidence and to carry out any inspection of the exporter’s accounts or any other check considered
         appropriate.
      
4.      If the customs authorities of the importing country decide to suspend the granting of preferential treatment to the products
         concerned while awaiting the results of the verification, release of the products shall be offered to the importer subject
         to any precautionary measures judged necessary.
      
5.      The customs authorities requesting the verification shall be informed of the results of this verification as soon as possible.
         These results must indicate clearly whether the documents are authentic and whether the products concerned can be considered
         as products originating in the Community, Hungary or one of the other countries referred to in Article and fulfil the other
         requirements of this Protocol.
      
6.      If in cases of reasonable doubt there is no reply within months of the date of the verification request or if the reply
         does not contain sufficient information to determine the authenticity of the document in question or the real origin of the
         products, the requesting customs authorities shall, except in exceptional circumstances, refuse entitlement to the preferences.’
      
According to the first paragraph of Article of Protocol 4, where disputes arise in relation to the verification procedures
         of Article which cannot be settled between the customs authorities requesting a verification and the customs authorities
         responsible for carrying out this verification or where they raise a question as to the interpretation of the protocol, they
         are to be submitted to the Association Committee.
      
 Decision 94/According to Article 2(1) of Council Decision 94/728/EC, Euratom of October on the system of the European Communities’
         own resources (OJ L 293, p. 9), the so-called ‘traditional’ revenue from Common Customs Tariff duties and other duties
         established or to be established by the institutions of the Communities in respect of trade with non-member countries and
         customs duties on products coming under the Treaty establishing the European Coal and Steel Community, inter alia, are to
         constitute own resources entered in the budget of the Communities.
      
Under Article 2(3) of Decision 94/728:
      
‘Member States shall retain, by way of collection costs, 10% of the amounts paid under 1(a) and (b).’
Under Article 8(1) of Decision 94/728:
      
‘The Community own resources referred to in Article 2(1)(a) and (b) shall be collected by the Member States in accordance
         with the national provisions imposed by law, regulation or administrative action, which shall, where appropriate, be adapted
         to meet the requirements of Community rules. The Commission shall examine at regular intervals the national provisions communicated
         to it by the Member States, transmit to the Member States the adjustments it deems necessary in order to ensure that they
         comply with Community rules and report to the budget authority. Member States shall make the resources provided for in Article
         2(1)(a) to (d) available to the Commission.’
      
 Regulations Nos 1552/and 1150/The second recital in the preamble to Regulation No 1552/89, which is similar to recital in the preamble to Regulation No
         1150/2000, provides:
      
‘The Community must have the own resources referred to in Article of [Council] Decision 88/376/EEC, Euratom [of June
         on the system of the Communities’ own resources (OJ L 185, p. 24)] available in the best possible conditions …’
      
Apart from the fact that Regulations Nos 1552/and 1150/refer, respectively, to Decision 88/and Decision 94/728,
         Articles 2, 6, to and 17(1) of the two regulations are essentially the same.
      
Under Article of Regulation No 1552/89:
      
‘1.      For the purpose of applying this Regulation, the Community’s entitlement to the own resources referred to in Article 2(1)(a)
         and (b) of Decision 88/376/EEC, Euratom shall be established as soon as the amount due has been notified by the competent
         department of the Member State to the debtor. Notification shall be given as soon as the debtor is known and the amount of
         entitlement can be calculated by the competent administrative authorities, in compliance with all the relevant Community provisions.
      
2.      Paragraph shall apply when a notification must be corrected.’
That provision was amended with effect from July by Council Regulation (Euratom, EC) No 1355/of July (OJ
         L 175, p. 3), and the ensuing content was reproduced in Article of Regulation No 1150/2000, which provides that:
      
‘1.      For the purpose of applying this Regulation, the Community’s entitlement to the own resources referred to in Article 2(1)(a)
         and (b) of Decision 88/376/EEC, Euratom shall be established as soon as the conditions provided for by the customs regulations
         have been met concerning the entry of the entitlement in the accounts and the notification of the debtor.
      
1a.      The date of the establishment referred to in paragraph shall be the date of entry in the accounting ledgers provided for
         by the customs regulations.
      
…’
Article 6(1) and (2) of Regulation No 1552/(now Article 6(1) and (3) of Regulation No 1150/2000) provide as follows:
      
‘1.      Accounts for own resources shall be kept by the Treasury of each Member State or by the body appointed by each Member State
         and broken down by type of resources.
      
2.      (a)    Entitlements established in accordance with Article shall, subject to point (b) of this paragraph, be entered in the accounts
         at the latest on the first working day after the 19th day of the second month following the month during which the entitlement
         was established.
      
(b)      Established entitlements not entered in the accounts referred to in point (a), because they have not yet been recovered and
         no security has been provided, shall be shown in separate accounts within the period laid down in point (a). Member States
         may adopt this procedure where established entitlements for which security has been provided have been challenged and might,
         upon settlement of the disputes which have arisen, be subject to change.
      
…’
Under Article 9(1) of Regulation No 1552/and of Regulation No 1150/2000:
      
‘In accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 10, each Member State shall credit own resources to the account opened
         in the name of the Commission with its Treasury or the body it has appointed.
      
…’
Article 10(1) of Regulation No 1552/and of Regulation No 1150/is worded as follows:
      
‘After deduction of 10% by way of collection costs in accordance with Article 2(3) of [Decisions 88/and 94/respectively],
         entry of the own resources referred to in Article 2(1)(a) and (b) of [those Decisions] shall be made at the latest on the
         first working day following the 19th day of the second month following the month during which the entitlement was established
         in accordance with Article 2.
      
…’
According to Article of those regulations: 
      
‘Any delay in making the entry in the account referred to in Article 9(1) shall give rise to the payment of interest by the
         Member State concerned at the interest rate applicable on the Member State’s money market on the due date for short-term public
         financing operations, increased by two percentage points. This rate shall be increased by 0.of a percentage point for each
         month of delay. The increased rate shall be applied to the entire period of delay.’
      
Under Article 17(1) of those regulations:
      
‘Member States shall take all requisite measures to ensure that the amount[s] corresponding to the entitlements established
         under Article are made available to the Commission as specified in this Regulation.’
      
 The Customs Code
Article 78(3) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/of October establishing the Community Customs Code (OJ L 302,
         p. 1; ‘the Customs Code’) provides:
      
‘Where revision of the declaration or post-clearance examination indicates that the provisions governing the customs procedure
         concerned have been applied on the basis of incorrect or incomplete information, the customs authorities shall, in accordance
         with any provisions laid down, take the measures necessary to regularise the situation, taking account of the new information
         available to them.’
      
According to Article 201(1)(a) of the Customs Code, the release for free circulation of goods liable to import duties gives
         rise to a customs debt on importation.
      
The first subparagraph of Article 217(1) of the Customs Code provides:
      
‘Each and every amount of import duty or export duty resulting from a customs debt, hereinafter called “amount of duty”, shall
         be calculated by the customs authorities as soon as they have the necessary particulars, and entered by those authorities
         in the accounting records or on any other equivalent medium (entry in the accounts).’
      
Under Article 220(1) of the Customs Code:
      
‘Where the amount of duty resulting from a customs debt has not been entered in the accounts in accordance with Articles and or has been entered in the accounts at a level lower than the amount legally owed, the amount of duty to be recovered
         or which remains to be recovered shall be entered in the accounts within two days of the date on which the customs authorities
         become aware of the situation and are in a position to calculate the amount legally owed and to determine the debtor (subsequent
         entry in the accounts). That time-limit may be extended in accordance with Article 219.’
      
Under Article of the Customs Code:
      
‘1.      As soon as it has been entered in the accounts, the amount of duty shall be communicated to the debtor in accordance with
         appropriate procedures.
      
…
3.      Communication to the debtor shall not take place after the expiry of a period of three years from the date on which the customs
         debt was incurred. …’
      
Article of the Customs Code provides:
      
‘Provided the amount of duty payable by the person concerned relates to goods declared for a customs procedure which entails
         the obligation to pay such duty, the customs authorities shall, at that person’s request, grant deferment of payment of that
         amount under the conditions laid down in Articles 225, and 227.’
      
Article of the Customs Code provides:
      
‘1.      Import duties or export duties shall be repaid in so far as it is established that when they were paid the amount of such
         duties was not legally owed or that the amount has been entered in the accounts contrary to Article 220(2).
      
Import duties or export duties shall be remitted in so far as it is established that when they were entered in the accounts
         the amount of such duties was not legally owed or that the amount has been entered in the accounts contrary to Article 220(2).
      
No repayment or remission shall be granted when the facts which led to the payment or entry in the accounts of an amount which
         was not legally owed are the result of deliberate action by the person concerned.
      
2.      Import duties or export duties shall be repaid or remitted upon submission of an application to the appropriate customs office
         within a period of three years from the date on which the amount of those duties was communicated to the debtor.
      
That period shall be extended if the person concerned provides evidence that he was prevented from submitting his application
         within the said period as a result of unforeseeable circumstances or force majeure.
      
Where the customs authorities themselves discover within this period that one or other of the situations described in the
         first and second subparagraphs of paragraph exists, they shall repay or remit on their own initiative.’
      
Under Article of the Customs Code:
      
‘The lodging of an appeal shall not cause implementation of the disputed decision to be suspended.
The customs authorities shall, however, suspend implementation of such decision in whole or in part where they have good reason
         to believe that the disputed decision is inconsistent with customs legislation or that irreparable damage is to be feared
         for the person concerned.
      
Where the disputed decision has the effect of causing import duties or export duties to be charged, suspension of implementation
         of that decision shall be subject to the existence or lodging of a security. However, such security need not be required where
         such a requirement would be likely, owing to the debtor’s circumstances, to cause serious economic or social difficulties.’
      
 Regulation No 515/Title III of Council Regulation (EC) No 515/of March on mutual assistance between the administrative authorities
         of the Member States and cooperation between the latter and the Commission to ensure the correct application of the law on
         customs and agricultural matters (OJ L 82, p. 1) governs the relations of the customs authorities of the Member States
         with the Commission. Under Article 17(2) of that regulation, the Commission is to communicate to the competent authorities
         in each Member State, as soon as it becomes available, any information that would help them to enforce customs or agricultural
         legislation.
      
Under Article 20(1) and (3) of that regulation, the Commission is to inform the Member States of the results of Community
         administrative and investigative cooperation missions carried out in third countries.
      
 Background to the dispute
From Suzuki and Subaru motor vehicles were imported into Germany from Hungary. Those imports received preferential tariff
         treatment, entailing application of a rate of 0%, under the EEC-Hungary Association Agreement on the basis of EUR.movement
         certificates certifying the Hungarian origin of the vehicles.
      
By a mutual assistance communication sent to the German authorities in English on June and in German on November
         1996, the Unit for the Coordination of Fraud Prevention (UCLAF) warned those authorities of its doubts as to whether those
         imports complied with the rules on origin. UCLAF asked them to initiate, with the Hungarian authorities, a procedure for the
         subsequent verification of the declarations of origin, to require a guarantee of payment or the deposit of the customs duties
         payable and to take all legal measures liable to suspend the limitation periods and ensure the possibility of post-clearance
         recovery. The Commission itself subsequently conducted further investigations, including an inspection mission to Hungary.
      
By a mutual assistance communication of June 1998, UCLAF ‘informed the Member States that the Hungarian administration
         had, in June 1998, sent the Commission the result of verifications carried out in Hungary on the status of [Magyar Suzuki
         rt; “Magyar Suzuki”] vehicles exported to the Community under cover of EUR.movement certificates’. That administration ‘confirmed
         the non-originating status of vehicles … which [had] unduly benefited from EUR.certificates’. According to the annex
         to that communication, as regards the imports to Germany, Suzuki vehicles and Subaru vehicles, in other words,
         a total of vehicles, had not observed the rules on origin.
      
By that communication, UCLAF stated that it had ‘supporting documents collected during the Community missions of cooperation’
         and ‘the official reply from the Hungarian customs headquarters, with supporting evidence (computer data and documents)’ and,
         moreover, that the Member States which had ‘requested post-clearance verification of EUR.certificates within the framework
         of [Protocol 4] will receive direct replies to these requests’.
      
UCLAF also announced to the Member States affected by those imports that it would send ‘a copy of the June communication
         with a complete version of the computer data and documents, … translations of correspondence from the Hungarian customs headquarters’
         and ‘computer files, summary extracts of operations by country created by UCLAF from the original Hungarian file’.
      
UCLAF sent those documents and computer files by letter, the English version of which was sent to the German authorities on
         July and the German translation on August 1998. Those documents included the letter of May by which the
         Hungarian authorities sent UCLAF the outcome of their verifications and the documents and computer files identifying the vehicles
         for which the rules on origin had not been respected.
      
It is claimed that the letter of May shows that, by May 1998, the Hungarian authorities had completed the verification
         of the origin of vehicles produced by Magyar Suzuki and the data appearing in the EUR.certificates. Following their verification,
         the authorities had found that the rules on origin had not been observed as regards some of the vehicles imported. However,
         the authorities stated that Magyar Suzuki had initiated judicial proceedings concerning the application of the rules on origin.
         Moreover, the Hungarian authorities made clear that they would inform the Member States which had asked for post-clearance
         verification of certain EUR.certificates under Protocol of the results of that verification directly.
      
Having received the letter of August 1998, the Federal Republic of Germany requested the final report of the Commission’s
         inspection mission to Hungary several times. It received that report on March 1999.
      
On April 1999, the German authorities began to enter in the accounts the customs duties for vehicles which, according to
         the Hungarian authorities, had not respected the rules on origin. However, because of the time-limit of three years for the
         communication to the debtor under the first sentence of Article 221(3) of the Customs Code, it was not possible to charge
         any duty for vehicles imported before April 1996. The own resources relating to that period were neither entered in the
         accounts nor made available to the Commission.
      
By its mutual assistance communication of October 1999, the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF), which succeeded UCLAF from
         June 1999, informed the Member States that the Hungarian authorities had informed the Commission on July of ‘its
         new stance regarding [the Magyar Suzuki] file’ following a ruling delivered by the competent Hungarian court. Under that new
         stance, some of the vehicles which the Hungarian authorities had previously found not to have respected the rules on origin
         had to be regarded as coming from Hungary after all.
      
In that connection, OLAF pointed out that, in July 1998, UCLAF had forwarded the conclusions of the Hungarian authorities
         ‘following the joint in-depth checks carried out with the Community task force during the first quarter of 1998’ and, in February
         1999, ‘its general investigation report … containing its own evaluation and its own conclusions based on its own documents
         and documentary evidence gathered within and outside Hungary’ which reflected the conclusions of the Hungarian authorities.
      
OLAF took the view that ‘the decisions taken by the Hungarian legal authorities following the litigation between Hungarian
         customs and the Hungarian exporter [had] no direct legal effect on the checks made by the customs authorities of the Member
         States on the status of goods imported by Community traders’.
      
OLAF disputed ‘the admissibility of new elements presented several years after the checks [had] started and several months
         after detailed checks’, formally rejected the argument of the Hungarian manufacturer and confirmed its analysis annexed to
         the investigation report of February 1999.
      
Accordingly, OLAF expressly called on the Member States to pursue the recovery procedures and to ‘base their actions on the
         conclusions of the Community report of February 1999’.
      
The German authorities subsequently reimbursed the import duties in respect of vehicles whose Hungarian origin had been confirmed
         by the authorities of the exporting State following judicial decisions delivered in that State.
      
 Pre-litigation procedure 
In the course of a check on own resources in May in Germany, Commission staff found that the German authorities had not
         carried out post-clearance recovery of customs duties immediately after the withdrawal by the Hungarian authorities of the
         declarations of origin of the imported vehicles at issue and had thus not made payment of own resources.
      
The German authorities did not send the first demands for post-clearance recovery until April for the imports between
         December and November 1997, and April for those from April to November 1996. As the customs debts relating to
         imports before April were already time-barred, the own resources relating to them were not established.
      
By letter of September 2001, those authorities explained that the customs debts which were time-barred at the time when
         the procedures for post-clearance recovery began were not established.
      
In the working document of June and in its letter of October 2003, the Commission took the view that the Member
         States concerned, which included the Federal Republic of Germany, had been able to identify the debtor and the amount of duty
         payable at the latest by August 1998, which was the date when the final language version of the documents and computer
         files relating to the mutual assistance communication of June were sent. Accordingly, the Member States which had
         not taken action within three months of that date had to be required to pay the amounts of duty laid down as of November
         1998.
      
In addition, the Commission asked the Member States concerned to provide it with more specific information regarding the import
         duties concerned. It stated that a letter of formal notice would follow. Finally, it pointed out that payment within the time-limit
         would obviate the need to calculate default interest.
      
By a letter of March 2005, the Federal Republic of Germany informed the Commission that the import duties in question amounted
         to EUR 735.53.
      
The Commission asked that Member State to pay that amount within two months and stated that default interest would be calculated
         once the payment was received. 
      
By letter of November 2005, the Federal Republic of Germany informed the Commission that payment had been made on October
         ‘subject to confirmation of the Commission’s position by a judgment of the Court of Justice’, solely in order to avoid
         default interest.
      
By letter of June 2006, the Federal Republic of Germany refused to pay the default interest which the Commission had fixed
         at EUR 011.and repeated that it disputed that a customs debt had arisen and that there was an obligation to recover
         it.
      
By letter of October 2006, the Commission commenced proceedings for failure to fulfil obligations under Article EC
         and put the Federal Republic of Germany on notice to submit its observations.
      
As it considered the reply received on February to be unsatisfactory, the Commission delivered a reasoned opinion
         on June 2007, to which the Federal Republic of Germany replied by letter of August 2007.
      
As it was not satisfied with that reply, the Commission decided to bring the present action.
      
 The action
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission essentially complains that the Federal Republic of Germany failed to recover the customs debts at issue, paid
         the resulting own resources late and refused to pay the default interest payable.
      
As regards the late payment of own resources, the Commission observed that Regulations Nos 1552/and 1150/and the Customs
         Code require the Member States to recover customs debts legally due and to establish and pay the related own resources as
         soon as they are in possession of the information needed to determine the debtor and the amount owed.
      
The Commission maintains that, in the present case, the letter of August informed the German authorities of the withdrawal
         of certain declarations of origin and, in conjunction with the previous communications and documents, contained all the information
         necessary to recover the customs debts at issue.
      
Within three months of the sending of that letter, the Federal Republic of Germany should have established the amounts legally
         due and informed the debtors, even if it subsequently had to provisionally waive payment or reimburse the amounts collected
         because of the judicial proceedings pending in Hungary. The own resources should have been entered in the Communities’ accounts
         by January at the latest.
      
As regards default interest, the Commission observes that, under Article of Regulations Nos 1552/and 1150/2000, the
         Member States are required to pay interest even if, as a result of their inaction, duties on own resources can no longer be
         established. The Federal Republic of Germany should thus have paid interest for the period from January to October
         2005, without that Member State being able to rely on the principle of the protection of legitimate expectations.
      
The Federal Republic of Germany claims, first, that it is the provisions of Article 32(1) and (5) of Protocol which apply,
         rather than those of Regulations Nos 1552/and 1150/2000.
      
Contrary to the requirements of that article, the conclusions of the Hungarian authorities did not indicate clearly whether
         the export documents were authentic and whether the goods concerned complied with the rules on origin. Moreover, those authorities
         had given notice of the judicial proceedings initiated by Magyar Suzuki and confined themselves to announcing that the definitive
         results of the verification would be forwarded subsequently.
      
Second, the Federal Republic of Germany observed that the investigation report by UCLAF was the result of a mission carried
         out under Regulation No 515/97. As a Member State which did not take part in that mission, the Federal Republic of Germany
         was entitled to wait for the mission report before commencing procedures for recovery, in accordance with point 4.of the
         guidelines for Community missions carried out under Regulation No 515/under the terms of which the Member States which
         do not take part in a mission are to request the investigation report before taking any action against importers. Moreover,
         in its mutual assistance communication of October 1999, OLAF itself called on the Member States to base their action on
         that investigation report.
      
Third, citing Joined Cases C-23/to C-25/Sfakianakis [2006] ECR I-1265, paragraph 21, the Federal Republic of Germany maintained that it was not authorised to recover customs
         duties before it knew the result of the judicial proceedings pending in Hungary. The expiry of the limitation period for customs
         debts would thus in some cases be inevitable.
      
As regards default interest, the Federal Republic of Germany maintains that, in the absence of an obligation to make own resources
         available, that ancillary obligation was without foundation.
      
In the alternative, that Member State argues that a legitimate expectation that no default interest need be paid had been
         created by the Commission, which, in the document distributed at the meeting of the Committee on Own Resources of July 2003,
         announced that ‘payment within the period prescribed will avoid the calculation of default interest’.
      
Moreover, the Federal Republic of Germany takes the view that, in the absence of any specific requirement in Regulation No
         1150/in that regard, the deadline for entry in the accounts when the amounts of the customs debts have not been recovered
         is set by the Commission. In the present case, the Commission only set a deadline for the payment of own resources in the
         document of June 2003. Accordingly, it is only from the expiry of that deadline that default interest must be calculated.
      
 Findings of the Court
 The making available of own resources
As a preliminary point, it must be observed that, under Article 16(1) of Protocol 4, products originating in Hungary are,
         on importation into the Community, to benefit from preferential treatment upon submission of proof in the form of an EUR.movement certificate.
      
For the implementation of the provisions of that protocol, a system of administrative cooperation was set up between the Hungarian
         authorities, on the one hand, and the Community authorities and those of the Member States, on the other.
      
That system is based on a division of responsibilities together with mutual trust between the authorities of the Member State
         concerned and those of the Republic of Hungary (see, to that effect, Sfakianakis, paragraph 21).
      
In the framework of that division of responsibilities, responsibility for verifying the originating status of products coming
         from Hungary falls to the Hungarian authorities. As they are best placed to verify directly the facts which establish the
         origin of the goods concerned, those authorities have the task, under Articles 17(4) and (5) and 32(3) of Protocol 4, of verifying
         whether the rules on origin have been observed when they issue the EUR.certificates and in subsequent verifications.
      
The system of administrative cooperation put in place by Protocol can, however, function only if the customs authorities
         of the State of import accept the determinations legally made by the authorities of the State of export (see Sfakianakis, paragraph 23).
      
In that regard, the authorities of the State of import must accept the validity of the EUR.certificates, attesting to the
         Hungarian origin of goods (see, in that regard, Sfakianakis, paragraph 37). Moreover, the authorities of the Member State of importation must accept the findings made by the Hungarian
         authorities in a subsequent verification.
      
Accordingly, if, following a subsequent verification, the Hungarian authorities indicate clearly, pursuant to Article 32(5)
         of Protocol 4, that the vehicles concerned cannot be considered to be products originating in Hungary and thus give the authorities
         of the Member State of importation sufficient information for them to take the view that the certificates in question had
         been revoked, those authorities are no longer required to grant the goods concerned the preferential treatment provided for
         in Article 16(1) of Protocol 4.
      
Moreover, in such circumstances, the authorities of the Member State of importation are required to ensure, under Regulations
         Nos 1550/and 1150/and the Customs Code, that own resources are placed at the disposal of the Communities rapidly and
         effectively and to effect post-clearance recovery of customs debts and enter the resulting own resources in the accounts without
         delay.
      
The Member States are thus required to establish the Communities’ entitlement to own resources as soon as their customs authorities
         are in a position to calculate the amount of duties arising from a customs debt and determine the debtor (see, to that effect,
         Case C-392/Commission v Denmark [2005] ECR I-9811, paragraph 61). Those Member States are accordingly required to take the duties into account on the conditions
         laid down in Article of Regulation No 1552/(see Case C-312/Commission v Netherlands [2006] ECR I-9923, paragraph 61).
      
In this case, the Federal Republic of Germany maintains, as pointed out in paragraph of this judgment, that the Hungarian
         authorities did not indicate clearly their finding that the vehicles imported into Germany did not comply with the rules on
         origin and that it was therefore required to continue to apply preferential treatment to the products concerned.
      
That argument cannot be upheld. As observed in paragraph of this judgment, having carried out the subsequent verification
         required by certain Member States and by the Commission, the Hungarian authorities clearly indicated in their letter of May that the vehicles imported into Germany and appearing in the relevant documents and files did not comply with the
         rules on origin and thus gave the authorities of the State of importation sufficient information for them to consider that
         the certificates in question had been revoked. Those findings were, according to that letter, definitive.
      
Consequently, as the Advocate General rightly observed in point of her Opinion, it must be held that, in this case, the
         provisions of Protocol no longer precluded the German authorities from refusing to apply preferential tariff treatment to
         the goods in question.
      
Moreover, it must be held that, on the basis of the information provided by the Hungarian authorities, the German authorities
         were in a position to determine the debtors and calculate the amount of the customs debt.
      
Having regard to the foregoing considerations, it must be held that, following receipt of the letter of August of
         the Commission containing the translation into German of the letter of the Hungarian authorities of May and the documents
         and computer files relating to it, the Federal Republic of Germany was required, within the time-limit of three months set
         by the Commission, to make a subsequent entry in the accounts and inform the debtor of the import duties legally due.
      
As the Advocate General observed in point of her Opinion, the fact that it was the Commission and not the German authorities
         which requested the verification carried out by the Hungarian authorities in no way affects the obligation of the authorities
         of the importing State to abide by the outcome of that verification. As the Court held in paragraph of Sfakianakis, that verification may be carried out, not only at the request of the authorities of the State of importation, but also at
         the request of the services of the Commission, which, pursuant to Article EC, is charged with ensuring the proper application
         of the EEC-Hungary Association Agreement and its protocols.
      
In addition, contrary to the contention of the Federal Republic of Germany, a delay in making available the customs duties
         at issue cannot be justified, in the circumstances of the case, by the expectation of further information from the Hungarian
         authorities or a definitive decision in the judicial proceedings initiated in Hungary by Magyar Suzuki, and still less by
         the expectation of the final report of the investigation conducted in parallel by UCLAF.
      
First, as the Advocate General observed in point of her Opinion, although the Hungarian authorities, in their letter of
         May 1998, announced that they would communicate the individual responses to the Member States which had requested subsequent
         verification of the EUR.certificates under Protocol 4, it is common ground that the German authorities were not amongst
         those who demanded that such verification be carried out and cannot, therefore, claim that they were expecting such a response.
      
Then, as regards the argument of the Federal Republic of Germany drawn from Sfakianakis, that it was not authorised to recover customs duties before the outcome of the judicial proceedings in Hungary was known,
         it must be observed that the case leading to that judgment concerned the subsequent recovery by the Greek authorities of customs
         duties relating to imports of Suzuki vehicles from Hungary in 1995. That recovery was based on the findings of the subsequent
         verification of EUR.certificates made by the Hungarian authorities under Protocol 4, findings which were revised following
         the decisions of the Hungarian courts.
      
It is against that background that the Court held, in paragraph of Sfakianakis, that the effectiveness of the abolition of the imposition of customs duties under the EEC-Hungary Association Agreement
         precludes administrative decisions imposing the payment of customs duties, taxes and penalties taken by the customs authorities
         of the State of import before the definitive result of actions brought against the findings of the subsequent verification
         have been communicated to them, when the decisions of the authorities of the State of export which initially issued the EUR.certificates have not been revoked or cancelled.
      
However, as the Advocate General observed in points and of her Opinion, that ruling took account of the fact that, in
         the case leading to the judgment in Sfakianakis, the Greek authorities did not have sufficient information to allow them to take the view that the EUR.certificates at
         issue had been revoked. According to paragraph of that judgment, the Hungarian authorities had expressly pointed out to
         the Greek authorities that the EUR.certificates relating to vehicles the non-Hungarian origin of which had been formally
         recognised by the manufacturer had been revoked. On the other hand, they gave no such indication with regard to the certificates
         at issue in the dispute and, as is apparent from paragraph of the judgment, they had even asked the Greek authorities to
         be patient before proceeding with recovery of the customs duties.
      
It must be found that the same does not apply in this case. The Hungarian authorities had clearly indicated by their letter
         of May that the vehicles concerned could not be considered to be goods originating in Hungary and had accordingly
         given the authorities of the State of importation sufficient information to allow them to take the view that the certificates
         in question had been revoked. However, as observed in paragraph of this judgment, the authorities of the Member State of
         importation must accept the findings made by the Hungarian authorities in a subsequent verification. Consequently, and contrary
         to the contentions of the Federal Republic of Germany, the fact that the Hungarian authorities also pointed out that there
         were proceedings pending against the findings of the subsequent verification cannot affect the obligation on the German authorities
         to enter in the accounts and notify the customs debt and to establish the own resources resulting from it.
      
Finally, since the final confirmation by the Hungarian authorities that the rules on origin had not been complied with represented
         a sufficient basis for the initiation by the German authorities of the procedures for the recovery of the customs debts at
         issue, those authorities could not rely on UCLAF’s failure to take a stance and, in particular, the absence of a final report
         on the investigation in an inspection mission to Hungary carried out by UCLAF itself regarding the same imports and in direct
         connection with the subsequent verification carried out by the Hungarian authorities to justify the delay in the recovery
         and making available of the related own resources.
      
Moreover, the arguments of the Federal Republic of Germany, according to which, by the mutual assistance communication of
         October 1999, OLAF itself invited the Member States to act on the basis of the UCLAF investigation report, cannot be upheld.
         As the Advocate General pointed out in points and of her Opinion, in formulating those arguments that Member State relied
         on a restrictive reading of that communication without taking account of the context.
      
It must be borne in mind that, in the wake of the decisions by the national courts, the Hungarian authorities had revised
         their stance concerning the failure to observe the rules on origin in respect of the exported vehicles. Against that background,
         OLAF, by its mutual assistance communication of October 1999, expressed its disagreement with the point of view of those
         authorities and called on the Member States concerned to continue to recover the customs duties at issue. It was only in order
         to strengthen its position that OLAF relied on the findings of the verification carried out by UCLAF.
      
Moreover, it must be observed that the recovery of the customs duties at issue by the German authorities after receipt of
         the findings of the Hungarian authorities confirming the failure to respect the rules on origin was not such as to affect
         the interests of the debtors irredeemably. First, the customs authorities were authorised, under Articles to of the
         Customs Code, to grant payment facilities to the debtors. Second, in so far as it is subsequently established that the amount
         of customs duty is not legally owed, the customs authorities are required, under Article of the Customs Code, to repay
         it. In that regard, it must be made clear that, in the present case, the German authorities which took steps to recover duties
         before the notification of the decisions of the Hungarian courts and of the new stance of the authorities of the exporting
         State in fact recovered customs duties which were not legally owed.
      
 Default interest
The Court has consistently held that there is an inseparable link between the obligation to establish the Communities’ own
         resources, the obligation to credit them to the Commission’s account within the prescribed time-limit and the obligation to
         pay default interest, payable regardless of the reason for the delay in making the entry in the Commission’s account (see,
         in particular, Case 68/Commission v Greece [1989] ECR 2965, paragraph 17; Case C-363/Commission v Italy [2003] ECR I-5767, paragraphs and 44; and the judgment of January in Case C-150/Commission v Portugal, paragraph 62).
      
Under Article of Regulation No 1552/89, any delay in making the entries in the account referred to in Article 9(1) of that
         regulation gives rise to the payment of interest by the Member State concerned at the interest rate applicable to the entire
         period of delay (see Case C-460/Commission v Netherlands [2005] ECR I-2613, paragraph 91, and Case C-275/Commission v Italy [2009] ECR I-2005, paragraph 66).
      
Moreover, it is apparent from the wording of Article that a delay in the making available of own resources cannot depend
         on a time-limit fixed by the Commission for making available those resources such as that mentioned in paragraph of this
         judgment.
      
The argument of the Federal Republic of Germany, according to which it had a legitimate expectation that it would not have
         to pay default interest, must also be rejected.
      
As the Advocate General observed in points to of her Opinion, in view of the clear and precise provisions of Articles
         and of Regulation No 1552/89, of the ambiguous content of the working document of June 2003, of the significant amount
         of the interest due and of the background to the case, the Federal Republic of Germany could not consider that it had been
         given precise, unconditional and consistent assurances such as to give rise to a legitimate expectation.
      
It follows from all the foregoing that, by allowing customs claims to become time-barred, despite the receipt of a mutual
         assistance communication, paying the own resources owed in this connection late and refusing to pay the default interest payable,
         the Federal Republic of Germany has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles 2, and to of Regulation No 1552/and the same articles of Regulation No 1150/2000.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Federal Republic of Germany
         has been unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, by allowing customs claims to become time-barred, despite the receipt of a mutual assistance communication,
            paying the own resources owed in this connection late and refusing to pay the default interest payable, the Federal Republic
            of Germany has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles 2, and to of Council Regulation (EEC, Euratom) No 1552/of May implementing Decision 88/376/EEC, Euratom on the system of the Communities’ own resources and the same articles
            of Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1150/of May implementing Decision 94/728/EC, Euratom on the system of
            the Communities’ own resources;
2.      Orders the Federal Republic of Germany to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 