
ORDER OF THE COURT (Tenth Chamber)
November (*)
(Appeal — Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice — Appeal relating solely to the amount of the costs set at first instance — Manifest inadmissibility)
In Case C‑549/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, brought on September 2017,
Ukraine, represented by M. Kostytska, advocate,
appellant,
the other parties to the proceedings being:
Viktor Fedorovych Yanukovych, residing in Kiev (Ukraine), 
applicant at first instance,
Council of the European Union,
defendant at first instance,
Republic of Poland,
European Commission,
interveners at first instance,
THE COURT (Tenth Chamber),
composed of E. Levits, President of the Chamber, M. Berger (Rapporteur) and F. Biltgen, Judges,
Advocate General: M. Wathelet,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to give a decision by reasoned order, pursuant to Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice,
makes the following
Order
By its appeal, Ukraine seeks, first, the annulment of the order of the General Court of the European Union of July 2017, Yanukovych v Council (T‑346/DEP, not published; ‘the order under appeal’, EU:T:2017:547), by which the General Court set the total amount of the costs to be reimbursed by Ukraine to Mr Viktor Fedorovych Yanukovych, the applicant at first instance, at the sum of pounds sterling (GBP) (approximately EUR 920), and, second, to set that amount at zero.
 The appeal
Pursuant to Article of its Rules of Procedure, where the appeal is, in whole or in part, manifestly inadmissible or manifestly unfounded, the Court may at any time, acting on a proposal from the Judge-Rapporteur and after hearing the Advocate General, decide by reasoned order to dismiss that appeal in whole or in part.
It is appropriate to apply that provision in the context of the present appeal.
By its appeal, Ukraine submits that, by setting, in the order under appeal, the total amount of the costs that it must reimburse to Mr Yanukovych at a sum other than zero, the General Court went beyond its powers and infringed the restrictive measures imposed by the European Union.
In that regard, it should be noted that, under the second paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, no appeal shall lie regarding only the amount of the costs or the party ordered to pay them.
Indeed, by its appeal, Ukraine merely challenges the amount of the costs set by the General Court in the order under appeal.
It follows that, pursuant to Article of the Rules of Procedure, the appeal must be dismissed as manifestly inadmissible.
 Costs
Under Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, which applies to appeal proceedings by virtue of Article 184(1) thereof, a decision as to costs is to be given in the order which closes the proceedings. As the present order has been adopted without notice of the appeal having been served on the other parties, Ukraine must be ordered to bear its own costs.
On those grounds, the Court (Tenth Chamber) hereby:
1.      Dismisses the appeal;
2.      Orders Ukraine to bear its own costs.
Luxembourg, November 2017.
A. Calot Escobar
 
E. Levits
Registrar
 
President of the Tenth Chamber
*      Language of the case: English.
Top  
 