
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-75/Commission of the European CommunitiesvGrand Duchy of Luxembourg
«(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 92/43/EEC – Conservation of natural habitats – Wild fauna and flora)»
Opinion of Advocate General Tizzano delivered on January I - Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber), February I - Summary of the Judgment
Acts of the institutions – Directives – Implementation by the Member States – Mere administrative practice does not constitute fulfilment of that obligation(Art. EC, third para.)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)February (1)
((Failure by a Member State to fulfil its obligations – Directive 92/43/EEC – Conservation of natural habitats – Wild fauna and flora))
In Case C-75/01, 
            
 Commission of the European Communities,  represented by R.B. Wainwright and J. Adda, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant, 
v
 Grand Duchy of Luxembourg,  represented by J. Faltz, acting as Agent,
            
defendant, 
APPLICATION for a declaration that, by failing to take all the necessary measures to implement fully and correctly Articles 1,
            4(5), 5(4), 6, 7, 12(1)(b) and (c), 12(2), 12(4), 13(1)(b) and 13(2), 14, 15, 16(1), 22(b) and (c), and 23(2) of Council Directive
            92/43/EEC of May on the conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora (OJ L 206, p. 7) in conjunction
            with Annexes I, II, IV, V and VI to that directive, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg has failed to fulfil its obligations under
            the directive and under the third paragraph of Article EC,
            
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
composed of: J.-P. Puissochet, President of the Chamber, C. Gulmann (Rapporteur), V. Skouris, F. Macken and N. Colneric, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: A. Tizzano, Registrar: R. Grass, 
            
having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 2002, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
By application lodged at the Court Registry on February 2001, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action
         pursuant to Article EC for a declaration that, by failing to take all the necessary measures to implement fully and correctly
         Articles 1, 4(5), 5(4), 6, 7, 12(1)(b) and (c), 12(2), 12(4), 13(1)(b) and 13(2), 14, 15, 16(1), 22(b) and (c), and 23(2)
         of Council Directive 92/43/EEC of May on the conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora (OJ L 206, p. 7, hereinafter  
         the Directive) in conjunction with Annexes I, II, IV, V and VI to that directive, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg has failed to fulfil its
         obligations under the Directive and under the third paragraph of Article EC. 
         
The Directive
            
Article of the Directive defines the principal terms used. In particular, Article 1(m) defines specimen as  
         any animal or plant, whether alive or dead, of the species listed in Annex IV and Annex V, any part or derivative thereof,
         as well as any other goods which appear, from an accompanying document, the packaging or a mark or label, or from any other
         circumstances, to be parts or derivatives of animals or plants of those species. 
         
            
Article of the Directive establishes a procedure in several stages for designating as special areas of conservation (
         SACs) sites which host the species and habitats protected by the Directive. Under Article 4(1), each Member State must propose
         a list of sites indicating which natural habitat types in Annex I and which species in Annex II that are native to its territory
         the sites host. The list must be sent to the Commission, together with information on each site, within three years of notification
         of the Directive. 
         
            
Under Article 4(5) of the Directive, once a site is placed on the list of sites of Community importance drawn up by the Commission
         it falls subject to the provisions of Article 6(2), (3) and (4). 
         
            
Article 5(1) and (4) of the Directive provides: 
         
1.
 In exceptional cases where the Commission finds that a national list as referred to in Article 4(1) fails to mention a site
         hosting a priority natural habitat type or priority species which, on the basis of relevant and reliable scientific information,
         it considers to be essential for the maintenance of that priority natural habitat type or for the survival of that priority
         species, a bilateral consultation procedure shall be initiated between that Member State and the Commission for the purpose
         of comparing the scientific data used by each.
         ...
         
4.
 During the consultation period and pending a Council decision, the site concerned shall be subject to Article 6(2).
         
            
Article of the Directive provides: 
         
1.
 For special areas of conservation, Member States shall establish the necessary conservation measures involving, if need be,
         appropriate management plans specifically designed for the sites or integrated into other development plans, and appropriate
         statutory, administrative or contractual measures which correspond to the ecological requirements of the natural habitat types
         in Annex I and the species in Annex II present on the sites.
         
2.
 Member States shall take appropriate steps to avoid, in the special areas of conservation, the deterioration of natural habitats
         and the habitats of species as well as disturbance of the species for which the areas have been designated, in so far as such
         disturbance could be significant in relation to the objectives of this directive.
         
3.
 Any plan or project not directly connected with or necessary to the management of the site but likely to have a significant
         effect thereon, either individually or in combination with other plans or projects, shall be subject to appropriate assessment
         of its implications for the site in view of the site's conservation objectives. In the light of the conclusions of the assessment
         of the implications for the site and subject to the provisions of paragraph 4, the competent national authorities shall agree
         to the plan or project only after having ascertained that it will not adversely affect the integrity of the site concerned
         and, if appropriate, after having obtained the opinion of the general public.
         
4.
 If, in spite of a negative assessment of the implications for the site and in the absence of alternative solutions, a plan
         or project must nevertheless be carried out for imperative reasons of overriding public interest, including those of a social
         or economic nature, the Member State shall take all compensatory measures necessary to ensure that the overall coherence of
         Natura is protected. It shall inform the Commission of the compensatory measures adopted.
         Where the site concerned hosts a priority natural habitat type and/or a priority species, the only considerations which may
         be raised are those relating to human health or public safety, to beneficial consequences of primary importance for the environment
         or, further to an opinion from the Commission, to other imperative reasons of overriding public interest.
         
            
Under Article of the Directive,  
         [o]bligations arising under Article 6(2), (3) and (4) of this directive shall replace any obligations arising under the first
         sentence of Article 4(4) of Directive 79/409/EEC in respect of areas classified pursuant to Article 4(1) or similarly recognised
         under Article 4(2) thereof, as from the date of implementation of this directive or the date of classification or recognition
         by a Member State under Directive 79/409/EEC, where the latter date is later. 
         
            
Under Article of the Directive,  
         Member States shall undertake surveillance of the conservation status of the natural habitats and species referred to in Article
         with particular regard to priority natural habitat types and priority species. 
         
            
Article 12(1)(b) and (c), (2) and (4) of the Directive reads as follows: 
         
1.
 Member States shall take the requisite measures to establish a system of strict protection for the animal species listed in
         Annex IV (a) in their natural range, prohibiting:
         ...
         
(b)
deliberate disturbance of these species, particularly during the period of breeding, rearing, hibernation and migration; 
         
(c)
deliberate destruction or taking of eggs from the wild; 
         ...
         
2.
 For these species, Member States shall prohibit the keeping, transport and sale or exchange, and offering for sale or exchange,
         of specimens taken from the wild, except for those taken legally before this directive is implemented.
         ...
         
4.
 Member States shall establish a system to monitor the incidental capture and killing of the animal species listed in Annex
         IV (a). In the light of the information gathered, Member States shall take further research or conservation measures as required
         to ensure that incidental capture and killing does not have a significant negative impact on the species concerned.
         
            
Article 13(1)(b) and (2) provides: 
         
1.
 Member States shall take the requisite measures to establish a system of strict protection for the plant species listed in
         Annex IV (b), prohibiting:
         ...
         
(b)
the keeping, transport and sale or exchange and offering for sale or exchange of specimens of such species taken in the wild,
         except for those taken legally before this directive is implemented. 
         
2.
 The prohibitions referred to in paragraph 1(a) and (b) shall apply to all stages of the biological cycle of the plants to
         which this Article applies.
         
            
Article of the Directive provides: 
         
1.
 If, in the light of the surveillance provided for in Article 11, Member States deem it necessary, they shall take measures
         to ensure that the taking in the wild of specimens of species of wild fauna and flora listed in Annex V as well as their exploitation
         is compatible with their being maintained at a favourable conservation status.
         
2.
 Where such measures are deemed necessary, they shall include continuation of the surveillance provided for in Article 11.
         Such measures may also include in particular:
         
─
regulations regarding access to certain property, 
         
─
temporary or local prohibition of the taking of specimens in the wild and exploitation of certain populations, 
         
─
regulation of the periods and/or methods of taking specimens, 
         
─
application, when specimens are taken, of hunting and fishing rules which take account of the conservation of such populations,
            
         
─
establishment of a system of licences for taking specimens or of quotas, 
         
─
regulation of the purchase, sale, offering for sale, keeping for sale or transport for sale of specimens, 
         
─
breeding in captivity of animal species as well as artificial propagation of plant species, under strictly controlled conditions,
            with a view to reducing the taking of specimens [in] the wild, 
         
─
assessment of the effect of the measures adopted.
         
            
Article of the Directive reads as follows: In respect of the capture or killing of species of wild fauna listed in Annex V (a) and in cases where, in accordance with
         Article 16, derogations are applied to the taking, capture or killing of species listed in Annex IV (a), Member States shall
         prohibit the use of all indiscriminate means capable of causing local disappearance of, or serious disturbance to, populations
         of such species, and in particular:
         
(a)
use of the means of capture and killing listed in Annex VI (a); 
         
(b)
any form of capture and killing from the modes of transport referred to in Annex VI (b).
         
            
Article 16(1) of the Directive provides: Provided that there is no satisfactory alternative and the derogation is not detrimental to the maintenance of the populations
         of the species concerned at a favourable conservation status in their natural range, Member States may derogate from the provisions
         of Articles 12, 13, and 15(a) and (b):
         
(a)
in the interest of protecting wild fauna and flora and conserving natural habitats; 
         
(b)
to prevent serious damage, in particular to crops, livestock, forests, fisheries and water and other types of property; 
         
(c)
in the interests of public health and public safety, or for other imperative reasons of overriding public interest, including
         those of a social or economic nature and beneficial consequences of primary importance for the environment; 
         
(d)
for the purpose of research and education, of repopulating and re-introducing these species and for the breeding operations
         necessary for these purposes, including the artificial propagation of plants; 
         
(e)
to allow, under strictly supervised conditions, on a selective basis and to a limited extent, the taking or keeping of certain
         specimens of the species listed in Annex IV in limited numbers specified by the competent national authorities.
         
            
Article 22(b) and (c) of the Directive provides: In implementing the provisions of this directive, Member States shall:...
         
(b)
ensure that the deliberate introduction into the wild of any species which is not native to their territory is regulated so
         as not to prejudice natural habitats within their natural range or the wild native fauna and flora and, if they consider it
         necessary, prohibit such introduction. The results of the assessment undertaken shall be forwarded to the committee for information;
         
         
(c)
promote education and general information on the need to protect species of wild fauna and flora and to conserve their habitats
         and natural habitats.
         
            
Under Article 23(2) of the Directive, the laws, regulations and administrative provisions which the Member States must adopt
         in order to comply with the Directive must contain a reference to the Directive or be accompanied by such reference on the
         occasion of their official publication. 
         The pre-litigation procedure
            
On April 1999, having concluded that the various measures transposing the Directive into Luxembourg law communicated to
         it failed to conform to Articles 1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, and of the Directive, the Commission gave
         the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg formal notice to submit its observations. 
         
            
In his letter of reply of July 1999, addressed to the Commission (
         the letter of reply) the Minister for the Environment of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg stated that various national laws and regulations could
         help to attain certain of the Directive's objectives and that the Law of May on regional planning (
          Mémorial  A 1999, p. 1402, hereinafter  
         the Regional Planning Law), the draft Grand-Ducal regulation on biodiversity and the Law of August on the protection of nature and natural
         resources (
          Mémorial  A 1999, p. 1486, hereinafter  
         the Nature Protection Law) would shortly ensure that the Directive's objectives were fully met. The letter also expressly disputed certain of the Commission's
         complaints. 
         
            
The Commission was not satisfied by the observations submitted to it by the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg in its letter of reply
         and on January issued a reasoned opinion in which it observed that, by failing to take all the necessary measures
         to implement fully and correctly Articles 1, 4(5), 5(4), 6, 7, 12(1)(b) and (c), 12(2), 12(4), 13(1)(b) and 13(2), 14, 15,
         16(1), 22(b) and (c), and 23(2) of the Directive in conjunction with Annexes I, II, IV, V and VI to the Directive, the Grand
         Duchy of Luxembourg had failed to fulfil its obligations under the Directive and under the third paragraph of Article EC. The Commission therefore called upon the Grand Duchy to adopted the measures required to comply with the reasoned opinion
         within two months of its notification. 
         
            
By letter of April 2000, the Luxembourg authorities acknowledged that, in order to transpose the Directive into national
         law, it would be necessary to supplement or amend its existing legislation. 
         
            
Finding that the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg had failed to adopt the necessary measures to comply with the reasoned opinion
         within the time specified therein, the Commission brought the present action. 
         The action
            
In its defence the Luxembourg Government merely indicates that a draft law transposing the Directive was approved by the government
         in council on February and asks the Court to dismiss the action. 
         Incomplete transposition of Article of the Directive
         
            
The Commission points out that, in its letter of formal notice, it observed that there were no provisions of Luxembourg law
         that had as their object or effect the correct, complete and precise transposition of the definitions set out in Article of the Directive and that the Luxembourg authorities did not dispute that complaint in the letter of reply. 
         
            
On this point, it should be borne in mind that the letter of reply stated that the Article definitions were to be included
         in a sectoral plan provided for by the Regional Planning Law. 
         
            
However, it appears that no such measure was adopted within the period of time specified in the reasoned opinion. 
         
            
The complaint of incomplete transposition of Article of the Directive must therefore be regarded as well founded. 
         Failure to transpose Article 4(5) of the Directive
         
            
According to the Commission, the transposing provisions notified by the Luxembourg authorities do not have the object or effect
         of transposing Article 4(5) of the Directive. Thus, sites of Community importance are not automatically brought within the
         protection regime provided for in Article 6(2), (3) and (4) of the Directive. The letter of reply disputes this complaint
         but only to the extent that the Commission charged the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg with having failed to put in place a system
         for applying the protection regime provided for in Article 6(2) to sites of Community importance. 
         
            
It is important to bear in mind that, according to the letter of reply, the administrative practice in Luxembourg of refusing
         the necessary authorisation for certain projects falling within the scope of the Nature Protection Law is an appropriate means
         of ensuring that the nuisances mentioned in Article 6(2) of the Directive do not occur on the sites referred to in Article
         4(5). The Luxembourg Government has, however, acknowledged its failure as regards application of Article 6(3) and (4) of the
         Directive to sites of Community importance. 
         
            
Now, according to the settled case-law of the Court of Justice relating to the obligations incumbent upon Member States in
         the transposition of Community directives, mere administrative practices, which by their nature are alterable at will by the
         authorities and are not given the appropriate publicity, cannot be regarded as constituting the proper fulfilment of obligations
         arising under the EC Treaty (see, in particular, Case C-159/Commission  v  
          Italy  [2001] ECR I-4007, paragraph 32, and Case C-394/Commission  v  
          Ireland  [2002] ECR I-581, paragraph 11). 
         
            
Given the foregoing, the Commission's complaint of failure to transpose Article 4(5) of the Directive must be upheld. 
         Failure to transpose Article 5(4) of the Directive
         
            
The Commission argues that no laws in Luxembourg make the sites referred to in Article 5(4) of the Directive subject to the
         protection regime provided for by Article 6(2). The Luxembourg authorities dispute this complaint in the letter of reply.
         
         
            
As is clear from the letter of reply, the Luxembourg Government maintains, in essence, that the administrative practice of
         refusing the necessary authorisation for certain projects falling within the scope of the Nature Protection Law is an appropriate
         means of ensuring that the nuisances mentioned in Article 6(2) of the Directive do not occur on the sites referred to in Article
         5(4). 
         
            
However, having regard to the case-law of the Court mentioned in paragraph of the present judgment, that argument must
         be rejected. 
         
            
It is also submitted in the letter of reply that the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg has, in any event, probably already included
         in the list sent to the Commission pursuant to Article 4(1) of the Directive all the sites within its territory which are
         essential to maintaining certain types of habitat present in its territory and that, consequently, there would be no need
         to have recourse to the procedure laid down in Article 5(4) of the Directive. 
         
            
That submission cannot be upheld either because, in any event, it cannot be ruled out that the Commission might find, pursuant
         to Article 5(1) of the Directive, that the list sent by the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg omits a site which it regards as essential
         to the preservation of a given priority natural habitat type or the survival of a given priority species and that the bilateral
         consultation procedure will therefore have to be initiated, during the currency of which the site in question will, in accordance
         with Article 5(4), have to be made subject to the protection regime laid down in Article 6(2). 
         
            
Consequently, the complaint of failure to transpose Article 5(4) of the Directive must be regarded as well founded. 
         Failure to transpose Article of the Directive
         Article 6(1) of the Directive
         
            
The Commission complains that the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg has failed to transpose this provision. 
         
            
In the letter of reply, the Luxembourg Government acknowledged that failure. 
         
            
The complaint of non-transposition of Article 6(1) of the Directive must therefore be upheld. 
         Article 6(2) of the Directive
         
            
The Commission observes that, subject to exceptional ministerial derogation based on public interest, Article of the Nature
         Protection Law prohibits the reduction, destruction or modification of certain types of biotope. A provision such as that,
         however, does not appear adequate to ensure that all habitats falling within SACs benefit from the protection provided for.
         The Commission also emphasises that the provisions of the Nature Protection Law envisage only certain types of disturbance.
         In particular, under Article it is possible to prevent only certain types of disturbance in forests. There is therefore
         a lack of any general measure, binding upon third parties, making it possible to prevent, in SACs, disturbance of species
         which could have a significant effect on those species, in relation to the objectives of the Directive. The Commission also
         points out that, in the letter of reply, infringement of this aspect of the Directive is expressly disputed. 
         
            
It is submitted in the letter of reply that Article of the Nature Protection Law protects all biotopes, including those
         forming part of an SAC and that it is incorrect to say that this law contemplates only certain types of disturbance: Article
         23, which has a general scope, prohibits disturbance of fauna and Articles and prohibit any kind of unjustified exploitation,
         use, mutilation or destruction of wild plants and animals that are not protected by means of a more stringent set of national
         rules. Moreover, the Nature Protection Law is backed by a ministerial circular, whose very purpose is to transpose the Directive,
         and this states that any degradation of habitats and disturbance of protected species must be avoided by means of rigorous
         application of the Nature Protection Law. 
         
            
It should be borne in mind that, subject to exceptional ministerial derogation based on public interest, Article of the
         Nature Protection Law prohibits the reduction, destruction or modification of biotopes such as ponds, fens, marshlands, land
         covered in reeds and rushes, hedgerows, scrub and groves. 
         
            
A provision such as that, which makes express reference to certain types of biotope only does not appear to be capable of
         ensuring, as is required by Article 6(2) of the Directive, that all natural habitats and habitats of species found within
         SACs are protected against acts liable to deteriorate them. 
         
            
In so far as concerns protection against deterioration, as provided for by Article 6(2) of the Directive, it is plain that,
         whilst certain provisions of the Nature Protection Law pleaded in the present case, and in particular Articles and 23,
         may contribute to the prevention of certain types of disturbance, the fact remains that they are incapable of completely transposing
         Article 6(2) of the Directive because they do not cover all types of disturbance that are significant in relation to the objectives
         of the Directive of the species for which the SACs are designated. 
         
            
As regards the ministerial circular to which the Luxembourg Government refers, it must be held that, in light of the case-law
         mentioned in paragraph of the present judgment, it is not capable of ensuring proper transposition of Article 6(2). 
         
            
It follows that the complaint of incomplete transposition of Article 6(2) of the Directive must be regarded as well founded.
         
         Article 6(3) and (4) of the Directive
         
            
The Commission maintains that the Luxembourg legislation sent to it contains no provision for an assessment to be carried
         out of the effects on protected sites in all the cases mentioned in Article 6(3) of the Directive. Furthermore, Luxembourg
         law fails to ensure that projects and plans are approved by the competent authority only after the authority has satisfied
         itself that the project or plan will not compromise the integrity of the site in question. As far as Article 6(4) of the Directive
         is concerned, the Commission argues that no provision of national law requires that alternative solutions be pursued before
         approval is given to projects regarded as having an adverse effect on protected sites. Luxembourg law also fails to provide
         for the adoption of compensatory measures where such projects are authorised. 
         
            
It is appropriate to observe that these complaints were already formulated in the same terms in the letter of formal notice
         and that, in the letter of reply, the Luxembourg Government acknowledged that the existing provisions of national law were
         inadequate as regards Article 6(3) and (4) of the Directive. 
         
            
That being so, the Court must also uphold this aspect of the Commission's action. 
         Failure to transpose Article of the Directive
         
            
The Commission submits that no provision of Luxembourg law provides for the application of Article 6(2), (3) and (4) of the
         Directive to special protection areas designated under Council Directive 79/409/EEC of April on the conservation of
         wild birds (OJ L 103, p. 1), as is required by Article of the Directive. The arguments put forward in the letter of
         reply also fail to persuade that Article has been transposed. 
         
            
It should be borne in mind that the letter of reply states that the sectoral plan which it anticipated drawing up would provide
         a precise legal framework, in particular as regards special protection areas classified under Directive 79/409. 
         
            
Given that, and taking particular account of what is stated in paragraph of the present judgment, it must be held that
         the complaint of failure to transpose Article of the Directive is well founded. 
         Inadequate transposition of Article 12(1)(b) and (c), (2) and (4) of the Directive
         
            
The Commission maintains, first of all, that Article 12(1)(b) of the Directive has been incompletely transposed into Luxembourg
         law because none of the national transposing provisions communicated to it prohibits the deliberate disturbance of the species
         concerned during the migration period. Secondly, none of the provisions has as its object or effect the complete transposition
         of Article 12(1)(c) of the Directive. Thirdly, the national provisions communicated to the Commission fail to prohibit the
         exchange and the offering for exchange of specimens of the species concerned, as is required by Article 12(2) of the Directive.
         Fourthly, no provision of Luxembourg law ensures that the definition of  
         animal in national law is as broad as that of  
         specimen within the meaning of the Directive. Lastly, none of the provisions communicated has as its object or effect the transposition
         of Article 12(4) of the Directive. According to the Commission, the arguments to the contrary set out in the letter of reply
         cannot be accepted. 
         Article 12(1)(b) of the Directive
         
            
As the Commission rightly observes, Article of the Nature Protection Law, which the Luxembourg Government regards as conforming
         to Article 12(1)(b) of the Directive, is incapable of transposing the latter provision fully because, whilst prohibiting the
         disturbance of fauna during the periods of breeding, rearing and hibernation, the prohibition fails expressly to mention the
         migration period. 
         
            
Consequently, the complaint of inadequate transposition of Article 12(1)(b) of the Directive must be regarded as well founded.
         
         Article 12(1)(c) of the Directive
         
            
The letter of reply maintains that Article 12(1)(c) of the Directive has been transposed into national law by Article of
         the Nature Protection Law and Article of the Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats, signed
         in Bern on September and approved by the Law of November (
          Mémorial  A 1981, p. 2130), to which the Community became a party by Council Decision 82/72/EEC of December (OJ L 38, p.
         1) (hereinafter  
         the Bern Convention). Article of the Nature Protection Law provides that animals which are the subject of complete protection may not be disturbed,
         killed, hunted, captured, kept in captivity or tamed, at any stage of their development. As regards Article of the Bern
         Convention, that provision prohibits the deliberate destruction or taking of eggs from the wild or keeping these eggs even
         if empty. 
         
            
In this connection, it should be pointed out that Article of the Nature Protection Law does not expressly mention the collection
         of eggs in the wild. The prohibition in Article on keeping in captivity animals which are the subject of complete protection
         at any stage of their development does not appear to include with sufficient certainty the collection of eggs in the wild,
         particularly as, under Article et seq. of the Nature Protection Law, this prohibition is one that is backed by criminal
         sanction. 
         
            
As regards Article 6(d) of the Bern Convention, which prohibits the deliberate destruction or taking of eggs from the wild
         or keeping such eggs, it is appropriate to point out that that provision applies only to the species listed in Annex II to
         the convention, which does not include certain of the species listed in Annex IV (a) to the Directive, to which Article of the Directive refers. 
         
            
It follows that Article 12(1)(c) of the Directive has not been correctly transposed into Luxembourg law. 
         Article 12(2) of the Directive
         
            
The letter of reply states that, in so far as it prohibits the keeping of animals which receive complete protection, Article
         of the Nature Protection Law also precludes the exchange of such animals. Indeed, to exchange something which may not be
         held is impossible. Moreover, Article of the Nature Protection Law, read together with the Grand-Ducal Regulation of April on the Complete and Partial Protection of Certain Species of Wild Animal (
          Mémorial  A 1986, p. 1174), provides for the classification of rare wild animals for the purposes of their conservation, without restriction
         to indigenous species. In addition, Article of the Nature Protection Law extends the definition of animal beyond the meaning
         conferred by national law. 
         
            
The Luxembourg Government's argument cannot be accepted. 
         
            
Indeed, the prohibition, laid down in Article of the Nature Protection Law, on keeping animals which receive complete protection
         would not seem to include the exchange or the offering for exchange of such animals, the concept of keeping being distinct
         from that of exchanging or offering for exchange, particularly from the viewpoint of a system of criminal sanctions, such
         as that mentioned in paragraph of the present judgment. 
         
            
As regards the meaning of the term animal in Luxembourg law, it must be held that, in any event, the law on which the Luxembourg
         Government relies in the letter of reply does not include within the definition of animal  
         any ... derivative [of any animal] ... as well as any other goods which appear, from an accompanying document, the packaging
         or a mark or label, or from any other circumstances, to be ... derivatives of animals ... of those species, as is provided for in Article 1(m) of the Directive, which defines the meaning of specimen as it appears, in particular,
         in Article 12(2) of the Directive. 
         
            
Article 12(2) of the Directive has not, therefore, been correctly transposed into Luxembourg law. 
         Article 12(4) of the Directive
         
            
It is appropriate to recall that the Luxembourg Government acknowledged in the letter of reply that there had yet to be established
         in Luxembourg law a monitoring system such as that provided for by Article 12(4) of the Directive. 
         
            
It also appears that no such monitoring system was adopted within the period of time laid down in the reasoned opinion. 
         
            
It thus appears that Article 12(4) of the Directive has not been transposed into the internal legal system of the defendant
         Member State. 
         
            
In light of the foregoing, it must be held that the complaint of inadequate transposition of Article 12(1)(b) and (c), (2)
         and (4) of the Directive is well founded. 
         Inadequate transposition of Article 13(1)(b) and (2) of the Directive
         Article 13(1)(b) of the Directive
         
            
The Commission submits that, despite the arguments advanced by the Luxembourg authorities in the letter of reply, Article
         13(1)(b) of the Directive has not been completely transposed into Luxembourg law, which neither prohibits the keeping, exchange
         or offering for sale or exchange of specimens of the plant species protected under that provision nor ensures that the prohibitions
         laid down in the provision apply also to the non-indigenous species protected under it. 
         
            
The letter of reply states that the sale of plants which receive complete protection is prohibited by Article of the Nature
         Protection Law and that, in so far as is necessary, keeping such plants is prohibited by Article of the Bern Convention.
         Moreover, Article of the Nature Protection Law does not exclude the protection of non-indigenous species. In this connection
         it would be sufficient to incorporate the species concerned into the Grand-Ducal Regulation of August on the Complete
         and Partial Protection of Certain Species of Wild Flower (
          Mémorial  A 1989, p. 1102, hereinafter  
         the Wild Flower Regulation). Article of the Nature Protection Law extends the definition of plant beyond the meaning conferred by national law. 
         
            
It should be observed that whilst Article of the Nature Protection Law prohibits the sale of plants that receive complete
         protection, it does not prohibit the possession, exchange or offering for sale or exchange of such plants. Article of the
         Bern Convention provides that each contracting party must, as appropriate, prohibit the possession of protected species. However,
         it does not appear that the Luxembourg authorities have adopted any supplementary measure further defining application of
         the Bern Convention as regards this point. As far as this aspect is concerned, therefore, Article 13(1)(b) of the Directive
         has not been properly transposed into Luxembourg law. 
         
            
As regards the complaint that Luxembourg law fails to ensure that the prohibitions laid down in Article 13(1)(b) of the Directive
         apply to the non-indigenous plant species protected by the Directive, it is important to recall that the Luxembourg Government
         itself has acknowledged  that the non-indigenous plant species covered by Article 13(1)(b) are not protected by Article of the Nature Protection Law, read together with the Wild Flower Regulation. Also, Article of the law provides that the
         plants and animals protected under approved and published international conventions may be purchased, imported, offered for
         sale, exported or held only pursuant to the relevant provisions of such conventions. However, Article is, in any event,
         incapable of ensuring as such the protection of non-indigenous species provided for by Article 13(1)(b) of the Directive.
         Moreover, the Luxembourg Government has provided no further information as to which international conventions are relevant
         in the matter. 
         
            
It follows that Article 13(1)(b) of the Directive has not been properly transposed into Luxembourg law. 
         Article 13(2) of the Directive
         
            
According to the Commission, the Luxembourg Government's assertion that Article 13(2) of the Directive has been transposed
         by Article of the Nature Protection Law, which extends the prohibitions laid down in that provision to parts of the plants
         concerned, fails to establish that the definition of plant in national law is as broad as that of specimen given in Article
         1(m) of the Directive, particularly in so far as concerns the inclusion of any part of or derivative obtained from a plant
         and any other goods which appear, from an accompanying document, the packaging or a mark or label, or from any other circumstances,
         to be parts of derivatives of plants of those species. 
         
            
It is important to bear in mind that, under Article 13(2) of the Directive, the prohibitions referred to in Article 13(1)(a)
         and (b) apply to all stages of the biological cycle of the plants to which Article applies. 
         
            
Even if the definition of plant in national law is narrower than that of specimen in Article 1(m), the Court finds that the
         Commission has failed to demonstrate why that should be inconsistent with Article 13(2) of the Directive, which makes no direct
         reference to specimens but instead refers to Article 13(1)(b) which does refer to specimens and lays down precise prohibitions
         in relation to specimens of protected specimens. 
         
            
Consequently, the complaint of incomplete transposition of Article 13(2) of the Directive, as formulated by the Commission,
         must be rejected. 
         
            
In view of the foregoing, the complaint of incomplete transposition of Article 13(1)(b) of the Directive must be upheld. 
         Non-transposition of Article of the Directive
         
            
The Commission maintains that Article of the Directive is not optional but contains an unconditional obligation of surveillance
         of the species listed in Annex V together with an obligation to take appropriate measures to ensure that those species are
         maintained at a favourable conservation status where the competent authorities deem it necessary, that is to say where surveillance
         reveals that, without such measures, the conservation status of the species would be endangered. 
         
            
In the letter of reply, the Luxembourg authorities acknowledged that national law fails to provide for the surveillance obligation
         relating to completely and partially protected species or the associated obligation to adopt appropriate measures to ensure
         that those species are maintained at a favourable conservation status. They have acknowledged the need to modify the law on
         this point. 
         
            
It therefore appears that the taking in the wild of specimens of species of wild fauna and flora listed in Annex V to the
         Directive as well as their exploitation is not coupled in Luxembourg law with an obligation to adopt, where their conservation
         status so warrants, appropriate measures to ensure that those species are maintained at a favourable conservation status.
         
         
            
The complaint of non-transposition of Article of the Directive must therefore be regarded as well founded. 
         Incorrect transposition of Article of the Directive
         
            
The Commission maintains that the transposition measures communicated to it by the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg fail to ensure
         the correct transposition of Article of the Directive. It refutes the reasoning put forward in the letter of reply in support
         of the contrary view. 
         
            
Indeed, the letter of reply states that, since the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg intended to avail itself of the derogation provided
         for by Article of the Directive, it was necessary for it to transpose Article of the Directive. The means of capture
         and killing mentioned in Article 15(a) and (b) of the Directive are exactly the same as those provided for in and prohibited
         by the Bern Convention. They are also prohibited, without exception, by the rules on hunting and fishing. Moreover, the Luxembourg
         Government has stated that the arrêté grand-ducal du mars ayant pour objet la destruction des animaux malfaisants
         et nuisibles (Grand-Ducal Decree of March on the elimination of harmful animals and vermin, hereinafter  
         the Grand-Ducal Decree), which imposes no restriction on the means of destruction used, is to be repealed by a new Grand-Ducal regulation of which
         a draft already exists. 
         
            
It is important to bear in mind that Annex VI (a) to the Directive, to which Article refers, includes amongst the prohibited
         methods and means of capture and killing traps which are non-selective according to their principle or their conditions of
         use and smoking out. However, in so far as it authorises the destruction of animals of the species listed in Annex V (a) to
         the Directive such as the marten and polecat, by means of smoking out with terriers or with the aid of traps, which, moreover,
         are not expressly required to be selective, the Grand-Ducal Decree is inconsistent with Article of the Directive. Furthermore,
         it is not apparent from the file that the Grand-Ducal Decree was repealed within the period laid down in the reasoned opinion.
         
         
            
It follows that, in any event, the complaint of incorrect transposition of Article of the Directive must be regarded as
         well founded. 
         Unsatisfactory transposition of Article 16(1) of the Directive
         
            
According to the Commission, the transposition measures mentioned in the letter of reply are unsatisfactory as regards Article
         16(1) of the Directive. 
         
            
As far as concerns Article of the Nature Protection Law, which provides that the competent minister may grant derogations
         from Articles to of that law for scientific purposes or in the public interest, it should be observed that the grant
         of such derogations has not been made conditional upon there being no other satisfactory solution, as is required by Article
         16(1) of the Directive. 
         
            
As regards Article of the Bern Convention, even if that provision makes the grant of derogations from the protection rules
         laid down in the convention subject to the same conditions as those specified in Article 16(1) of the Directive, and in particular
         the condition that there be no other satisfactory solution, the fact that that system of derogations and that implemented
         by Article of the Nature Protection Law coexist in Luxembourg's national law is, in any event, contrary to Article 16(1)
         of the Directive because that situation in fact creates in this case an ambiguity liable to render compliance with Article
         16(1) less than certain. 
         
            
The complaint of unsatisfactory transposition of Article 16(1) of the Directive must therefore be upheld. 
         Incorrect transposition of Article 22(b) and (c) of the Directive
         Article 22(b) of the Directive
         
            
In reply to the complaint of incorrect transposition of Article 22(b) of the Directive, as formulated in the letter of formal
         notice, the Luxembourg authorities state that that provision was transposed by Article of the Nature Protection Law, which
         prohibits the introduction of non-indigenous species into the wild except with the  authorisation of the competent minister,
         to which appropriate conditions may be attached. 
         
            
In this connection it should be observed that Article of the Nature Protection Law does not make the grant of the ministerial
         authorisation referred to in that provision conditional upon satisfaction of the requirements of Article 22(b) of the Directive,
         particularly the requirement that authorisation should be granted only where no harm would be caused to natural habitats.
         
         
            
Consequently, Article of the Nature Protection Law does not correctly transpose Article 22(b) of the Directive. The Commission's
         complaint in this regard must therefore be regarded as well founded. 
         Article 22(c) of the Directive
         
            
The letter of reply maintains that Article 22(c) of the Directive, which is designed to promote education and general information
         on the need to protect species of wild fauna and flora and to conserve natural habitats, is transposed by Article 3(3) of
         the Bern Convention, by Article of the Convention on Biological Diversity concluded in Rio de Janeiro on June and
         approved by the Law of March (
          Mémorial  A 1994, p. 429), to which the European Community became a party by Council Decision 93/626/EEC of October concerning
         the conclusion of the Convention on Biological Diversity (OJ L 309, p. 1), and by the Law of August on freedom
         of access to environmental information and rights of action of associations for the protection of nature and the environment
         (
          Mémorial  A 1992, p. 2204). 
         
            
Whilst it maintains that the Law of August just mentioned contains no provision for actively supplying the public
         with information, the Commission acknowledges that Article 3(3) of the Bern Convention and Article of the Convention on
         Biological Diversity are in principle capable of transposing Article 22(c) of the Directive satisfactorily. Nevertheless,
         the institution objects that the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg has failed to show that its legal system includes the principle
         of direct effect of the so-called self-executing provisions of international conventions that are properly approved and published.
         
         
            
Since it is not disputed that the provisions of the Bern Convention and of the Convention on Biological Diversity just mentioned
         are capable of satisfactorily transposing Article 22(c) of the Directive, the Court must confine itself to considering whether
         those provisions have in fact been incorporated into Luxembourg law. 
         
            
There is no doubt that the provisions have been incorporated in the present case. Indeed the conventions in question were
         approved by laws of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg and require no further measures to be taken in order for them to achieve
         their full effect in the internal legal system of that Member State. 
         
            
That being so, the complaint of incorrect transposition of Article 22(c) of the Directive must be rejected. 
         
            
In view of the foregoing, the Court must uphold the complaint of inappropriate transposition of Article 22(b) of the Directive.
         
         Infringement of Article 23(2) of the Directive
         
            
The Commission maintains that the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg has infringed Article 23(2) of the Directive in that the transposition
         measures which that Member State adopted after the Directive's entry into force and communicated to the Commission contain
         no reference to the Directive or were not accompanied by any such reference when officially published. 
         
            
The letter of reply states that the essential purpose of the proposed sectoral plan provided for by the Regional Planning
         Law is the implementation of Directives 79/and 92/and that a list of all national measures transposing the Directive
         is to be published in the  
          Mémorial . 
         
            
However, it is apparent that no such list has been published within the period laid down in the reasoned opinion. 
         
            
It follows that the complaint of infringement of Article 23(2) of the Directive is well founded. 
         
            
In light of the foregoing, it must be held that, by failing to take all the necessary measures to implement fully and correctly
         Articles 1, 4(5), 5(4), 6, 7, 12(1)(b) and (c), 12(2), 12(4), 13(1)(b), 14, 15, 16(1), 22(b) and 23(2) of the Directive in
         conjunction with Annexes I, II, IV, V and VI to the Directive, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg has failed to fulfil its obligations
         under the Directive. 
         
Costs Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if there has been
         an application to that effect. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg has been unsuccessful
         in the majority of its pleas, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs. 
         On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
hereby:  
         
1.
 Declares that, by failing to take all the necessary measures to implement fully and correctly Articles 1, 4(5), 5(4), 6, 7,
            12(1)(b) and (c), 12(2), 12(4), 13(1)(b), 14, 15, 16(1), 22(b) and 23(2) of Council Directive 92/43/EEC of May on
            the conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora in conjunction with Annexes I, II, IV, V and VI to that directive,
            the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive; 
            
2.
 Orders the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg to pay the costs.
            
Puissochet
Gulmann 
Skouris 
Macken
Colneric 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on February 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
J.-P. Puissochet  
Registrar
President of the Sixth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: French.
Top  
 