
Joined Cases C-182/and C-217/Kingdom of Belgium
and
Forum ASBL 
v
Commission of the European Communities
(State aid – Existing aid regime – Tax regime for coordination centres established in Belgium – Application by an association – Admissibility – Commission Decision that the regime does not constitute aid – Change in the Commission’s appraisal – Article 87(1) EC – Protection of legitimate expectations – General principle of equal treatment)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Actions for annulment – Natural or legal persons – Measures of direct and individual concern to them 
(Art. EC)
2.        Actions for annulment – Natural or legal persons – Measures of direct and individual concern to them 
(Art. EC)
3.        State aid – Existing aid
(Arts EC and EC; Council Regulation No 659/1999, Art. 1(b)(v))
4.        State aid – Examination by the Commission 
(Art. EC)
5.        State aid – Meaning 
(Art. 87(1) EC)
6.        State aid – Meaning 
(Art. 87(1) EC)
7.        Acts of the institutions – Statement of reasons – Obligation – Scope 
(Art. EC)
8.        Community law – Principles – Protection of legitimate expectations – Conditions 
9.        State aid – Commission Decision repealing a tax regime made available by way of authorisation 
1.        Under Article EC, a natural or legal person may institute proceedings against a decision addressed to another person only
         if the decision is of direct and individual concern to it.
      
As regards the second of those conditions, the fact that a disputed provision is, by its nature and scope, a provision of
         general application inasmuch as it applies to the traders concerned in general, does not of itself prevent it being of individual
         concern to some.
      
Natural or legal persons may claim that a contested provision is of individual concern to them only if it affects them by
         reason of certain attributes which are peculiar to them or by reason of circumstances in which they are differentiated from
         all other persons.
      
In that regard, where a contested measure affects a group of persons who were identified or identifiable when that measure
         was adopted by reason of criteria specific to the members of the group, those persons may be individually concerned by that
         measure inasmuch as they form part of a limited class of traders. That applies to undertakings in respect of which a Commission
         decision relating to State aid prevents the benefit of national derogating tax measures continuing until the end of the period
         laid down under national legislation or until the renewal of that benefit, which they have applied for and to which they would
         have been entitled.
      
(see paras 55, 58-64)
2.        An association which is responsible for protecting the collective interests of undertakings is, as a rule, entitled to bring
         an action for annulment against a final decision of the Commission in matters of State aid only if those undertakings or some
         of those undertakings themselves have locus standi or if the association can prove an interest of its own.
      
(see para. 56)
3.        Regulation No 659/laying down detailed rules for the application of Article [EC], which codifies the rules relating
         to the exercise by the Commission of the powers conferred on it by Article EC, does not define the concept of ‘evolution
         of the common market’ referred to in Article 1(b)(v), which states that a measure which did not constitute aid when it was
         put into effect is none the less to be treated as existing aid in so far as it ‘subsequently became an aid due to the evolution
         of the common market’. That concept, which may be understood as a change in the economic and legal framework of the sector
         concerned by the measure in question, does not apply in a situation where the Commission alters its appraisal on the basis
         only of a more rigorous application of the Treaty rules on State aid.
      
However, the regulation constitutes a measure of secondary legislation adopted for the purposes of the application of Article
         EC and Article EC, which cannot restrict the scope of those articles, particularly as the Commission derives its powers
         directly from them. Article 88(1) EC entrusts the Commission with the task of keeping under constant review all systems of
         aid existing in the Member States and of proposing to them any appropriate measures required by the progressive development
         or by the functioning of the common market. Should effect not be given to those proposals, Article 88(2) entitles the Commission
         to require the Member State concerned to alter or to abolish the aid within a period of time to be determined.
      
It follows that, in deciding to review the tax regime applicable to certain undertakings in a Member State which, while it
         had been the subject of previous decisions finding that there was no aid, was declared harmful to the common market by a Council
         working group, and by applying to that regime the procedure for monitoring existing aid, which led the Commission to conclude
         that that regime should henceforth constitute State aid incompatible with the common market, the Commission carried out the
         duties entrusted to it under Article EC. The legal basis of such a decision is therefore Articles EC and EC.
      
As the principle of legality was complied with, such a decision constitutes a measure which is certain and the application
         of which was foreseeable by those subject to it. Accordingly, the decision does not infringe the principle of legal certainty.
      
(see paras 70-76)
4.        In the case of an aid programme, the Commission may confine its examination to the characteristics of the programme in question
         in order to determine whether it gives an appreciable advantage to the recipients in relation to their competitors. It is
         not required to examine each particular case in which the regime applies.
      
(see para. 82)
5.        The concept of aid may cover not only positive benefits, such as subsidies, loans or the taking of shares in undertakings,
         but also action which, in various forms, mitigates the charges which are normally included in the budget of an undertaking
         and which, without therefore being subsidies in the strict meaning of the word, are similar in character and have the same
         effect.
      
A measure by which the public authorities grant to certain undertakings a tax exemption which, although not involving a transfer
         of State resources, places the persons to whom it applies in a more favourable financial situation than other taxpayers constitutes
         State aid.
      
(see paras 86-87)
6.        Article 87(1) EC requires that it be determined whether, under a particular statutory scheme, a State measure is such as to
         favour ‘certain undertakings or the production of certain goods’ in comparison with others which, in the light of the objective
         pursued by the system in question, are in a comparable legal and factual situation. If so, the measure concerned fulfils the
         condition of selectivity which is a defining characteristic of the concept of State aid as set out by that provision.
      
(see para. 119)
7.        While the obligation to state reasons for a Community measure laid down under Article EC must be appropriate to the act
         at issue and must disclose in a clear and unequivocal fashion the reasoning followed by the institution which adopted the
         measure in question in such a way as to enable the persons concerned to ascertain the reasons for the measure and to enable
         the competent court to exercise its power of review, the Commission is not required in a decision finding an aid regime to
         be incompatible with the common market to state the reasons why it made a different assessment of the same aid regime in its
         previous decisions. The concept of State aid must be applied to an objective situation, which falls to be appraised on the
         date on which the Commission takes its decision.
      
(see para. 137)
8.        The right to rely on the principle of the protection of legitimate expectations extends to any person in a situation where
         a Community authority has caused him to entertain expectations which are justified. However, a person may not plead infringement
         of the principle unless he has been given precise assurances by the administration. Similarly, if a prudent and alert economic
         operator could have foreseen the adoption of a Community measure likely to affect his interests, he cannot plead that principle
         if the measure is adopted.
      
Furthermore, even if the Community had first created a situation capable of giving rise to legitimate expectations, an overriding
         public interest may preclude transitional measures from being adopted in respect of situations which arose before the new
         rules came into force but which are still subject to change. However, in the absence of an interest of that kind, the absence
         of transitional measures intended to protect the expectations which traders might legitimately have derived from the retention
         of Community rules may be considered as an infringement of a superior rule of law.
      
(see paras 147-149)
9.        There is an infringement of both the principle of legitimate expectations and that of equal treatment where the Commission
         adopts a decision which, reversing its previous findings to contrary effect, repeals a particular tax regime on the ground
         that it involves State aid incompatible with the common market, without laying down transitional measures in favour of traders
         requiring an authorisation, renewable without difficulty, in order to benefit from that regime which expires at the same time
         as or shortly after the date of the decision’s notification, while not precluding authorisations in place on that date continuing
         to have effect for several years, where those traders, who are not in a position to adapt to the change to the regime in question
         in a short timescale, were on any basis entitled to expect that a Commission decision reversing its previous approach would
         give them the time necessary to address that change in approach and where no overriding public interest precludes the necessary
         time being afforded to them.
      
(see paras 155-167, 172-174)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
June (*)
      
(State aid – Existing aid regime – Tax regime for coordination centres established in Belgium – Application by an association – Admissibility – Commission Decision that the regime does not constitute aid – Change in the Commission’s appraisal – Article 87(1) EC – Protection of legitimate expectations – General principle of equal treatment)
In Joined Cases C-182/and C-217/03,
ACTIONS for annulment under Article EC, brought on and April 2003,
Kingdom of Belgium, represented initially by A. Snoecx, and subsequently by E. Dominkovits, acting as Agents, assisted by B. van de Walle de
         Ghelcke, J. Wouters and P. Kelley, avocats,
      
applicant in Case C-182/Forum ASBL, established in Brussels (Belgium), represented by A. Sutton and J. Killick, Barristers,
      
applicant in Case C-217/v
Commission of the European Communities, represented by G. Rozet, R. Lyal, and V. Di Bucci, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, J. Makarczyk, R. Schintgen, P. Kūris (Rapporteur) and J. Klučka,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: P. Léger,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on September 2005,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on February 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Kingdom of Belgium seeks the annulment of Commission Decision 2003/757/EC of February on the
         aid scheme implemented by Belgium for coordination centres established in Belgium (OJ L 282, p. 25) (‘the contested decision’)
         in so far as it does not authorise it to grant, even temporarily, renewal of coordination centre status to the coordination
         centres which benefited from that scheme as at December 2000.
      
Forum ASBL (‘Forum 187’) requests that the contested decision be annulled.
      
 Legal framework
 Monitoring of existing aid systems under Community law 
Article 88(1) and the first subparagraph of Article 88(2) EC provide:
      
‘1.      The Commission shall, in cooperation with Member States, keep under constant review all systems of aid existing in those States.
         It shall propose to the latter any appropriate measures required by the progressive development or by the functioning of the
         common market. 
      
2.       If, after giving notice to the parties concerned to submit their comments, the Commission finds that aid granted by a State
         or through State resources is not compatible with the common market having regard to Article 87, or that such aid is being
         misused, it shall decide that the State concerned shall abolish or alter such aid within a period of time to be determined
         by the Commission.’
      
Article 17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 659/of March laying down detailed rules for the application of Article
         [EC] (OJ L 83, p. 1) (‘the Regulation’) states: 
      
‘Where the Commission considers that an existing aid scheme is not, or is no longer, compatible with the common market, it
         shall inform the Member State concerned of its preliminary view and give the Member State concerned the opportunity to submit
         its comments within a period of one month. In duly justified cases, the Commission may extend this period.’
      
 The Belgian tax regime for coordination centres
The Belgian tax regime for coordination centres, which derogates from ordinary law, is governed by Royal Decree of December concerning the establishment of coordination centres (Moniteur belge of January 1983), as supplemented and amended on several occasions.
      
To benefit from the regime, a centre must first receive individual authorisation by royal decree. In order to obtain that
         authorisation, the centre must form part of a multinational group with capital and reserves of at least BEF million
         and an annual consolidated turnover of at least BEF million. Only certain preparatory, auxiliary and centralisation
         activities are authorised, and undertakings in the financial sector are excluded from the regime. At the end of the first
         two years of their activity, centres must have in Belgium at least the equivalent of full-time employees.
      
The authorisation granted to a centre is valid for years and renewable for the same duration. 
      
The tax regime for authorised coordination centres derogates from the ordinary tax regime in several respects.
      
First, a centre’s taxable income is determined at a standard rate according to the cost-plus method. It represents a percentage
         of the total operating expenses and costs, from which staff costs, financial charges and corporation tax are excluded.
      
Secondly, the centres are exempt from property tax on the buildings they use to carry on their professional activity.
      
Thirdly, the 0.5% registration fee is not payable on contributions made to a centre or on increases in its registered capital.
      
Fourthly, dividends interest and royalties distributed by centres are, with certain exceptions, exempt from withholding tax,
         as is income received by the centres on their cash deposits.
      
Fifthly, the centres pay an annual tax fixed at BEF per full-time member of staff, but this cannot exceed BEF per centre.
      
 Documents of the Council of the European Union concerning harmful tax competition 
As part of an overall review of harmful tax competition, the Council, on December 1997, adopted a code of conduct for business
         taxation (OJ C 2, p. 2). In that context, the Member States committed themselves to the gradual elimination of certain
         fiscal measures considered harmful, while the Commission expressed its intention to examine or re-examine, in the light of
         the State aid rules, the tax regimes in force in the Member States.
      
The Belgian rules relating to the tax regime for coordination centres were among the national fiscal measures affected by
         those various initiatives.
      
 Facts prior to the contested decision 
The tax regime for the coordination centres had been examined by the Commission when it was introduced. In particular, in
         decisions communicated in the form of letters on May and March (‘the decisions of and 1987’), the Commission
         had found, in essence, that such a regime, based on a system for a flat-rate assessment of the income of the coordination
         centres, did not contain an aid element. 
      
That appraisal was confirmed in the reply given on the Commission’s behalf by Mr Brittan, the Commissioner for Competition,
         on September to written question No 1735/by Mr Gijs de Vries, Member of the European Parliament (OJ C 63,
         p. 37).
      
After adopting, on November 1998, a notice on the application of the State aid rules to measures relating to direct business
         taxation (OJ C 384, p. 3), the Commission undertook a comprehensive review of the tax legislation of the Member States
         from the point of view of the State aid rules.
      
In the course of that review, the Commission asked the Belgian authorities, in February 1999, for certain information relating,
         in particular, to the regime for the coordination centres. The latter replied in March 1999.
      
In July 2000, the Commission informed the Belgian authorities that the regime appeared to constitute State aid. For the purpose
         of initiating the cooperation procedure, in accordance with Article 17(2) of the Regulation, the Commission invited the Belgian
         authorities to submit their observations within one month.
      
At its meeting of and November 2000, the Ecofin Council noted that, in accordance with its resolution of December
         1997, all harmful measures relating to direct business taxation were to have been eliminated by January 2003. It adopted
         a proposal from the Presidency of the European Union that, as regards undertakings benefiting from a harmful tax regime on
         December 2000, the effect of that regime should expire at the latest on December 2005, whether it was a regime granted
         for a fixed period or not. It also decided that it could, on a case-by-case basis and in order to take account of special
         circumstances, resolve, following a report from the ‘Code of Conduct’ Group, to extend the effects of certain harmful tax
         regimes beyond December 2005.
      
On July 2001, the Commission adopted four proposals for appropriate measures pursuant to Article 88(1) EC, concerning inter
         alia the regime for coordination centres. It proposed to the Belgian authorities that a number of changes be made to that
         regime, while at the same time providing, on a transitional basis, that centres authorised before the date on which those
         measures were approved might continue to benefit from the previous regime until December 2005.
      
Since the appropriate measures it had proposed were not approved by the Belgian authorities, the Commission, by decision notified
         by letter of February (OJ C 147, p. 2), initiated the formal investigation procedure in accordance with Article
         19(2) of the Regulation. In particular, it invited the Kingdom of Belgium to submit its observations and to provide any information
         relevant to an assessment of the measure in question. It also invited that Member State and interested third parties to submit
         observations and to supply any relevant information for determining whether the beneficiaries of the regime at issue had legitimate
         expectations that provisional measures would be laid down. 
      
After the initial one-month time-limit had been extended, the Belgian authorities sent their observations to the Commission
         by letter of April 2002.
      
By letter of May 2002, the authorities notified a draft law designed to amend Royal Decree No 187. The draft was registered
         by the Commission as new aid under reference N351/2002.
      
In July 2002, following several meetings, the Commission sent the Kingdom of Belgium a request for additional information
         regarding both the existing regime and the draft which had been notified. The Belgian authorities responded to the request
         by letter of August 2002. Interested third parties also took part in the formal procedure to investigate the measure in
         question.
      
On January 2003, the Ecofin Council approved the extension of the effects of certain harmful tax regimes beyond 2005. As
         regards the Belgian tax regime for coordination centres, it provided that centres subject to the scheme on December could continue to benefit from it until December 2010.
      
 The contested decision
On February 2003, the Commission adopted the contested decision, which was notified on the same day to the Kingdom of Belgium.
         After finding that the wording of Article of the operative part of the decision could seem inconsistent with the conclusions
         drawn in points and of the grounds of the decision, the Commission decided, on April 2003, to amend Article by
         means of a corrigendum. That amendment was notified to the Member State on April 2003.
      
In the contested decision, the Commission first of all gave its reasons for classifying the regime for coordination centres
         as existing aid and explained the legal basis for the procedure it adopted. The decision stated that Article 1(b) of Regulation
         No 659/could serve as a legal basis in the matter and that, failing that, Articles EC and EC constituted the real
         legal basis for the Commission’s action.
      
The Commission also stated in the contested decision that, if it were to be regarded as a withdrawal or amendment of the decisions
         of and 1987, the contested decision satisfies the conditions for the exercise of the Commission’s right to withdraw or
         amend any unlawful favourable measure.
      
In the remainder of the contested decision, the Commission set out its reasons for finding that the various measures which
         form the tax regime for coordination centres met the requirements of Article 87(1) EC, but did not qualify for any of the
         derogations laid down under Article 87(2) and (3). 
      
With regard to the legitimate expectations invoked by the coordination centres, the contested decision states in its grounds:
         
      
‘(117) The Commission recognises that there is a legitimate expectation on the part of beneficiaries of the scheme. It is therefore
         right that the Commission should allow the centres that hold an approval on December to continue to enjoy the benefits
         of the scheme until the end of their period of approval, if this was ongoing at the time of the present Decision, up to December at the latest. This view is based on the following grounds.
      
(118)          ... [the] agreements [approved by the tax administration] related only to the facts and not to the scheme being implemented.
         They cannot, therefore, give any legal guarantee that the scheme, as it stood on the date approval was granted, would be maintained
         for the next years. ...
      
(119)          ... Although approval gives no guarantee as to the continued existence of the advantageous nature of the scheme, the Commission
         admits that centres were established, investment made and commitments entered into in the reasonable and legitimate expectation
         of a certain degree of continuity in the economic conditions, including the tax regime. The Commission has accordingly decided
         to allow a transitional period so that the cost-plus scheme for the present beneficiaries can be gradually phased out.
      
(120)          Because the approvals do not represent a right to the continuation of the scheme or its advantageous character, even during
         the approval period, the Commission believes that they cannot, under any circumstances, confer a right to have the scheme
         renewed when the present approval expires. In view of the explicit restriction of the approval to years it is impossible
         that a legitimate expectation should have been created as to automatic renewal, which would have amounted to approval that
         could theoretically last for ever.’
      
The conclusions set out in points to of the grounds of the contested decision state that:
      
‘(121) The Commission concludes that the tax scheme covering coordination centres in Belgium is incompatible with the common market
         and that measures must be taken to remedy the incompatibility of its various components by abolishing or amending them. As
         of the date of notification of this Decision, new beneficiaries can no longer be covered by this scheme or sections thereof,
         nor can it be maintained by renewing existing approvals. The Commission notes that centres approved in have not benefited
         from the scheme since December 2002.
      
(122)          As regards the centres currently covered by the scheme, the Commission acknowledges that the Decision approving Royal
         Decree No and the reply to a Parliamentary question given by the Member of the Commission responsible for competition
         gave rise to a legitimate expectation that the scheme did not violate the rules on State aid enshrined in the Treaty.
      
(123)          In view of the substantial investments made on this basis, as well as the need to respect legitimate expectations and the
         legal certainty of the beneficiaries, it is justifiable to allow a reasonable period for eliminating the scheme’s impact on
         the existing approved centres. The Commission takes the view that this reasonable period comes to an end on December 2010.
         The centres whose approval expires before this date can no longer make use of their approval after the deadline. After the
         date on which approval lapses and at any rate after December 2010, it will be unlawful to grant or maintain the tax concessions
         in question.’
      
The first two articles of the operative part of the contested decision provide:
      
‘Article The tax scheme which currently operates in Belgium for the benefit of coordination centres approved under Royal Decree No
         constitutes aid incompatible with the common market.
      
Article Belgium is required to withdraw the aid referred to in Article or to amend it in such a way as to make it compatible with
         the common market.
      
As of the date of notification of this Decision, the benefits of this scheme or sections thereof may no longer be granted
         to new beneficiaries or maintained by renewing existing agreements.
      
With regard to centres approved before December 2000, the scheme may be maintained until the expiry date of the individual
         approval applying on the date of notification of this Decision and until December at the latest. In accordance with
         the second paragraph, if approval is renewed prior to that date the benefits of the scheme dealt with in this Decision may
         no longer be granted, even temporarily.’ 
      
 Facts subsequent to the contested decision 
The amendments to Royal Decree which had been notified by the Belgian authorities to the Commission on May were
         adopted by the Belgian Parliament on December and published in the Moniteur Belge on December 2002. 
      
On April 2003, the Commission authorised the new regime in so far as it laid down in particular the principle of prior
         authorisation for coordination centres for a period of years and that the tax base was to be determined by including all
         operating costs together with an appropriate profit margin. However, as the new regime also provided for such centres to be
         exempt from withholding tax and capital duty, as well as for ‘special advantages and advantages without any quid pro quo’ to be exempt from tax, the Commission initiated a formal investigation procedure in relation to those three measures.
      
By its Decision 2005/378/EC of September concerning the aid scheme which Belgium is proposing to implement for coordination
         centres (OJ L 125, p. 10), the Commission held that, having regard to the undertakings given by the Belgian Government
         as to the abolition of the exemptions in question and their replacement by measures for exemption or reduction applying to
         all undertakings established in that country as well as to bring all the ‘special advantages and advantages without any quid pro quo’ extended to the coordination centres within the charge to tax, the measures comprised in the new tax regime for coordination
         centres did not constitute aid falling within Article 87(1) EC.
      
At the hearing of September 2005, the representative of the Kingdom of Belgium confirmed the information given to the Commission
         by letter of February 2005, to the effect that that new regime had been abandoned. 
      
In addition, by letter of March 2003, the Belgian Minister for Finance informed the Commission pursuant to Article 88(3)
         EC that he intended to grant, until December 2005, the benefit of certain tax measures to undertakings which were subject
         to the regime for coordination centres on December with an authorisation which expired between February and
         December 2005.
      
The Kingdom of Belgium also asked the Council, by letter of the same day, for those measures to be declared to be compatible
         with the common market in accordance with the third subparagraph of Article 88(2) EC.
      
In a letter of April 2003, the President of the Commission stated that the contested decision was enforceable and that
         the letter of March referred to above could not be considered as the notification of new aid for the purposes of Article
         88(3) EC.
      
By letter of May 2003, the Kingdom of Belgium again informed the Commission that it was its intention to implement the
         measures referred to in its letter of March 2003.
      
At its meeting of June 2003, the Ecofin Council gave its approval in principle to that request and asked the Committee of
         Permanent Representatives to take any measures necessary to enable the Council to adopt the planned decision as soon as possible,
         and in any event before the end of June 2003.
      
By Council Decision 2003/531/EC of July on the granting of aid by the Belgian Government to certain coordination centres
         established in Belgium (OJ L 184, p. 17), adopted pursuant to Article 88(2) EC, ‘the aid which Belgium plans to grant
         in the period up to December to undertakings authorised as at December to act as coordination centres under
         Royal Decree No …, and whose authorisations expire between February and December 2005’ was declared to be compatible
         with the common market. That decision formed the subject‑matter of Case C‑399/03.
      
By letter of July sent in reply to the notification of May referred to above, the Commission confirmed the
         position set out in its letter of April 2003.
      
By order of June in Joined Cases C-182/R and C-217/R Belgium and Forum v Commission [2003] ECR I‑6887, the President of the Court ordered that the operation of the contested decision be suspended in so far
         as it prohibits the Kingdom of Belgium from renewing coordination centre authorisations effective as at the date of notification
         of the decision.
      
 Forms of order sought and procedure before the Court 
In Case C-182/03, the Kingdom of Belgium claims that the Court should:
      
–        annul the second and third paragraphs of Article of the contested decision in so far as it provides that ‘as of the date
         of notification of [the] decision, the benefits of this scheme or sections thereof may no longer be … maintained by renewing
         existing agreements’ and that ‘in accordance with the second paragraph, if approval is renewed prior to [December 2010]
         the benefits of the scheme dealt with in this Decision may no longer be granted, even temporarily’;
      
–        order the Commission to pay the costs, including those relating to the interlocutory proceedings.
In Case C-217/03, Forum claims that the Court should:
      
–        annul the contested decision and, in the alternative, annul it in so far as it failed to lay down appropriate transitional
         measures;
      
–        order the Commission to pay the costs in Case C-217/and in the case which gave rise to the order of the Court of First
         Instance in Case T-276/Forum v Commission [2003] ECR II-2075.
      
The Commission contends that the Court should, in each case:
      
–        dismiss the actions;
–        order the applicants to pay the costs, including those relating to the interlocutory proceedings. 
By a separate document registered on June 2003, the Commission raised an objection of inadmissibility against Forum 187’s
         application.
      
By decision of March 2004, the Court decided to join the objection of inadmissibility to the substance of the case and
         to continue the procedure.
      
By order of the President of the Second Chamber of April 2005, Cases C‑182/and C-271/were joined for the purposes
         of the oral procedure and the judgment.
      
 Admissibility
The Commission contends that Forum has no locus standi to challenge the contested decision – which is not addressed to it – on the ground that it is not directly and individually
         concerned by the decision.
      
Forum contests that objection of inadmissibility and argues, first, that there is direct and individual concern on the
         part of centres which had their authorisation renewed in and which will cease to be entitled to benefit from
         the tax regime at issue on December 2010, and also eight centres with an application for renewal pending on the date on
         which the contested decision was adopted. Secondly, it regards itself as being affected by the contested decision in its capacity
         as the representative body for the coordination centres, which is recognised by the Belgian authorities, and with which it
         has a semi-official status which allowed it to play an important part in the administrative procedure before the Commission,
         and as the contested decision affects its raison d’être.
      
Under Article EC, a natural or legal person may institute proceedings against a decision addressed to another person only
         if the decision is of direct and individual concern to it.
      
An association such as Forum which is responsible for protecting the collective interests of coordination centres established
         in Belgium is, as a rule, entitled to bring an action for annulment against a final decision of the Commission in matters
         of State aid only if the undertakings which it represents or some of those undertakings themselves have locus standi (Case C-6/Federmineraria and Others v Commission [1993] ECR I‑6357, paragraphs and 16) or if it can prove an interest of its own (Case C-313/CIRFS and Others v Commission [1993] ECR I‑1125, paragraphs and 30).
      
As regards the first condition laid down under the fourth paragraph of Article EC, it is not in dispute that the Commission
         decision prohibiting the Belgian Government from renewing the authorisations of coordination centres which expired after February and restricting in any event the temporal effects of current authorisations to December is mandatory
         in its application and that the coordination centres in question are therefore directly concerned by the contested decision.
      
As regards the second condition laid down under Article EC, the Court has repeatedly held that the fact that a disputed
         provision is, by its nature and scope, a provision of general application inasmuch as it applies to the traders concerned
         in general, does not of itself prevent it being of individual concern to some (see, to that effect, Case C-309/Codorniu [1994] ECR I‑1853, paragraph 19).
      
Natural or legal persons may claim that a contested provision is of individual concern to them only if it affects them by
         reason of certain attributes which are peculiar to them or by reason of circumstances in which they are differentiated from
         all other persons (see Case 25/Plaumann v Commission [1963] ECR 95). 
      
In that regard, the Court has held that, where a contested measure affects a group of persons who were identified or identifiable
         when that measure was adopted by reason of criteria specific to the members of the group, those persons might be individually
         concerned by that measure inasmuch as they form part of a limited class of traders (see Case 11/Piraiki-Patraiki and Others v Commission [1985] ECR 207, paragraph 31, and Case C-152/Sofrimport v Commission [1990] ECR I-2477, paragraph 11). 
      
In the first place, not only is the effect of the contested decision that December becomes the last date on which
         the authorisations of the coordination centres which had their authorisation renewed in and are to end, rather than
         that date being set in or 2012, but also that those centres were fully identifiable at the time when the contested decision
         was adopted. The coordination centres which are concerned by the effects of the decision therefore had locus standi as individuals to bring proceedings against it.
      
In the second place, the contested decision did not lay down any transitional measures for the benefit of the coordination
         centres with an authorisation which had expired at the same time as the contested decision was notified and those with a pending
         application for authorisation on the date on which the decision was notified.
      
Thus, eight centres which had a pending application for renewal of their authorisation are concerned. These form part of a
         closed class, the members of which are particularly affected by the contested decision, as they could no longer obtain a renewal
         of their authorisation. Those centres accordingly had locus standi as individuals to bring proceedings against the contested decision.
      
It follows from the above, without it being necessary to consider whether Forum can prove an interest of its own in bringing
         an action, that that association has locus standi in that it represents, first, coordination centres the entitlement of which to benefit from the disputed regime was limited
         to December and, secondly, eight centres with pending applications for renewal on the date on which the contested
         decision was notified.
      
 The merits of the actions
As the Kingdom of Belgium and Forum each seek the annulment of the contested decision in so far as it does not lay down
         any transitional provisions, it is appropriate first of all to examine the claims of Forum for the annulment of the decision
         in so far as it classifies the disputed aid as incompatible with the common market.
      
 The claims of Forum for the annulment of the contested decision in so far as it classifies the disputed measures as State
            aid incompatible with the common market
 The plea alleging the lack of any legal basis 
By this plea, Forum maintains that the contested decision has no legal basis and infringes the principle of legal certainty.
         Given the positions adopted by the Commission years previously, the decision cannot be based on Article EC or Article
         EC, nor can it be based on Article 1(b)(v) of the Regulation, since it makes no reference to any development in the common
         market
      
The Commission cannot, moreover, invoke the right to correct its mistakes. The association infers from that that, in the present
         case, the principle of legal certainty, which requires that previous decisions be adhered to, was infringed.
      
The Court notes at the outset that, by the contested decision, the Commission did not withdraw the decisions of and 1987.
         What it did was to undertake a fresh investigation of the tax regime for coordination centres, by applying to that regime
         the procedure for monitoring existing aid and concluded from that that the regime should henceforth constitute State aid incompatible
         with the common market.
      
In order to determine whether the Commission was entitled to carry out such a new investigation, it should be noted not only
         that the principle of legal certainty requires that Community legislation must be certain and its application foreseeable
         by those subject to it (Case 325/Ireland v Commission [1987] ECR 5041, paragraph 18, and Case C‑63/Duff and Others [1996] ECR I‑569, paragraph 20), but also that its application must be combined with that of the principle of legality (Joined
         Cases 42/and 49/SNUPAT v High Authority [1961] ECR 53, 87).
      
In that regard, it is common ground, as the Advocate General points out in points and of his Opinion, that the Regulation,
         which codifies the rules relating to the exercise by the Commission of the powers conferred on it by Article EC, does not
         define the concept of ‘evolution of the common market’ referred to in Article 1(b)(v), which states that a measure which did
         not constitute aid when it was put into effect is nonetheless to be treated as existing aid in so far as it ‘subsequently
         became an aid due to the evolution of the common market’.
      
That concept, which may be understood as a change in the economic and legal framework of the sector concerned by the measure
         in question, does not apply in a situation where, as in the present case, the Commission alters its appraisal on the basis
         only of a more rigorous application of the Treaty rules on State aid.
      
It must however be noted that the Regulation constitutes a measure of secondary legislation adopted for the purposes of the
         application of Article EC and Article EC, which cannot restrict the scope of those articles, particularly as the Commission
         derives its powers directly from them.
      
Article 88(1) EC entrusts the Commission with the task of keeping under constant review all systems of aid existing in the
         Member States and of proposing to them any appropriate measures required by the progressive development or by the functioning
         of the common market. 
      
Should effect not be given to those proposals, Article 88(2) entitles the Commission to require the Member State concerned
         to alter or to abolish the aid within a period of time to be determined. 
      
It follows that, in deciding to review the tax regime for coordination centres in force in Belgium, which had been declared
         harmful to the common market by the Code of Conduct Group, the Commission carried out the duties entrusted to it under Article
         EC. The legal basis of the contested decision is therefore Article EC and Article EC.
      
As the principle of legality was thus complied with, the contested decision constitutes a measure which is certain and the
         application of which was foreseeable by those subject to it. Accordingly, the decision does not infringe the principle of
         legal certainty.
      
Furthermore, the only procedure which the Commission could apply in the present case is that laid down by the Regulation for
         the monitoring of existing aid. It is beyond doubt that the tax regime in question constitutes an existing measure, as the
         Commission was notified of it in and the regime had not been materially altered.
      
Forum therefore has no grounds for arguing that, in taking Articles and of the Regulation as a basis for initiating
         the formal investigation procedure, as it indicated in its letter of July to the Belgian authorities, and thereafter
         referring only to Article EC and Article EC, the Commission committed an error of law. The first plea should accordingly
         be rejected.
      
 The plea alleging infringement of Article 87(1) EC 
By this plea, Forum contends that the tax regime for coordination centres does not constitute State aid for the purposes
         of Article 87(1) EC. To that end, it argues not only that the method of assessment of the tax regime used by the Commission
         was unduly general, but also that the various measures comprised in the regime in question did not meet the conditions laid
         down by that article. In particular, it states that those measures confer no benefit on the centres, do not involve a transfer
         of State resources, are not selective in nature and that the Commission has failed to establish that they have an impact on
         competition and intra-Community trade. In any event, the regime is justified by the nature and general scheme of the Belgian
         tax system.
      
–       The method of assessment of the tax regime 
Forum complains that the Commission failed to have proper regard to the competence of the Member States in tax matters
         and that its appraisal of the regime in question was unduly general.
      
It should be pointed out, first, that rules relating to tax are not excluded from the scope of Article EC.
      
Secondly, in the case of an aid programme, the Commission may confine its examination to the characteristics of the programme
         in question in order to determine whether it gives an appreciable advantage to the recipients in relation to their competitors
         (Case C‑75/Belgium v Commission [1999] ECR I‑3671, paragraph 48). It is not required to examine each particular case in which the regime applies (Case C-278/Greece v Commission [2004] ECR I-3997, paragraph 24, and the case-law cited there).
      
The first part of the plea must accordingly be rejected.
      
–       The conditions laid down under Article 87(1) EC 
The first point to be noted is that it is settled case-law that classification as aid requires that all the conditions set
         out in Article 87(1) EC be met (Case C-280/Altmark Trans and Regierungspräsidium Magdeburg [2003] ECR I‑7747, paragraph 74).
      
It is accordingly necessary to consider each of those conditions.
      
i)     Whether certain undertakings are favoured 
The concept of aid may cover not only positive benefits, such as subsidies, loans or the taking of shares in undertakings,
         but also action which, in various forms, mitigates the charges which are normally included in the budget of an undertaking
         and which, without therefore being subsidies in the strict meaning of the word, are similar in character and have the same
         effect (Case C-126/Gemo [2003] ECR I‑13769, paragraph 28, and the case-law cited there).
      
Furthermore, the Court has held that a measure by which the public authorities grant to certain undertakings a tax exemption
         which, although not involving a transfer of State resources, places the persons to whom it applies in a more favourable financial
         situation than other taxpayers constitutes State aid (Case C‑387/Banco Exterior de España [1994] ECR I‑877, paragraph 14).
      
The Commission held in the contested decision that the method of determining taxable income, the exemption from property tax,
         withholding tax and capital duty and the system of notional withholding tax constitute advantages for the coordination centres.
      
Forum challenges that appraisal. 
      
In the first place, the Commission took the view in points to of the contested decision that the flat-rate assessment
         of income under the cost-plus method constitutes an economic advantage for the purposes of Article EC. 
      
Under the regime in question, taxable profits are set at a flat-rate amount which represents a percentage of the full amount
         of operating costs and expenses, from which staff costs and financial charges are excluded.
      
Moreover, the profit margin of a coordination centre is, as a rule, to be set by reference to the activity which it actually
         carries on. If the centre itself charges for some of its services at a rate that corresponds to its costs plus a percentage
         for profits, that percentage can be adopted, provided it is not exceptional. Where no objective criteria exist for establishing
         the percentage of profits to be taken into account, the latter is normally set at 8%.
      
However, the taxable profits of the centre may not be less than the total of the expenditure or charges that are not deductible
         as business costs and the ‘special advantages and advantages without any quid pro quo’ extended to the centre by the members of the group. That profit is taxed at the normal rate of corporation tax.
      
That method of assessment of taxable income is based on the so-called cost-plus method recommended by the Organisation for
         Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) for the taxation of services provided by a subsidiary or a fixed establishment
         on behalf of companies belonging to the same international group and established in other States. 
      
In order to decide whether a method of assessment of taxable income such as that laid down under the regime for coordination
         centres confers an advantage on them, it is necessary, as the Commission suggests at point of the contested decision, to
         compare that regime with the ordinary tax system, based on the difference between profits and outgoings of an undertaking
         carrying on its activities in conditions of free competition.
      
In that regard, the staff costs and the financial costs incurred in cash‑flow management and financing are factors which make
         a major contribution to enabling the coordination centres to earn revenue, inasmuch as those centres provide services, particularly
         of a financial nature. Accordingly, the effect of the exclusion of those costs from the expenditure which serves to determine
         the taxable income of the centres is that the transfer prices do not resemble those which would be charged in conditions of
         free competition.
      
It follows that such an exclusion confers an economic advantage on the centres.
      
Contrary to what Forum contends, that analysis cannot be called into question either by the fact that the inclusion of
         the financial charges could, in some cases, lead to a tax base that was unduly high or by the scale of the tax burden that
         might be imposed on the group, nor can it be called into question by the fact that a centre may be taxed when it has not made
         any profits. Each of those factors is a necessary incident of the cost-plus system.
      
Furthermore, the annual charge introduced from January of EUR per full-time staff member, capped at EUR 000, does not offset the positive effects of the method of calculation adopted, as the cap corresponds to the minimum number
         of employees which the centres are required to employ by the end of their first two years of their activity. 
      
The same point applies to the rate of 8% applied by default to operating expenses in order to determine the tax base, inasmuch
         as that rate is applied to a base which has already been reduced and the marginal rate differs widely in practice between
         one centre and another, as it depends on the activity which is carried on.
      
Lastly, as the Advocate General stated at point of his Opinion, the Commission is right to argue that the alternative
         tax base, intended to avoid possible abuses by laying down a minimum basis of assessment, does not extinguish the advantage
         conferred by the combined application of the abovementioned exclusions and the rate of 8%. That base includes only amounts
         which are also liable to tax in Belgium in the case of companies that are not subject to the disputed regime.
      
In the light of the above points, the Commission was correct to hold that the rules governing the determination of taxable
         income constitute an advantage for the coordination centres and the groups to which they belong.
      
In the second place, the Commission held in points and of the contested decision that the exemption from property tax
         from which the coordination centres benefit confers an economic advantage on them.
      
The tax regime in question exempts the centres from property tax on the buildings which they use in order to carry on their
         activities, although that tax is, generally speaking, a charge which is included in the budget of every company which owns
         immovable property in Belgium, that is to say built and unbuilt immovable property, including materials and equipment which
         are immovable owing to their intrinsic nature or the use to which they are put.
      
It follows that the exemption from that tax constitutes an economic advantage. The fact that only 5% of the coordination centres
         benefit from it in practice, as all the others hold their buildings under lease, does not affect that assessment, since the
         choice between owning a building and leasing it is a matter entirely at the discretion of the centres.
      
In the third place, the Commission held in points and of the contested decision that the exemption from capital duty
         which the coordination centres enjoy also constitutes an economic advantage.
      
As the rule in Belgium is that capital contributions are taxable transactions, every company having a share capital should
         therefore be liable to that tax. The exemption which the coordination centres enjoy, which applies both to contributions on
         start-up and on increases in registered capital, cannot therefore be regarded as anything other than an advantage.
      
The fact that Article 7(1) of Council Directive 69/335/EEC of July concerning indirect taxes on the raising of capital
         (OJ, English Special Edition 1969(II), p. 412), as amended by Council Directive 85/303/EEC of June (OJ L 156,
         p. 23), provided for transactions that were in place on July to be maintained has no bearing on that assessment, since
         the capital duty exemption at issue applies only to certain types of company and is thus not one of a general nature.
      
In the fourth place, at points to of the contested decision, the Commission classified the exemption of the coordination
         centres from withholding tax as an economic advantage.
      
Under the regime in question, there is no liability to withholding tax, that is to say deductions at source on dividends,
         interest – except for interest paid to beneficiaries who are liable to tax in Belgium – royalties paid by the coordination
         centres and income received on cash deposits.
      
The Commission’s findings show that withholding tax is the definitive Belgian tax on income distributed to non-resident companies
         which are unable to have the income offset or refunded in the State in which they are established.
      
It follows that, by exempting the coordination centres from payment of that tax, the regime at issue confers on them an advantage,
         the existence of which cannot, on any basis, be challenged on the ground that other exemptions from that tax have been granted
         to different types of undertakings.
      
In the fifth place, the Commission held in point of the contested decision that the grant of a notional withholding tax
         constitutes an advantage.
      
Not only are the recipients of payments made by the coordination centres exempt from withholding tax, but they also enjoy
         a flat-rate deduction on the total amount of tax they are required to pay.
      
It is clear from the oral argument presented at the hearing that the rate of the notional withholding tax was reduced to zero
         in 1991.
      
However, interest paid on long-term loans entered into before July continues to be exempted. Such a situation accordingly
         confers an advantage on the coordination centres concerned.
      
By contrast, the fact that the rate of that tax, which has been reduced to zero, may be amended by royal decree constitutes,
         at best, no more than a contingent and future advantage. Such a contingency does not provide a basis for classifying that
         measure as State aid.
      
It follows from the above that the regime in question confers an advantage on the coordination centres.
      
ii)  Selectivity
It must be observed that, according to settled case-law, Article 87(1) EC requires that it be determined whether, under a
         particular statutory scheme, a State measure is such as to favour ‘certain undertakings or the production of certain goods’
         in comparison with others which, in the light of the objective pursued by the system in question, are in a comparable legal
         and factual situation. If so, the measure concerned fulfils the condition of selectivity which is a defining characteristic
         of the concept of State aid as set out by that provision (see Case C-172/Heiser [2005] ECR I-1627, paragraph 40, and the case-law cited there).
      
Thus, it is clear from the above analysis that the exemptions from property and withholding tax, from capital duty and the
         granting of a notional withholding tax constitute derogations from the ordinary Belgian tax regime. The point, relied on by
         Forum 187, that a number of other derogations exist, does not undermine the finding that the regime for coordination centres
         is, in fact, derogatory in nature and that it restricts those exemptions to the coordination centres alone.
      
The selective character of those exemptions is accordingly established.
      
As regards the method of determining taxable income, while Forum argues that the regime in question applies to those companies
         for which it was specifically designed, so that the risk of double taxation may be avoided, it is a matter of agreement that
         the regime applies only to international groups having subsidiaries which are established in at least four different countries,
         which have capital and reserves of at least BEF million, and have an annual consolidated turnover of at least BEF million.
      
It follows that the regime in question is also selective in that regard.
      
That finding is not called into question by Forum 187’s argument that the regime in question does not constitute a derogation
         from the ordinary tax regime which applies to undertakings, but a different type of regime, dictated by fiscal logic and the
         need to provide a solution to the problem of double taxation of services provided within an international group of companies.
      
First, Forum provides no explanation as to why the various measures laid down under the regime in question are justified
         by the tax system in force in Belgium. Secondly, Forum has not shown in what way the aim of providing a resolution for
         the problem of double taxation of intra-group services justifies restricting the benefit of the regime in question to centres
         established by groups of a particular size, nor in what way such an aim made each of the various advantages comprised in that
         regime necessary.
      
Forum has thus not established that the regime in question is justified by the nature or the general scheme of the Belgian
         tax system of which it forms part and it must therefore be held that the selective nature of the scheme has been established.
      
iii)  The requirement that the aid be granted through State resources and be imputable to the State 
For advantages to be capable of being categorised as aid within the meaning of Article 87(1) EC, they must, first, be granted
         directly or indirectly through State resources and, second, be imputable to the State (GEMO, paragraph 24)
      
While there can be no dispute that the second condition is satisfied, as the tax regime in question was drawn up by the Belgian
         Government, it is otherwise with the first condition, as Forum argues that the Belgian State has received EUR million
         a year of tax revenues and social security contributions from the coordination centres.
      
It is sufficient to find that the shortfall of tax and social security revenue on that State’s part resulting from the exemptions
         considered above means that the advantages which they gave rise to are granted through State resources.
      
iv)  The requirement that the aid scheme affect trade between Member States and distort or threaten to distort competition
Points to of the contested decision show that the Commission took the view that the regime in question affects trade
         between Member States and distorts or threatens to distort competition.
      
It is clear from the case-law of the Court that competition is distorted where a measure mitigates the burden imposed on a
         beneficiary undertaking and thereby strengthens its position as regards competing undertakings (see, to that effect, Case
         730/Philip Morris v Commission [1980] ECR 2671, paragraph 11, and Case 259/France v Commission [1987] ECR 4393, paragraph 24).
      
In the present case, the advantages conferred on the coordination centres had the effect of distorting competition between
         them and service providers in the financial, trust, information technology and recruitment sectors by encouraging group companies
         to make use of the services provided by those centres.
      
Moreover, as the Advocate General stated at point of his Opinion, the wide-ranging nature of the activities carried on
         by the multinational groups which have established a coordination centre means that the tax scheme in question has inevitably
         had an impact on competition.
      
Lastly, the scheme necessarily affects trade between Member States, since the coordination centres are set up by multinational
         companies which are established in at least four States.
      
It follows from all of the above that the tax scheme for coordination centres meets the conditions laid down by Article 87(1)
         EC. The plea based on infringement of that article must therefore be rejected.
      
–       The plea alleging a failure to state adequate reasons 
Forum 187’s primary submission is that the Commission failed to explain the reasons which led it to reverse its previous decisions.
      
It should be pointed out in that regard that, while the obligation to state reasons for a Community measure must be appropriate
         to the act at issue and must disclose in a clear and unequivocal fashion laid down under Article EC the reasoning followed
         by the institution which adopted the measure in question in such a way as to enable the persons concerned to ascertain the
         reasons for the measure and to enable the competent court to exercise its power of review (Case 1/Italy v Commission [1969] ECR 277, paragraph 9, and Case C-310/Italy v Commission [2002] ECR I‑2289, paragraph 48), the Commission is not required to state the reasons why it made a different assessment of
         the regime in question in its previous decisions. The concept of State aid must be applied to an objective situation, which
         falls to be appraised on the date on which the Commission takes its decision.
      
The plea alleging a failure to state adequate reasons must accordingly be rejected, as must Forum 187’s claims for the annulment
         of the contested decision in so far as it classifies the disputed measures as State aid incompatible with the common market.
      
 The claims of the Kingdom of Belgium and Forum for partial annulment of the contested decision 
The Kingdom of Belgium, which seeks the annulment of the contested decision in so far as it does not permit it to grant, even
         temporarily, renewal of the authorisations of centres benefiting from the regime in question as at December which
         expire before December 2010, relies on four pleas alleging infringement of Article EC and the principle of the protection
         of legitimate expectations, the principle of equal treatment and a failure to state adequate reasons.
      
Forum 187, which seeks the annulment of the decision in so far as it does not lay down appropriate transitional measures for
         the centres with an authorisation which expires between February and December 2004, relies on two pleas alleging
         infringement of the principle of the protection of legitimate expectations and a failure to state adequate reasons.
      
 Infringement of the principle of the protection of legitimate expectations 
–       Arguments of the parties
The Kingdom of Belgium contends that, while the Commission based its decision on the Code of Conduct and the documents of
         the Ecofin Council when it allowed the coordination centres to have the benefit of current authorisations until December
         2010, it failed to have regard to all of the Council’s positions including, in particular, the memorandum of and November
         which stated that the tax regime in question should continue to apply to all centres until December 2005. 
      
It also argues that the adoption of that position led the Belgian Minister for Finance to make an official announcement to
         the Chamber of Representatives on December that authorisations could be renewed until December 2005, which was
         the date adopted by the Commission in its proposals for appropriate measures of July 2001.
      
The Kingdom of Belgium also states that since coordination centres could expect to have their authorisations renewed automatically
         when the applicable conditions were satisfied, the centres with an authorisation which expired at the same time as the contested
         decision were legitimately entitled to expect that they would be granted a renewal. It observes that until the notification
         of the contested decision, neither it nor the centres could be aware that that date would be adopted by the Commission as
         being the date from which authorisations could no longer be renewed. 
      
Forum argues that in the light of the Commission’s previous decisions the coordination centres were legitimately entitled
         to expect that they would continue to benefit from an authorisation which had been granted to them.
      
It also contends that the coordination centres with an authorisation which expired during and needed a transitional
         period of two years in which to reorganise themselves or, if appropriate, to leave Belgium. It disputes the grounds relied
         on by the Commission to refuse to grant transitional measures.
      
The Commission contests all of those arguments and states that it acknowledged that the centres had a legitimate expectation
         arising from its previous decisions that the regime in question would be maintained and that it was for that reason that it
         provided for a transitional period, expiring on December at the latest, to apply to those centres with an authorisation
         which was in force on the date on which the contested decision was notified.
      
–       Findings of the Court
The Court has repeatedly held that the right to rely on the principle of the protection of legitimate expectations extends
         to any person in a situation where a Community authority has caused him to entertain expectations which are justified. However,
         a person may not plead infringement of the principle unless he has been given precise assurances by the administration (Case
         C-506/Germany v Commission [2005] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 58). Similarly, if a prudent and alert economic operator could have foreseen the adoption of
         a Community measure likely to affect his interests, he cannot plead that principle if the measure is adopted (Case 265/Van den Bergh en Jurgens and Van Dijk Food Products Lopik v Commission [1987] ECR 1155, paragraph 44).
      
Furthermore, even if the Community had first created a situation capable of giving rise to legitimate expectations, an overriding
         public interest may preclude transitional measures from being adopted in respect of situations which arose before the new
         rules came into force but which are still subject to change (Case C‑183/Affish [1997] ECR I-4315, paragraph 57).
      
However, the Court has also held that, in the absence of an overriding public interest, the Commission infringed a superior
         rule of law by failing to couple the repeal of a set of rules with transitional measures for the protection of the expectations
         which a trader might legitimately have derived from the Community rules (see, to that effect, Case 74/CNTA v Commission [1975] ECR 533, paragraph 44). 
      
It is necessary in the first place to consider whether the conclusions of the Council of and November and the proposals
         for appropriate measures made by the Commission were capable of creating an expectation that the regime in question would
         be continued until at least December 2005. 
      
It is clear from the documents before the Court that the conclusions of the Council express an aspiration of a political nature
         and cannot, by reason of their contents, produce legal effects on which parties could rely before the Court. Furthermore,
         those conclusions could in no event bind the Commission in the exercise of its own powers, which are conferred on it by the
         Treaty in State aid matters. It follows that there is no merit in the Belgian Government’s argument that those conclusions
         could have been the basis of assurances that transitional measures would be implemented.
      
The same applies to the coordination centres, which are deemed to be aware of the Commission’s powers and cannot therefore
         rely on the Council’s conclusions of and November as against the Commission.
      
Nor, on any basis, could the proposals for appropriate measures notified to the Kingdom of Belgium by the Commission constitute
         grounds for an expectation, since they represent an integral part of the formal investigation procedure and a State may, as
         in the present case, reject them.
      
Accordingly, neither the Kingdom of Belgium nor Forum may rely on a legitimate expectation that the regime in question
         would continue in force until at least December 2005.
      
In the second place, it is common ground that, by its decisions given in and and by the reply given on September
         1990, the Commission created an expectation that the scheme in question did not contain any aid element.
      
It is also common ground that: 
      
–        although the scheme in question provides that an authorisation is to subsist for a period of years, the renewal of such
         an authorisation, while not automatic, is subject to the same procedure and may be obtained without difficulty when the relevant
         objective conditions continue to be satisfied;
      
–        in addition, the number of renewals is not stipulated by the national legislation;
–        in the absence of any discretionary review by the national authorities, coordination centres seeking a renewal of their authorisation
         might reasonably expect that there would be no obstacle to that renewal.
      
The fact, relied on by the Commission, that the Belgian authorities reduced the advantages conferred by the regime in question,
         in particular by introducing an annual tax based on staff employed, does not call into question the finding regarding the
         continuation of the regime in respect of the coordination centres. Nothing was said at the hearing to suggest that the amendments
         made to the scheme introduced by Royal Decree No were so substantive as to fundamentally alter its nature.
      
It follows that, by its decisions of and and by its reply of September 1980, the Commission gave the coordination
         centres with an authorisation in place on December grounds to expect that the Treaty rules did not preclude the renewal
         of their authorisation.
      
In the third place, it is necessary to consider whether the expectation reached on that basis is a legitimate one.
      
The Commission essentially argues that the coordination centres could not plead a legitimate expectation in the continued
         existence of the scheme in question, because there was information available to them that the scheme would not be maintained.
      
Even if it were the case that the information relied on by the Commission in that regard was capable of undermining the expectation
         of the coordination centres that the regime for the centres was compatible with the Treaty rules, the centres were on any
         basis entitled to expect that a Commission decision reversing its previous approach would give them the time necessary to
         address that change in approach.
      
It should be pointed out in that regard that the period which elapsed between the publication of the decision to initiate
         the formal investigation procedure of June and the contested decision of February was not sufficient to enable
         all the centres to address the possibility that there might be a decision terminating the regime in question. As previously
         stated, the regime is a tax regime under which authorisations for a period of years are granted, which calls for measures
         of an accounting nature and financial and economic decisions which cannot be taken in such a brief time by a prudent economic
         operator.
      
It follows that the coordination centres with an application for renewal of their authorisation pending on the date on which
         the contested decision was notified or with an authorisation which expired at the same time as or shortly after that decision
         was notified were entitled to have a legitimate expectation that a reasonable transitional period would be granted in order
         for them to adjust to the consequences of that decision. In that regard, the expression ‘shortly after’ should be understood
         as referring to a date so close to that on which the contested decision was notified that the coordination centres concerned
         did not have the time required to adjust to the change in the regime in question. 
      
In the fourth place, it is necessary to be certain that there was no overriding public interest which might take precedence
         over the interest of the coordination centres in question to be granted such a transitional period. 
      
First, it must be stated that the Commission has not shown how the interests of the Community preclude a transitional period
         of that kind. Secondly, there is a lack of consistency in the Commission’s approach inasmuch as it allowed authorisations
         that were in place on the date on which the decision was notified to continue in force until December at the latest,
         while, conversely, it refused to allow any transitional period to those coordination centres with an application for renewal
         pending on the date on which the contested decision was notified or with an authorisation which expired at the same time as
         or shortly after the decision was notified.
      
Lastly, not only did the Commission acknowledge in the decision that the coordination centres had made substantial investments
         and had entered into long-term commitments, but it must also be pointed out that no replacement or amended regime was in place
         on the date of the contested decision.
      
It follows from all of the above that the plea alleging infringement of the principle of the protection of legitimate expectations
         is well founded. 
      
 Infringement of the principle of equal treatment 
The Kingdom of Belgium maintains that the contested decision discriminates without justification between those coordination
         centres with an authorisation which expired shortly before its adoption and which thus benefit from the regime in question
         until December and those with an authorisation which expired after the date on which the contested decision was notified
         and which are denied the benefit of any transitional measures.
      
The Commission contests that argument and contends that as all coordination centres are granted a 10-year authorisation and
         are entitled to the benefit of the whole of the period of authorisation, they are in the same position.
      
According to the case-law of the Court, the general principle of equal treatment requires that comparable situations must
         not be treated differently and that different situations must not be treated in the same way unless such treatment is objectively
         justified (Joined Cases 66/79, 127/and 128/Salumi and Others [1980] ECR 1237, paragraph 14, and Case C‑14/Niemann [2003] ECR I-2279, paragraph 49, and the case-law cited there).
      
Having regard to the finding set out in paragraph of this judgment, the coordination centres, each of which was entitled
         to a legitimate expectation that a reasonable transitional period would be granted, were treated differently in the contested
         decision.
      
Thus, depending on the date on which the last renewal of an authorisation took place in and 2002, or whether the authorisation
         terminated at the same time as or shortly after the notification of the contested decision, the time when the benefit of the
         regime in question is to expire will differ, as, in the former case, it will occur on December 2010, whereas, in the latter,
         there is to be no transitional period.
      
It follows that, by failing to adopt transitional measures for those coordination centres with an authorisation which expired
         at the same time as or shortly after the notification of the contested decision, the Commission infringed the general principle
         of equal treatment.
      
In the light of all of the above, the contested decision must be annulled in so far as it does not lay down transitional measures
         for those coordination centres with an application for renewal of their authorisation pending on the date on which the contested
         decision was notified or with an authorisation which expired at the same time as or shortly after the notification of the
         decision. 
      
As the action is to be upheld, it is not necessary to consider the other pleas in law set out in the applications. 
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Under the first subparagraph of Article 69(3) of those rules, where each
         party succeeds on some and fails on other heads the Court may order that the costs be shared.
      
Since the Kingdom of Belgium has applied for the Commission to be ordered to pay the costs and the Commission has been unsuccessful,
         it must be ordered to pay the costs in Cases C-182/and C-182/R. 
      
Since Forum has applied for the Commission to be ordered to pay the costs and the Commission has in part been unsuccessful,
         it should be ordered to pay half of Forum 187’s costs in Case C-217/and all of Forum 187’s costs in Case C-217/R.
      
On the other hand, as the Court of First Instance ordered Forum to pay the costs in the case which gave rise to its order
         in Forum v Commission, Forum 187’s application for the Commission to be ordered to pay the costs of that action must be rejected.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby: 
1.      Annuls Commission Decision 2003/757/EC of February on the aid scheme implemented by Belgium for coordination centres
            established in Belgium in so far as it does not lay down transitional measures for those coordination centres with an application
            for renewal of their authorisation pending on the date on which the contested decision was notified or with an authorisation
            which expired at the same time as or shortly after the notification of the decision; 
2.      Rejects the application of Forum ASBL as to the remainder;
3.      Orders the Commission of the European Communities to pay the costs in Case C‑182/and half of the costs of Forum ASBL
            in Case C‑217/03;
4.      Orders the Commission of the European Communities to pay the costs in Cases C‑182/R and C‑217/R.
[Signatures]
* Languages of the case: French and English.
      
Top  
 