
Avis juridique important
|
61988O0194(01)
Order of the President of the Court of September 1988.  -  Commission of the European Communities v Italian Republic.  -  Award of a public works contract - Incinerator.  -  Case 194/R.  
European Court reports Page Parties
Grounds
Operative part
Keywords
++++Application for interim measures - Interim measures - Powers conferred on the President by Article ( ) of the Rules of Procedure  ( EEC Treaty, Art . 186; Rules of Procedure, Art . ( ) )  
Parties
In Case 194/R  Commission of the European Communities, represented by Guido Berardis, a member of its Legal Department, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of Georgios Kremlis, Jean Monnet Building, Kirchberg,  applicant,  v  Italian Republic, represented by Luigi Ferrari Bravo, Head of the Department for Contentious Diplomatic Affairs, acting as Agent, assisted by Pier Giorgio Ferri, avvocato dello Stato, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the Italian Embassy, 5, rue Marie-Adelaeide,  defendant,  APPLICATION for an interim order for the suspension of the award by the "Consorzio per la costruzione e la gestione di un impianto per l' incenerimento e trasformazione dei rifiuti solidi urbani" ( Consortium for the Construction and Management of the Incinerator and Processing Plant for Solid Urban Refuse ) whose headquarters are at the offices of the City of La Spezia, of a public-works contract in connection with the Consortium' s incinerator,  The President of the Court of Justice  of the European Communities  makes the following  Order  
Grounds
As to the facts of the case, reference is made to the application made on July in which the Commission requested the Court to order, by way of interim relief in accordance with Article ( ) of the Rules of Procedure, the suspension of the award of a public-works contract by the "Consorzio per la costruzione e la gestione di un impianto per l' incenerimento e la trasformazione dei rifiuti solidi urbani ".  By an order dated July 1988, the President of the Court, by way of an interlocutory decision, ordered the Italian Republic, as a conservatory measure, to adopt all the necessary measures to suspend the award of the aforementioned public-works contract until September 1988, or such other date as might be fixed by a subsequent order of the Court, and to lodge its observations on the Commission' s application before September .  The Italian Republic lodged its observations on September .  In the light of the observations submitted by the Italian Republic, it proves to be necessary to hear the oral explanations of the parties . As a hearing cannot take place until after September 1988, it is appropriate to extend the aforementioned conservatory measures until the date of the final order in these interlocutory proceedings .  
Operative part
On those grounds,  The President,  by way of interlocutory decision,  hereby orders :  ( ) The Italian Republic shall adopt all the necessary measures to suspend the award of a public-works contract by the "Consorzio per la construzione e la gestione di un impianto per l' incenerimento e trasformazione dei rifiuti solidi urbani", whose headquarters are at the offices of the City of La Spezia, until the date of the final order in these interlocutory proceedings;  ( ) Costs are reserved .  Luxembourg, September .  
Top  
 