
Joined Cases C-18/and C-155/Casa di cura privata Salus SpA
v
Agenzia Entrate – Ufficio di Napoli and
Agenzia Entrate – Ufficio di Firenze v
Villa Maria Beatrice Hospital Srl 
(References for a preliminary ruling, from the Commissione tributaria provinciale di Napoli and from the Commissione tributaria
         regionale di Firenze)
      
(Article 104(3), second subparagraph, of the Rules of Procedure – Sixth VAT Directive – Article 13B(c) – Exemptions – Exemption for supplies of goods used exclusively for an exempted activity or excluded from the right of deduction)
Order of the Court (Fifth Chamber), July Summary of the Order
Tax provisions – Harmonisation of laws – Turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax – Exemptions provided for in the
            Sixth Directive 
(Council Directive 77/388, Art. 13B(c))
The first part of Article 13B(c) of Sixth Council 77/on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to
         turnover taxes must be interpreted as meaning that the exemption for which it provides applies only to the resale of goods
         previously acquired by a taxable person for an exempted activity under that article, in so far as the value added tax paid
         upon initial acquisition of the goods in question was not deductible.
      
(see para. 31, operative part)
  
  
ORDER OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Second paragraph of Article 104(3) of the Rules of Procedure – Sixth VAT Directive – Article 13B(c) – Exemptions – Supplies of goods used wholly for an exempted activity which do not give rise to a right of deduction)
In Joined Cases C‑18/and C‑155/05,
REFERENCES for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, from the Commissione tributaria provinciale di Napoli (C‑18/05)
         and the Commissione tributaria regionale di Firenze (C‑155/05) (Italy), made by decisions of July and March 2005,
         received at the Court on January and April 2005, in the proceedings
      
Casa di cura privata Salus SpA (C‑18/05)
v
Agenzia Entrate – Ufficio di Napoli 4,
and
Agenzia Entrate – Ufficio di Firenze (C‑155/05)
v
Villa Maria Beatrice Hospital Srl,
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
composed of J. Makarczyk (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, R. Schintgen and L. Bay Larsen, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: R. Grass,
after informing the national courts that the Court proposes to give its decision by reasoned order pursuant to the second
         subparagraph of Article 104(3) of its Rules of Procedure,
      
after inviting the persons referred to in Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice to submit any observations they
         might have in that regard,
      
after hearing the Advocate General,
makes the following
Order
These references for a preliminary ruling principally concern the interpretation of the first part of Article 13B(c) of Sixth
         Council Directive 77/388/EEC of May on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes
         – Common system of value added tax: uniform basis of assessment (OJ L 145, p. 1) (‘the Sixth Directive’).
      
 Legal background
 Community legislation
Under Article of the Sixth Directive:
‘A.      Exemptions for certain activities in the public interest      
      
1.      Without prejudice to other Community provisions, Member States shall exempt the following under conditions which they shall
         lay down for the purpose of ensuring the correct and straightforward application of such exemptions and of preventing any
         possible evasion, avoidance or abuse:
      
…
(b)      hospital and medical care and closely related activities undertaken by bodies governed by public law or, under social conditions
         comparable to those applicable to bodies governed by public law, by hospitals, centres for medical treatment or diagnosis
         and other duly recognised establishments of a similar nature;
      
…
B.      Other exemptions
Without prejudice to other Community provisions, Member States shall exempt the following under conditions which they shall
         lay down for the purpose of ensuring the correct and straightforward application of the exemptions and of preventing any possible
         evasion, avoidance or abuse:
      
…
(c)       supplies of goods used wholly for an activity exempted under this Article or under Article 28(3)(b) when these goods have
         not given rise to the right to deduction, or of goods on the acquisition or production of which, by virtue of Article 17(6),
         value added tax did not become deductible; …’.
      
Article 17(2) of the Sixth Directive provides:
‘In so far as the goods and services are used for the purposes of his taxable transactions, the taxable person shall be entitled
         to deduct from the tax which he is liable to pay:
      
(a)       value added tax due or paid in respect of goods or services supplied or to be supplied to him by another taxable person;
(b)      value added tax due or paid in respect of imported goods;
…’.
 National legislation
Under Article of the Decree of the President of the Republic No of October establishing and regulating value
         added tax (Decreto del Presidente della’Repubblica No 633, Ottobre 1972, institutzione e disciplina dell’ imposta sul valore
         aggiunto) (Ordinary Supplement No 1, GURI No of November 1972) (‘DPR 633/1972’), the following are exempted from value
         added tax (‘VAT’):
      
‘…
(18)      medical diagnosis, treatment and rehabilitation provided to persons in the exercise of the regulated medical professions,
         within the meaning of Article of the consolidated text of the laws on health, approved by Royal Decree No of July
         1934, as subsequently amended, or provided for by decree of the Minister for Health together with the Minister for Finance;
      
(19)       the provision of hospital and medical treatment by hospitals or clinics and other officially approved establishments providing
         medical care and mutual benefit societies with legal personality and [non-profit making organisations], including the administering
         of medicines, medical instruments and food and the provision of treatment by thermal centres’.
      
Article 1(4) of Legislative Decree No of September (Decreto legislativo No 313, settembre 1997) (‘LD 313/1997’)
         added paragraph 27d to Article of DPR 633/1972, which provides for the VAT exemption for ‘supplies of goods acquired or
         imported without the right to deduct all of the tax relating to them, within the meaning of Articles 19, 19-a and 19-a 2’.
         
      
 The disputes in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 Case C‑18/The Casa di cura privata Salus SpA (‘Salus’) is an establishment providing healthcare, which carries out those activities
         within the framework of agreements concluded with the Servizio Sanitario Nazionale (National Health Service). Those activities
         are exempt from VAT under of the national rules which transposed Article 13A(1)(b) of the Sixth Directive.
      
Arguing that Article 13B(c) of the Sixth Directive also requires Member States to exempt supplies of goods used wholly for
         exempt activities, Salus claimed reimbursement from the Agenzia Entrate – Ufficio di Napoli (Public Revenue Office Naples
         4) of the sum of ITL (EUR 672.17) that it had paid in respect of VAT in the years 1998, and 2000.
         Following the implied rejection of its claim by the tax administration, Salus brought an action on March before the
         Commissione tributaria provinciale di Napoli (Regional Tax Court, Naples).
      
The national court refers to divergences in Italian case-law concerning the application of the exemption provided for in Article
         13B(c) of the Sixth Directive in respect of supplies of goods used for exempt activities.
      
The majority of cases interpret that provision as laying down an exemption of an objective nature, applicable merely upon
         the goods acquired being used for exempt activities, so that claims for reimbursement of undeducted tax in cases similar to
         the case in these proceedings are upheld.
      
However, according to a minority trend in the case-law to which the national court adheres, that provision refers only to
         the exemption of the sale of goods by taxpayers who do not enjoy a right of deduction because their activity is exempt, since
         the goods sold were intended to be used exclusively for an exempt activity.
      
In those circumstances, the Commissione tributaria proviciale di Napoli decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following
         questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Does the exemption under Article 13B(c) of [the Sixth Directive] refer to input VAT paid on the acquisition of goods or services
         used for exempted activities or rather to cases in which a taxable person who has acquired goods intended for such activities
         subsequently sells those goods to other persons?
      
2.      Is that provision sufficiently precise and unconditional to be directly effective in the national legal system?
3.      For the purposes of the direct applicability of the directive, what is the effect of the requirement in [Article 13B] whereby,
         in implementing [the rules in Article 13B(c)], Member States are to lay down conditions for “preventing any possible evasion,
         avoidance or abuse”?’
      
 Case C‑155/On September 2002, Villa Maria Beatrice Hospital Srl (‘VMB Hospital’) brought nine claims for reimbursement before the
         Agenzia Entrate – Ufficio di Firenze (Public Revenue Office Florence 1), first, for the sum of EUR 779.46, together
         with interest accrued and accruing in respect of VAT unduly paid in the years to 2000, and, second, for the total sum
         of EUR 090.paid in respect of VAT in the years to 1997. Since those claims were the subject of implied decisions
         of rejection, VMB Hospital brought an action on April before the Commissione tributaria provinciale di Firenze (Regional
         Tax Court, Florence).
      
VMB Hospital submitted that its main activity consists of supplying hospital treatment and medical care under a system of
         accreditation by the Servizio Sanitario Nazionale, which is an activity exempt from VAT under the national rules which transposed
         Article A(1)(b) of the Sixth Directive.
      
VMB Hospital submitted, in particular, that the supplies of goods used wholly for the activities referred to in Article of the Sixth Directive have not been exempted by the Italian legislature, so that it was unable to deduct fully the VAT for
         the supplies concerned in the years to 2000. Furthermore, VMB Hospital submitted that LD 313/1997, adopted after the
         judgment in Case C‑45/Commission v Italy [1997] ECR I-3605, did not fully transpose the Sixth Directive into national law.
      
By judgment of December to January 2004, the Commissione tributaria provinciale di Firenze upheld the action.
On May the Agenzia Entrate – Ufficio di Firenze brought an appeal against that judgment before the referring court,
         submitting, inter alia, that the court of first instance had wrongly interpreted Article 13B(c) of the Sixth Directive.
      
The referring court takes the view that the amendment to Article of DPR 633/by LD 313/does not introduce a general
         exemption for all goods used wholly for an exempt activity or excluded from the right to deduction, as set out in the judgment
         Commission v Italy, but limits the exemption to supplies relating to goods acquired or imported without a right of full deduction of the tax
         on them. The exemption therefore concerns only goods acquired with non-deductible VAT, used for exempt activities and subsequently
         resold.
      
In those circumstances, the Commissione tributaria di Firenze decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following question
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Following the addition of paragraph 27d to Article of Presidential Decree 633/1972, must the Italian Republic be regarded
         as still failing to fulfil its obligations under the [Sixth Directive] and, in particular, Article 13B(c) thereof ?’
      
 The joinder of Cases C‑18/and C‑155/Given the close connection between these two cases, it is appropriate, in accordance with Article of the Rules of Procedure,
         read together with Article thereof, to join them for the purposes of the Order.
      
 The first question referred for a preliminary ruling in Case C‑18/and the question referred in Case C‑155/Taking the view that the answer to those questions leaves no scope for any reasonable doubt, the Court, pursuant to the second
         paragraph of Article 104(3) of its Rules of Procedure, informed the referring courts that it proposed to give its decision
         by reasoned order and called on the interested parties referred to in Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice to
         submit any observations they might have in that regard.
      
In their observations, Salus and VMB Hospital maintain their respective positions, and suggest that the answer to the question
         referred should be that Article 13B(c) of the Sixth Directive must be interpreted as meaning that goods sold to a person exercising
         exclusively an exempt activity, if they have not given rise to a right of deduction, must also be exempt from tax or give
         rise to a right of deduction.
      
 Preliminary observations 
First of all, as regards the question referred by the national court in Case C‑155/05, it should be recalled that, in the
         context of Article EC, the Court has no jurisdiction to rule either on the interpretation of provisions of national laws
         or regulations or on their conformity with Community law (see, to that effect, Case C‑107/Teckal [1999] ECR I-8121, paragraph 33, and Joined Cases C‑19/01, C‑50/and C‑84/Barsotti and Others [2004] ECR I-2005, paragraph 30).
      
However, if questions have been improperly formulated or go beyond the scope of the powers conferred on the Court by Article
         EC, the Court is free to extract from all the factors provided by the national court and, in particular, from the statement
         of grounds contained in the reference, the elements of Community law requiring an interpretation having regard to the subject-matter
         of the dispute (see, to that effect Case 83/Pigs Marketing Board [1978] ECR 2347, paragraph 26; Case C‑105/Codiesel [1997] ECR I-3465, paragraph 13; and Case C‑536/Antόnio Jorge [2005] ECR I-4463, paragraph 16).
      
In the light of the order for reference in Case C‑155/05, it is clear that the national court is seeking the interpretation
         of the first part of Article 13B(c) of the Sixth Directive.
      
 The questions referred
By their questions, the national courts wish to know, essentially, whether the VAT exemption provided for by the first part
         of Article 13B(c) of the Sixth Directive concerns VAT paid upstream at the time of acquisition of goods intended to be used
         wholly for one of the activities referred to in that article, or whether that exemption applies only where such goods are
         resold.
      
In that regard it must be recalled that, according to settled case-law, the exemptions referred to in Article of the Sixth
         Directive are to be interpreted strictly, since they constitute exceptions to the general principle that VAT is to be levied
         on all supplies of services for consideration by a taxable person (see, to that effect, inter alia, Case C‑498/Kingscrest Associates and Montecello [2005] ECR I-4427, paragraph 29, and Case C‑415/Stichting Kinderopvang Enschede [2006] ECR I-1385, paragraph 13).
      
Those exemptions constitute independent concepts of Community law whose purpose is to avoid divergences in the application
         of the VAT system from one Member State to another and must therefore be given a Community definition (see, to that effect,
         Case C‑8/Taksatorringen [2003] ECR I-13711, paragraph 37; Case C‑284/Temco EuropeSA [2004] ECR I-11237, paragraph 16; and Joined Cases C‑394/and C‑395/Diagnostiko & Therapeftiko Kentro Athinon – Ygeia [2005] ECR I-10373, paragraph 15).
      
As regards, in particular, the first part of Article 13B(c) of the Sixth Directive, it requires Member States to exempt supplies
         of goods used wholly for an activity exempted under that article where those goods have not given rise to a right of deduction
         (see, to that effect, Commission v Italy, paragraph 12).
      
The Court has further held that the purpose of Article 13B(c) of the Sixth Directive is to avoid double taxation contrary
         to the principle of fiscal neutrality inherent in the common system of value added tax (Commission v Italy, paragraph 15).
      
Thus, the first part of Article 13B(c) of the Sixth Directive provides for an exemption which prevents the resale of goods
         from being taxed anew, where they were acquired previously by a taxable person for the purposes of an activity which is exempt
         under that same article and on which therefore the VAT has been paid definitively and without possibility of deduction.
      
Accordingly, the answer to the first question referred in Case 18/and the single question referred in Case 155/must
         be that the first part of Article 13B(c) of the Sixth Directive must be interpreted as meaning that the exemption for which
         it provides applies only to the resale of goods previously acquired by a taxable person for an exempted activity under that
         article, in so far as the VAT paid upon initial acquisition of the goods in question was not deductible.
      
 The second and third questions in Case C‑18/It is clear from the order for reference that, given the answer to the first question in Case C‑18/05, the second and third
         questions referred in that case are no longer relevant for the outcome of the dispute in the main proceedings. There is therefore,
         no need to answer those questions.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fifth Chamber) hereby rules:
The first part of Article 13B(c) of Sixth Council Directive 77/388/EEC of May on the harmonisation of the laws of
            the Member States relating to turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax: uniform basis of assessment, must be interpreted
            as meaning that the exemption for which it provides applies only to the resale of goods previously acquired by a taxable person
            for an exempted activity under that article, in so far as the VAT paid upon initial acquisition of the goods in question was
            not deductible.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 