
Avis juridique important
|
61988JJudgment of the Court of May 1989.  -  Commission of the European Communities v Kingdom of Belgium.  -  Free movement of goods - Prohibition of the importation of meat-based products containing more than a given quantity of edible gelatine.  -  Case 52/88.  
European Court reports Page Pub.RJ Page Pub somm 
Summary
Parties
Operative part
Keywords
++++Free movement of goods - Quantitative restrictions - Measures having equivalent effect - Prohibition on the marketing of foodstuffs containing more than a given quantity of a particular ingredient - Not permissible - Justification - Fairness of commercial transactions - Consumer protection - Conditions - Application of less restrictive measures  ( EEC Treaty, Art . )  
Summary
A prohibition by a Member State on the marketing in its territory of certain foodstuffs containing more than a given quantity of a given ingredient and originating in another Member State where they were lawfully produced and marketed cannot be justified on the ground of mandatory requirements relating to the fairness of commercial transactions and consumer protection unless those objectives cannot be attained by means which restrict the free movement of goods less ( line of authority; see, most recently, judgment of February in Case 274/Commission v Germany (( )) ECR ). 
Parties
In Case 52/Commission of the European Communities, represented by René Barents, a member of its Legal Department, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of Georgios Kremlis, also a member of its Legal Department, Wagner Centre, Kirchberg,  applicant,  v  Kingdom of Belgium, represented by the Minister for External Relations, represented by J . Devadder, conseiller adjoint, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the Belgian Embassy,  defendant,  APPLICATION for a declaration that, by not permitting the sale in its territory of prepared meat and meat preparations containing more than a given quantity of edible gelatine which are lawfully produced and marketed in other Member States, the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of the EEC Treaty,  THE COURT  composed of : O . Due, President, T . Koopmans, R . Joliet and F . Grévisse ( Presidents of Chambers ), Sir Gordon Slynn, C . N . Kakouris, J . C . Moitinho de Almeida, G . C . Rodríguez Iglesias and M . Diéz de Velasco, Judges,  ( the grounds of the judgment are not reproduced )  hereby :  
Operative part
( 1)Declares that, by not permitting the sale in its territory of prepared meat and meat preparations containing more than a given quantity of edible gelatine which originate in another Member State where they were lawfully produced and marketed, the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of the EEC Treaty;  ( ) Orders the Kingdom of Belgium to pay the costs .  
Top  
 