
Case C-162/Ampliscientifica Srl
and
Amplifin SpA
v
Ministero dell’Economia e delle Finanze
and
Agenzia delle Entrate
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Corte suprema di cassazione)
(Sixth VAT directive – Taxable persons – Second subparagraph of Article 4(4) – Parent companies and subsidiaries – Implementation by the Member State of the single taxable person scheme – Conditions – Consequences)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Tax provisions – Harmonisation of laws – Turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax – Taxable persons
(Council Directive 77/388, Art. 4(4), second subpara.)
2.        Tax provisions – Harmonisation of laws – Turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax – Mechanism to simplify declarations
            and payments of value added tax
(Council Directive 77/388)
1.        The second subparagraph of Article 4(4) of Sixth Directive 77/on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating
         to turnover taxes is a provision which, in order to be implemented by a Member State, requires prior consultation by that
         State of the Advisory Committee on value added tax and the adoption of national legislation authorising persons, in particular
         companies, established in the territory of the country who, while legally independent, are closely bound to one another by
         financial, economic and organisational links, no longer to be treated as separate taxable persons for the purposes of value
         added tax in order to be treated as a single taxable person to whom a single value added tax identification number is allocated
         and, accordingly, the sole person entitled to submit value added tax declarations. Where there has been no prior consultation
         of the Advisory Committee on value added tax, national legislation which meets those criteria constitutes legislation adopted
         in breach of the procedural requirement laid down in the second subparagraph of Article 4(4) of Sixth Directive 77/388.
      
(see para. 23, operative part 1)
2.        The principle of fiscal neutrality does not preclude national legislation which simply treats taxable persons wishing to opt
         for a mechanism to simplify value added tax declarations and payments differently according to whether the parent company
         or body has held more than 50% of the share capital or stock of the persons with whom it is linked since at least the beginning
         of the calendar year preceding that in which the declaration was made or, on the contrary, satisfies those conditions only
         after that date. Moreover, neither the principle prohibiting the abuse of rights nor the principle of proportionality precludes
         such legislation.
      
(see para. 32, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
May (*)
      
(Sixth VAT directive – Taxable persons – Second subparagraph of Article 4(4) – Parent companies and subsidiaries – Implementation by the Member State of the single taxable person scheme – Conditions – Consequences)
In Case C‑162/07,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Corte Suprema di Cassazione (Italy), made by decision of
         November 2006, received at the Court on March 2007, in the proceedings
      
Ampliscientifica Srl,
Amplifin SpA
v
Ministero dell’Economia e delle Finanze,
Agenzia delle Entrate,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of A. Rosas, President of the Chamber, U. Lõhmus, A. Ó Caoimh, P. Lindh and A. Arabadjiev (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: J. Mazák,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on January 2008,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Ampliscientifica Srl and Amplifin SpA, by M. Garavoglia, Avvocato,
–        the Italian Government, by I. M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, and G. De Bellis, Avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Cypriot Government, by E. Syméonidou, acting as Agent,
–        the United Kingdom Government, by C. Gibbs, acting as Agent, and I. Hutton, Barrister,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by A. Aresu and M. Afonso, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of the second subparagraph of Article 4(4) of the Sixth
         Council Directive 77/388/EEC of May on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes
         – Common system of value added tax: uniform basis of assessment (OJ L 145, p. 1, the ‘Sixth Directive’).
      
The reference was made in proceedings between Ampliscientifica Srl (‘Ampliscientifica’) and Amplifin SpA (‘Amplifin’) on the
         one hand and the Ministero dell’Economia e delle Finanze (Ministry of Finance) and the Agenzia delle Entrate (Revenue Authority)
         on the other concerning an additional assessment to value added tax (‘VAT’) which was addressed to Amplifin in respect of
         the years and 1991. 
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
Article 4(1) of the Sixth Directive provides as follows:
      
‘“Taxable person” shall mean any person who independently carries out in any place any economic activity specified in paragraph
         2, whatever the purpose or results of that activity.’
      
The second subparagraph of Article 4(4) of the Sixth Directive is worded as follows:
      
‘Subject to the consultations provided for in Article 29, each Member State may treat as a single taxable person persons established
         in the territory of the country who, while legally independent, are closely bound to one another by financial, economic and
         organisational links.’ 
      
Article 27(1) of the Sixth Directive provides as follows:
      
‘The Council, acting unanimously on a proposal from the Commission, may authorise any Member State to introduce special measures
         for derogation from the provisions of this Directive, in order to simplify the procedure for charging the tax or to prevent
         certain types of tax evasion or avoidance. Measures intended to simplify the procedure for charging the tax, except to a negligible
         extent, may not affect the amount of tax due at the final consumption stage.’
      
Article of the Sixth Directive sets up an Advisory Committee on VAT. 
      
 National legislation
 The Decree of the President of the Republic No The third paragraph of Article of the Decree of the President of the Republic No of October establishing and
         regulating value added tax (ordinary supplement to GURI No of November 1972), as amended by the Decree of the President
         of the Republic No of January (GURI No of January 1979), provides as follows:
      
‘The Minister of Finance shall have authority to issue decrees laying down appropriate rules which provide that declarations
         of subsidiary companies may be submitted by the parent company or body to the office for the place at which it is registered
         for tax purposes and that payments … may be made to that office of the total amount due by the parent company or body and
         by the subsidiary companies, net of any deductible excess. The declarations, which are also to be signed by the parent company
         or body, must also be submitted to the offices for the places at which the subsidiary companies are registered for tax purposes,
         without prejudice to the other obligations and liabilities of those companies. A company shall be regarded as a subsidiary
         where over 50% of the shares or stock in that company has been held by another company since the beginning of the previous
         calendar year.’ 
      
 The Ministerial Decree of December The authority provided for in the third paragraph of Article was implemented by the Ministerial Decree of December adopting rules on value added tax relating to payments and declarations by subsidiary companies (GURI No of December
         1979), as amended by the Ministerial Decree of December (GURI No of December (‘the Decree’). The
         Decree organises and facilitates the manner in which payments and declarations can be made by parent companies and subsidiaries
         by enabling the parent company, to a certain extent, to act on behalf of its subsidiary company or companies. 
      
Article of the Decree states that ‘only … companies in which the parent company or body or other subsidiary of that
         company or body within the meaning of this article has held more than 50% of the share capital or stock since the beginning
         of the previous calendar year shall be regarded as subsidiary companies’. 
      
Article of the Decree states accordingly that the declaration of the parent company ‘also to be signed by the representatives
         of the subsidiary company, must indicate … the VAT number of the subsidiary companies as well as the competent (VAT) office
         for each of them’. 
      
The first paragraph of Article of the Decree provides as follows:
      
‘A parent company or body wishing to rely on this decree must also submit the annual declarations of its subsidiaries to the
         [VAT] office for the place at which it is registered for tax purposes. Those declarations, which are also to be signed by
         the representative of the parent company or body, must also be submitted, together with their annexes, by the subsidiary companies
         to the competent VAT office for each of them. The name of the parent company or body along with the appropriate VAT number
         must be stated in the declarations of the subsidiary company.’ 
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
The dispute in the main proceedings concerns the tax declarations submitted by Ampliscientifica for and by Amplifin for
         and (‘the contetsted declarations’). Ampliscientfica and Amplifin are companies incorporated under Italian law which
         formed part of the Amplifon group, which was engaged in the research and development of new scientific instruments. 
      
More than 50% of the share capital of Amplifscientifica, which was formed in February 1989, was subscribed by Amplaid SpA,
         99% of which was in turn controlled by Amplifin. Ampliscientifica’s business ceased in February 1993. For the tax year,
         Amplifin submitted to the Milan VAT office the declaration provided for under the Decree, after making an entry in its
         accounts transferring a VAT debt for which Ampliscientifica had previously been liable. For the tax year, it did the
         same with another of its subsidiaries that was involved in the real estate sector, Ampliare Srl, formed in November 1990,
         which resulted in a significant VAT credit being transferred to it. 
      
The Milan VAT office took the view that Amplifin was not entitled to submit the contested declarations, since Article of
         the Decree provides that, in order for the simplified VAT payment scheme to be applicable, the link between the parent
         company or body and the subsidiary company must have existed ‘from the beginning of the calendar year’ preceding the year
         in which the declaration was made. It therefore issued notices of additional assessment for (in respect of the VAT debt
         of Ampliscientifica) and (in respect of the VAT credit of Ampliare Srl). 
      
Ampliscientfica and Amplifin challenged those notices before the Commissione tribuatria provinciale di Milano (Provincial
         Tax Court, Milan), which granted their applications in separate judgments on November 1996. 
      
The Milan VAT office appealed before the Commissione tributaria della Lombardia (Tax Court, Lombardy), which granted its appeals
         by judgements of May and November 1999, taking the view that, under the Decree, Amplifin had failed to comply with
         the condition stipulating the period for which share capital must be held in subsidiary companies and was not at that time
         entitled to submit the contested declarations. Ampliscientifica and Amplifin lodged appeals before the Corte Suprema di Cassazione,
         which decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)  Must the [second subparagraph] of Article 4(4) of the Sixth Directive … be construed as a rule that is insufficiently precise,
         with the effect that the Member States are permitted to apply the VAT scheme set out in that rule to specific situations involving
         economic, financial or legal links among different persons, or as a rule that is sufficiently precise and which, therefore,
         once a Member State has decided to adopt that scheme, requires provision to be made for it to be applied in all cases involving
         the links set out in that rule?
      
(2)      (i) Regardless of the reply to be given to the question (1), is the imposition of a temporal restriction – in the sense that
         the link must have existed for a significant period of time – as a precondition for the application of the scheme, where the
         persons concerned are not permitted to demonstrate that there is a valid economic reason for the link being forged, disproportionate
         in relation to the objectives of the directive and to the need for compliance with the principle prohibiting the abuse of
         rights? (ii) Is that legislation to be regarded in any event as contrary to the principle of the neutrality of VAT?’
      
 The questions 
 Question The first question is based on the premiss that the Decree, under which the reminders for VAT non-payment at issue in
         the main proceedings were issued, constitutes an implementation of the authority conferred on all Member States by the second
         subparagraph of Article 4(4) of the Sixth Directive to treat as a single taxable person for VAT purposes different persons
         who are established in the territory of the country but are legally independent where those persons are closely bound to one
         another by financial, economic and organisational links. In other words, the Decree is, at least in part, a measure transposing
         the second subparagraph of Article 4(4) of the Sixth Directive. 
      
It should be noted, first of all, as the very wording of that provision makes clear, that it can be implemented only after
         the Advisory Committee on VAT has been consulted. However, it is not disputed that, in the case of the Decree, the Italian
         Republic did not consult that committee.
      
It is to be observed, secondly, that the effect of implementing the scheme established in the second subparagraph of Article
         4(4) of the Sixth Directive is that national legislation adopted on the basis of that provision allows persons, in particular
         companies, which are bound to one another by financial, economic and organisational links no longer to be treated as separate
         taxable persons for the purposes of VAT but to be treated as a single taxable person. Thus, where that provision is implemented
         by a Member State, the closely linked person or persons within the meaning of that provision cannot be treated as a taxable
         person or persons within the meaning of Article 4(1) of the Sixth Directive (see, to that effect, Case C‑355/van der Steen [2007] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 20). It follows that treatment as a single taxable person precludes persons who are thus closely
         linked from continuing to submit VAT declarations separately and from continuing to be identified, within and outside their
         group, as individual taxable persons, since the single taxable person alone is authorised to submit such declarations. 
      
The second subparagraph of Article 4(4) of the Sixth Directive therefore necessarily requires, where that provision is implemented
         by a Member State, the national implementing legislation to provide that the taxable person is a single taxable person and
         that a single VAT number be allocated to the group. The fact that express reference was made in the Sixth Directive to an
         individual VAT identification number only after the introduction of Article 28h of that directive, which forms the basis of
         the new Article 22(1)(c) to (e) of the directive, by Council Directive 91/680/EEC of December (OJ L 376, p. 1),
         namely after the tax years in question in the main proceedings, can have no bearing on the foregoing consideration, since
         the use of such a number is dictated by the need, both for the economic operators and the tax authorities of the Member States,
         to identify with a degree of certainty those effecting transactions subject to VAT. The clarifications brought about by Article
         28h thus simply confirm a pre-existing rule that is integral to the proper functioning of the common system of VAT. 
      
The transposition of the second subparagraph of Article 4(4) of the Sixth Directive must therefore be distinguished from the
         setting up of a mechanism to simplify VAT declarations and payments which enables, inter alia, companies within the same group
         to remain separate taxable persons, even where VAT may be consolidated in the accounts of the parent company. 
      
It is in the light of those considerations and of the view expressed by the Italian Government at the hearing and in its letter
         of July to the Commission in the context of infringement proceeding No 2002/that the Decree does not constitute
         a measure transposing the second subparagraph of Article 4(4) of the Sixth Directive that the Corte Suprema di Cassazione
         must determine whether the national legislation applicable to the contested declarations satisfies the criteria referred to
         at paragraphs and above. It must be stressed that, should that be the case, such legislation would have been adopted
         in breach of the procedural requirement laid down in the second subparagraph of Article 4(4) of the Sixth Directive, namely
         consultation of the Advisory Committee on VAT. 
      
The answer to the first question must therefore be that the second subparagraph of Article 4(4) of the Sixth Directive is
         a provision which, in order to be implemented by a Member State, requires prior consultation by that State of the Advisory
         Committee on VAT and the adoption of national legislation authorising persons, in particular companies, established in the
         territory of the country who, while legally independent, are closely bound to one another by financial, economic and organisational
         links, no longer to be treated as separate taxable persons for the purposes of VAT in order to be treated as a single taxable
         person to whom a single VAT identification number is allocated and, accordingly, the sole person entitled to submit VAT declarations.
         It is for the national court to determine whether national legislation, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, satisfies
         those criteria, subject to the qualification that, where there has been no prior consultation of the Advisory Committee on
         VAT, national legislation which meets those criteria constitutes legislation adopted in breach of the procedural requirement
         laid down in the second subparagraph of Article 4(4) of the Sixth Directive. 
      
 Question In essence, the second question concerns whether the temporal restriction imposed by the Decree in order for a parent
         company or body to be able to make VAT declarations and payments in accordance with the simplified rules laid down in that
         provision is in breach of the principles of proportionality and fiscal neutrality and the rules against the abuse of rights.
         In order to qualify for that provision, the parent company or body must have held more than 50% of the share capital or stock
         of the persons with whom it is closely linked, such as subsidiary companies, since at least the beginning of the calendar
         year preceding that in which the declaration is made. 
      
As regards, first, the principle of fiscal neutrality, it is a fundamental principle of the common system of VAT (see, inter
         alia, Case C‑454/Schmeink & Cofreth and Strobel [2000] ECR I‑6973, paragraph 59) which precludes, on the one hand, treating similar goods, which are thus in competition
         with each other, differently for VAT purposes (Case C‑283/Fischer [1998] ECR I‑3369, paragraphs and 27, and Case C-481/Commission v France [2001] ECR I‑3369, paragraph 22) and, on the other, treating similar economic transactions, which are therefore in competition
         with each other, differently for VAT purposes (Case C‑109/Commission v Germany [2003] ECR I‑12691, paragraph 20; Case C‑382/Cimber Air [2004] ECR I‑8379, paragraph 24; and Case C‑97/Navicon [2007] ECR I‑0000. paragraph 21). 
      
National legislation which simply treats taxable persons wishing to opt for a mechanism to simplify VAT declarations and payments
         differently according to whether the persons in question have had a link established by a specific holding in the capital
         of a subsidiary for a longer or shorter period than that referred to at paragraph above applies to all economic operators
         equally, regardless of whether they are competing with each other in connection with their operations or their goods. The
         principle of fiscal neutrality does not preclude such legislation, which makes a distinction that is objectively justified
         in order that the economic reality underlying a legal transaction may be established so that recourse may be had to simplified
         VAT declaration and payment procedures. As was observed at paragraph above, it is for the referring court to determine
         whether the national legislation applicable to the contested declarations constitutes such a provision. 
      
Next, the principle prohibiting the abuse of rights is intended to ensure, particularly in the field of VAT, that Community
         legislation is not extended to cover abusive practices by economic operators, that is to say transactions carried out not
         in the context of normal commercial operations, but solely for the purpose of wrongfully obtaining advantages provided for
         by Community law (Case C‑255/Halifax [2006] ECR I‑1609, paragraphs and 70).
      
The effect of that principle is therefore to prohibit wholly artificial arrangements which do not reflect economic reality
         and are set up with the sole aim of obtaining a tax advantage (see, to that effect, Case C‑196/Cadbury Schweppes and Cadbury Schweppes Overseas [2006] ECR I‑7995, paragraph 55). 
      
Moreover, preventing possible tax evasion, avoidance and abuse is an objective recognised and encouraged by the Sixth Directive
         (Halifax, paragraph 71). 
      
Clearly, national legislation, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which requires economic operators to demonstrate,
         by means of a certain continuity in their activities and operations, that recourse to a mechanism to simplify VAT declarations
         and payments is not simply motivated by the intention to obtain a tax advantage, inter alia by entering a VAT debit or credit
         in the accounts of the parent company or body, which would have the effect, in the first case, of reducing its taxable income
         and, in the second, of securing it an immediate tax credit, but is the result of a more long-term economic decision, is not
         contrary to the principle prohibiting the abuse of rights.
      
Lastly, as regards the principle of proportionality, national legislation which, in the same way as the Decree, lays
         down a time‑limit of between one and two years in order for taxpayers to be able to make VAT declarations and payments in
         accordance with simplified procedures is, in the light of the objective of combating tax evasion and bogus legal arrangements,
         consistent with the principle of proportionality. Conversely, if no time‑limit had been imposed, the effect might have been
         to permit individual operations to be carried out justifying the ad hoc formation of legal structures. Such national legislation
         is likely to encourage abuse and evasion, the prevention of which is precisely one of the objectives pursued by Community
         law (see, to that effect, Case C‑494/Heintz van Landewijck [2006] ECR I‑5381, paragraphs and 43, and Case C­374/BATIG [2007] ECR I‑000, paragraph 39). 
      
The answer to the second question must therefore be that the principle of fiscal neutrality does not preclude national legislation
         which simply treats taxable persons wishing to opt for a mechanism to simplify VAT declarations and payments differently according
         to whether the parent company or body has held more than 50% of the share capital or stock of the persons with whom it is
         closely linked since at least the beginning of the calendar year preceding that in which the declaration was made or, on the
         contrary, satisfies those conditions only after that date. It is for the national court to determine whether national legislation,
         such as that at issue in the main proceedings, constitutes such a provision. Moreover, neither the principle prohibiting the
         abuse of rights nor the principle of proportionality precludes such legislation. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      The second subparagraph of Article 4(4) of the Sixth Council Directive 77/388/EEC of May on the harmonisation of the
            laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax: uniform basis of assessment is a
            provision which, in order to be implemented by a Member State, requires prior consultation by that State of the Advisory Committee
            on value added tax and the adoption of national legislation authorising persons, in particular companies, established in the
            territory of the country who, while legally independent, are closely bound to one another by financial, economic and organisational
            links, no longer to be treated as separate taxable persons for the purposes of value added tax in order to be treated as a
            single taxable person to whom a single value added tax identification number is allocated and, accordingly, the sole person
            entitled to submit value added tax declarations. It is for the national court to determine whether national legislation, such
            as that at issue in the main proceedings, satisfies those criteria, subject to the qualification that, where there has been
            no prior consultation of the Advisory Committee on value added tax, national legislation which meets those criteria constitutes
            legislation adopted in breach of the procedural requirement laid down in the second subparagraph of Article 4(4) of Sixth
            Directive 77/388. 
2.      The principle of fiscal neutrality does not preclude national legislation which simply treats taxable persons wishing to opt
            for a mechanism to simplify value added tax declarations and payments differently according to whether the parent company
            or body has held more than 50% of the share capital or stock of the persons with whom it is linked since at least the beginning
            of the calendar year preceding that in which the declaration was made or, on the contrary, satisfies those conditions only
            after that date. It is for the national court to determine whether national legislation, such as that at issue in the main
            proceedings, constitutes such a provision. Moreover, neither the principle prohibiting the abuse of rights nor the principle
            of proportionality precludes such legislation.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 