
Case C-117/Proceedings brought by
Gerda Möllendorf and Christiane Möllendorf-Niehuus
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Kammergericht Berlin)
(Common foreign and security policy – Specific restrictive measures directed against persons and entities associated with Usama bin Laden, the Al-Qaida network
         and the Taliban – Freezing of funds and economic resources – Regulation (EC) No 881/– Articles 2(3) and 4(1) – Prohibition on making economic resources available to persons listed in Annex I to that regulation – Scope of prohibition – Sale of immovable property – Contract concluded before inclusion of a buyer in the list in Annex I – Application for registration of the transfer of ownership in the Land Register subsequent to that inclusion)
      
Opinion of Advocate General Mengozzi delivered on May Judgment of the Court (Second Chamber), October Summary of the Judgment
1.     Community law – Principles – Fundamental rights – Compliance by Member States when implementing Community rules
2.     European Union – Common foreign and security policy – Specific restrictive measures directed against certain persons and entities
            associated with Usama bin Laden, the Al-Qaida network and the Taliban
(Council Regulation No 881/2002, Arts 2(3) and 9)
1.     The requirements flowing from the protection of fundamental rights within the Community legal order are also binding on Member
         States when they implement Community rules, and consequently they are bound, as far as possible, to apply the rules in accordance
         with those requirements.
      
(see para. 78)
2.     On a proper interpretation of Article 2(3) of Regulation No 881/imposing certain specific restrictive measures directed
         against certain persons and entities associated with Usama bin Laden, the Al-Qaida network and the Taliban, and repealing
         Regulation No 467/prohibiting the export of certain goods and services to Afghanistan, strengthening the flight ban and
         extending the freeze of funds and other financial resources in respect of the Taliban of Afghanistan, as amended by Regulation
         No 561/2003, in a situation where both a contract for the sale of immovable property and the agreement on transfer of ownership
         of that property have been concluded before the date on which the buyer is included in the list in Annex I to Regulation No
         881/2002, and where the sale price has also been paid before that date, the said Article 2(3) prohibits the final registration,
         in performance of that contract, of the transfer of ownership in the Land Register subsequent to that date.
      
In the first place, the said Article 2(3) applies to any mode of making available an economic resource and therefore also
         to any act which flows from the execution of a contract imposing mutual obligations and which has been agreed in exchange
         for payment of pecuniary consideration. 
      
In addition, Article of Regulation No 881/must be understood as meaning that the measures laid down in that regulation,
         including the freezing of economic resources, preclude also the completion of acts which implement contracts concluded before
         the entry into force of that regulation. 
      
(see paras 56, 62, 80, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Common foreign and security policy – Specific restrictive measures directed against persons and entities associated with Usama bin Laden, the Al-Qaida network
         and the Taliban – Freezing of funds and economic resources – Regulation (EC) No 881/– Articles 2(3) and 4(1) – Prohibition on making economic resources available to persons listed in Annex I to that regulation – Scope of prohibition – Sale of immovable property – Contract concluded before inclusion of a buyer in the list in Annex I – Application for registration of the transfer of ownership in the Land Register subsequent to that inclusion)
      
In Case C‑117/06,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC made by the Kammergericht Berlin (Germany) by decision of February
         2006, received at the Court on March 2006, in the proceedings brought by
      
Gerda Möllendorf,
      
Christiane Möllendorf-Niehuus,
      
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans (Rapporteur), President of Chamber, L. Bay Larsen, K. Schiemann, P. Kūris and J.-C. Bonichot,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: P. Mengozzi,
Registrar: J. Swedenborg, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on March 2007,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Ms Möllendorf and Ms Möllendorf-Niehuus, by K. Alich, Notar,
–       the German Government, by C. Schulze-Bahr and by M. Lumma and A. Dittrich, acting as Agents,
–       the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, assisted by G. Aiello, avvocato dello Stato,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by F. Hoffmeister and A. Manville, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on May 2007,
gives the following
Judgment
The reference for a preliminary ruling relates to the interpretation of Articles 2(3) and 4(1) of Council Regulation (EC)
         No 881/of May imposing certain specific restrictive measures directed against certain persons and entities associated
         with Usama bin Laden, the Al-Qaida network and the Taliban, and repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 467/prohibiting
         the export of certain goods and services to Afghanistan, strengthening the flight ban and extending the freeze of funds and
         other financial resources in respect of the Taliban of Afghanistan (OJ L 139, p. 9), as amended by Council Regulation
         (EC) No 561/of March (OJ L 82, p. 1) (‘Regulation No 881/2002’).
      
This reference has been made in the course of proceedings brought by Gerda Möllendorf and Christiane Möllendorf-Niehuus (‘the
         sellers’) against a decision of the Grundbuchamt (the Land Registry) rejecting their application for registration in the Grundbuch
         (‘the Land Register’) of the transfer of the ownership of some immovable property, in implementation of a notarially recorded
         instrument of sale. 
      
 Legal context
 The United Nations Security Council Resolutions
On January 2002, the United Nations Security Council (‘the Security Council’) adopted Resolution (2002), laying down
         the measures that States must take with respect to Usama bin Laden, members of the Al-Qaida organisation and the Taliban and
         other individuals, groups, undertakings and entities associated with them, as referred to in the list created pursuant to
         Security Council Resolutions (1999) and (2000). 
      
Paragraph 2(a) of Resolution (2002) states:
‘[The Security Council] [d]ecides that all States shall take the following measures with respect to Usama bin Laden, members of the Al-Qaida organisation and
         the Taliban and other individuals, groups, undertakings and entities associated with them, as referred to in the list created
         pursuant to resolutions (1999) and (2000) to be updated regularly by the Committee established pursuant to resolution
         (1999) hereinafter referred to as “the Committee” [the Sanctions Committee]:
      
(a)      Freeze without delay the funds and other financial assets or economic resources of these individuals, groups, undertakings
         and entities, including funds derived from property owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by them or by persons acting
         on their behalf or at their direction, and ensure that neither these nor any other funds, financial assets or economic resources
         are made available, directly or indirectly, for such persons’ benefit, by their nationals or by any persons within their territory’.
         
      
On December 2002, the Security Council adopted Resolution (2002), designed to facilitate the implementation of counter-terrorism
         obligations. In relation to the freezing of funds and economic resources imposed by Resolutions (1999), (2000) and
         (2002), paragraph of Resolution (2002) provides for a certain number of derogations and exceptions which States
         may apply on humanitarian grounds, subject to the approval of the Sanctions Committee.
      
Paragraph of Resolution (2002) provides:
‘[The Security Council] [d]ecides that all States may allow for the addition to accounts subject to the provisions of paragraph 4(b) of resolution (1999)
         and paragraphs and 2(a) of resolution (2002) of:
      
(a)      interest or other earnings due on those accounts, or
(b)      payments due under contracts, agreements or obligations that arose prior to the date on which those accounts became subject
         to the provisions of resolutions (1999), (2000), or (2002),
      
provided that any such interest, other earnings and payments continue to be subject to those provisions. ‘
On July 2004, the Sanctions Committee added the name ‘Aqeel Abdulaziz Al‑Aqil’ to the consolidated list of natural persons
         and entities to be made subject to the freezing of funds pursuant to resolutions (1999) and (2000).
      
 Legislation of the European Union and the European Community 
On May 2002, in order to give effect to Resolution (2002), the Council of the European Union adopted Common Position
         2002/402/CFSP concerning restrictive measures against Usama bin Laden, members of the Al-Qaida organisation and the Taliban
         and other individuals groups, undertakings and entities associated with them and repealing Common Positions 96/746/CFSP, 1999/727/CFSP,
         2001/154/CFSP and 2001/771/CFSP (OJ L 139, p. 4).
      
As is clear in particular from Recital in the preamble thereto, Regulation No 881/was adopted in order to implement,
         inter alia, Resolution (2002).
      
Article of Regulation No 881/provides:
‘For the purpose of this Regulation, the following definitions shall apply:
…
2.      “economic resources” means assets of every kind, whether tangible or intangible, movable or immovable, which are not funds
         but can be used to obtain funds, goods or services;
      
…
4.      “freezing of economic resources” means preventing their use to obtain funds, goods or services in any way, including, but
         not limited to, by selling, hiring or mortgaging them.’
      
Article of Regulation No 881/states:
‘1.      All funds and economic resources belonging to, or owned or held by, a natural or legal person, group or entity designated
         by the Sanctions Committee and listed in Annex I shall be frozen.
      
2.      No funds shall be made available, directly or indirectly, to, or for the benefit of, a natural or legal person, group or entity
         designated by the Sanctions Committee and listed in Annex I.
      
3.      No economic resources shall be made available, directly or indirectly, to, or for the benefit of, a natural or legal person,
         group or entity designated by the Sanctions Committee and listed in Annex I, so as to enable that person, group or entity
         to obtain funds, goods or services.’
      
Under Article 4(1) of Regulation No 881/2002:
‘The participation, knowingly and intentionally, in activities, the object or effect of which is, directly or indirectly,
         to circumvent Article or to promote the transactions referred to in Article 3, shall be prohibited.’
      
Article 7(1) of Regulation No 881/empowers the Commission of the European Communities, inter alia, to ‘amend or supplement
         Annex I on the basis of determinations made by either the … Security Council or the Sanctions Committee’.
      
Article of Regulation No 881/is worded as follows:
‘This Regulation shall apply notwithstanding any rights conferred or obligations imposed by any international agreement signed
         or any contract entered into or any licence or permit granted before the entry into force of this Regulation.’
      
Annex I to Regulation No 881/contains the ‘(l)ist of persons, groups and entities referred to in Article 2’ thereof.
On February 2003, on the view that Community action was necessary to give effect to Resolution (2002), the Council
         adopted Common Position 2003/140/CFSP concerning exceptions to the restrictive measures imposed by Common Position 2002/(OJ L 53, p. 62).
      
Recital in the preamble to Regulation No 561/states that, in view of Resolution (2002), it is necessary to adjust
         the measures imposed by the Community. 
      
Paragraph of Article 2a of Regulation No 881/– an article inserted in that regulation by Regulation No 561/– provides:
‘Article 2(2) [of Regulation No 881/2002] shall not apply to the addition to frozen accounts of:
(a)      interest or other earnings due on those accounts; or
(b)      payments due under contracts, agreements or obligations that arose prior to the date on which those accounts became subject
         to the provisions of … Security Council resolutions implemented successively through Regulation (EC) No 337/…, Regulation
         (EC) No 467/… or this Regulation.
      
In the same manner as the account to which they are added, such interest, other earnings and payments shall also be frozen.’
On July 2004, the Commission adopted Regulation (EC) No 1277/amending for the 37th time Regulation No 881/(OJ
         L 241, p. 12).
      
Pursuant to Article of Regulation No 1277/and paragraph of the Annex thereto, Annex I to Regulation No 881/was
         amended so as to include the entry ‘Aqeel Abulaziz Al-Aqil. Date of birth: April 1949’ under the heading ‘Natural persons’.
      
In accordance with Article thereof, Regulation No 1277/entered into force on the day of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union, that is to say, on July 2004.
      
 The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling 
By notarially recorded instrument of December 2000, a contract of sale was concluded between the sellers, as members of
         a partnership constituted under civil law, and Salem-Abdul Ghani El-Rafei, Kamal Rafehi and Ageel A. Al-Ageel (‘the buyers’),
         also acting as members of such a partnership.
      
By that contract, the sellers agreed to sell land and buildings belonging to them in Berlin to the buyers in exchange for
         payment by the latter of a sale price of DEM 000. 
      
Under the contract of sale, the parties agree that ownership of the immovable property is to be transferred to the buyers
         and the transfer of ownership registered in the Land Register.
      
Under the same contract, the sale price had to be deposited in a trust account of the attesting notary (‘the notary’), and
         then paid to the sellers when the property transfer was provisionally registered in the Land Register, pending final registration.
      
On March 2001, the transfer of ownership to the buyers was provisionally registered in the Land Register.
By decision of October 2003, the Grundbuchamt attached to the Amtsgericht (Local Court) Lichtenberg rejected the application
         made by the notary on January for final registration in the Land Register of the transfer of ownership, on the ground
         that certain documents, production of which had been requested by letter of March 2003, had not been provided in the time
         allowed.
      
On December 2004, the notary submitted a new application for final registration in the Land Register of the transfer of
         ownership to the buyers on the basis of the notarially recorded instrument of December 2000.
      
By decision of April 2005, the Grundbuchamt – having ascertained that the name of one of the buyers appeared in the list
         in Annex I to Regulation No 881/– refused to accept the application for final registration, relying on Articles 2(3)
         and 4(1) of that regulation.
      
On May 2005, the notary submitted a complaint against that decision to the Grundbuchamt. Acting on its own initiative, the
         Grundbuchamt referred the complaint, by decision of May 2005, to the Landgericht (Regional Court) Berlin, which dismissed
         it by order of September 2005.
      
On October 2005, the notary brought an appeal against that decision before the Kammergericht (Higher Regional Court) Berlin.
According to the order for reference, the sellers submit before that court, first, that Articles 2(3) and 4(1) of Regulation
         No 881/– and, in particular, the phrases ‘made … available to’ and ‘made available for the benefit of’ in Article 2(3)
         – should be interpreted as referring only to transactions in which there is an economic imbalance between the consideration
         given and the consideration received. As it is, in the present case, the sale price agreed by the parties for the immovable
         property was a substantial sum and, what is more, it had already been paid to the sellers.
      
The second submission of the sellers before the Kammergericht Berlin is that, if the contract of sale were to be annulled,
         the buyers would have a right, enforceable against the sellers, to repayment of the purchase price for the immovable property:
         in other words, a sum of money equivalent to the purchase price would be made available to the buyers. That, however, would
         be contrary to Recital in the preamble to Regulation No 881/and to Article 2(1) thereof.
      
The referring court explains that, under German law, ownership of immovable property cannot be acquired directly as a result
         of a notarially recorded contract of sale between seller and buyer. If title to the property is effectively to pass to the
         buyer, it is also necessary for the two parties to conclude, in accordance with Article of the Civil Code (Bürgerliches
         Gesetzbuch, ‘the BGB’), an agreement that ownership is to be transferred and for that transfer to be registered in the Land
         Register, in accordance with Article of the BGB.
      
The order for reference adds that, under German law, if there is any restriction on the right to dispose of property – as
         in the case before the referring court because of the supervening obligation to freeze the funds of one of the buyers – and
         if that restriction comes into being after conclusion of both the notarially recorded contract of sale and the agreement to
         transfer ownership, but before the application for registration of the transfer in the Land Register, the Grundbuchamt must,
         as a general rule, take account of that restriction.
      
The Kammergericht Berlin adds that the legal impediment to registration of the transfer of ownership in the Land Register
         precludes completion of the contract of sale, with the consequence that the sellers are required, under Articles and of the BGB, to repay the sale price to the buyers.
      
The question arises, however, whether such a repayment is compatible with the prohibition laid down in Article 2(2) of Regulation
         No 881/2002.
      
In a supplementary order of February 2006, the referring court observes that it cannot be inferred from Articles 2(1) to
         (3) and 4(l) of Regulation No 881/that the seller may be ordered to deposit a sum of money corresponding to the sale
         price of the property concerned if, at the time when the sale contract was concluded or the sale price was received, the seller
         had no knowledge of the sanctions affecting the buyer.
      
In the same order, the referring court states that it is also unclear whether, in cases where there is more than one buyer
         or, as in the main proceedings, where a number of buyers are members of a partnership, the right to repayment of the sale
         price must be suspended in its entirety or only in proportion to the entitlement of the buyer affected by the restrictive
         measures.
      
In those circumstances, on the view that the outcome of the proceedings before it is dependent on the interpretation of Regulation
         No 881/2002, the Kammergericht Berlin decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court of Justice
         for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Do the provisions of Articles 2(3) and 4(1) of Council Regulation (EC) No 881/… prohibit property from being conveyed
         in performance of a sale and purchase agreement to a natural person listed in Annex I to that regulation?
      
(2)      If Question is to be answered in the affirmative: does Regulation … No 881/prohibit the entry in the land register
         necessary for transferring ownership in the property even when the underlying sale and purchase agreement has been concluded,
         and the conveyance declared binding, before publication of the restriction on disposal in the Official Journal of the European Communities, and the contractual purchase price to be paid by the natural person listed in Annex I to the regulation, as buyer, has already
         been 
      
(a)      deposited in the notarial trust account, or
(b)      paid to the seller?’
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
By the two questions, which it is appropriate to examine together, the referring court asks in essence whether, in a situation
         where both the contract for the sale of immovable property and the agreement on transfer of ownership of that property have
         been concluded before the date on which the buyer is included in the list in Annex I to Regulation No 881/and where the
         sale price has also been paid before that date, Articles 2(3) and 4(1) of that regulation must be interpreted as prohibiting
         the final registration, in performance of that contract, of the transfer of ownership in the Land Register subsequent to that
         date.
      
By way of preliminary, it should be pointed out that those questions must be examined solely in the light of Article 2(3)
         of Regulation No 881/2002.
      
As the Advocate General stated in point of his Opinion, there is nothing in the order for reference to explain why Article
         4(1) of Regulation No 881/2002, which concerns the possible circumvention of Article thereof, could be relevant in a situation
         such as that at issue in the main proceedings.
      
As the Commission has stated without being contradicted, the fact that the buyers have concluded the contract of sale in question
         as members of a partnership does not entail any risk of circumvention since, if final registration of the transfer of ownership
         in the Land Register were to be accepted, the names of all of the members – including the name of the person listed in Annex
         I to Regulation No 881/– would have to be entered in the Register.
      
In the present case, the essential question is whether, in circumstances such as those of the case before the referring court,
         final registration of transfer of ownership in the Land Register implies that an economic resource is made available, directly
         or indirectly, to natural or legal persons, groups or entities designated by the Sanctions Committee and listed in Annex I
         to Regulation No 881/so as to enable them to obtain funds, goods or services within the meaning of Article 2(3) of that
         regulation.
      
In that regard, it is important to note, first, that the asset in question in the main proceedings, namely immovable property
         consisting in buildings and land, is an economic resource for the purposes of Article 2(3) of Regulation No 881/and,
         accordingly, such an asset is clearly covered by the definition of ‘economic resources’ in Article 1(2) of that regulation,
         since it is tangible immoveable property which does not consist of funds, but can be used to obtain funds, goods or services.
      
Next, it is clear from the order for reference that one of the three buyers is a natural person who is included both in the
         list drawn up by the Sanctions Committee and in the list in Annex I to Regulation No 881/2002.
      
Consequently, there remains only the question whether final registration in the Land Register of the transfer of ownership
         of the property concerned is an act which must be categorised, for the purposes of Article 2(3) of Regulation No 881/2002,
         as ‘[making an economic resource] available, directly or indirectly’ to the natural person included in those lists, ‘so as
         to enable [that person] to obtain funds, goods or services’.
      
There is nothing in the wording of Article 2(3) of Regulation No 881/to support the inference, argued for by the sellers,
         that that provision does not cover the obtaining of economic resources in the particular context of the case before the referring
         court, namely a transaction in which there is an economic balance between the consideration given and the consideration received.
      
On the contrary, the prohibition laid down in Article 2(3) of Regulation No 881/is framed in particularly broad terms,
         as evidenced by the use of the words ‘directly or indirectly’. 
      
In addition, the expression ‘made available’ has a wide meaning: rather than denoting a specific legal category of act, it
         encompasses all the acts necessary under the applicable national law if a person is effectively to obtain full power of disposal
         in relation to the property concerned. 
      
The inescapable conclusion is that final registration in the Land Register of the transfer of ownership of property constitutes
         such an act, since it is common ground that, under German law, it is only after final registration that the buyer has the
         power not only to mortgage the immovable property, ownership of which has thus been transferred to him, but also and above
         all to transfer title to that property.
      
Moreover, it is precisely acts of that kind that Article 2(3) of Regulation No 881/seeks to prohibit, since they enable
         a person on the list in Annex I to that regulation to obtain funds, goods or services.
      
It is relevant to add that, for the purposes of interpreting Regulation No 881/2002, account must also be taken of the wording
         and purpose of Resolution (2002) which, according to Recital in the preamble to Regulation No 881/2002, that regulation
         is designed to implement (see, to that effect, Case C‑84/Bosphorus [1996] ECR I‑3953, paragraphs and 14, and Case C‑371/Aulinger [2006] ECR I‑2207, paragraph 30).
      
Under paragraph 2(a) of Resolution (2002), States must ‘ensure that neither these nor any other funds [belonging to individuals,
         groups, undertakings or entities associated with them, as referred to in the list created pursuant to resolutions (1999)
         and (2000)], financial assets or economic resources are made available, directly or indirectly, for such persons’ benefit,
         by their nationals or by any persons within their territory’.
      
The broad and unambiguous terms of that provision confirm that Article 2(3) of Regulation No 881/applies to any mode
         of making available an economic resource and therefore also to any act, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which
         flows from the execution of a contract imposing mutual obligations and which has been agreed in exchange for payment of pecuniary
         consideration.
      
Lastly, it cannot be disputed that application, in the case before the referring court, of the prohibition laid down in Article
         2(3) of Regulation No 881/2002, in so far as it affects a person considered to be associated with Usama Bin Laden, the Al-Qaida
         network or with the Taliban, who participates in the financing of acts of terrorism – that is to say, who may even organise
         such acts, facilitate them, prepare them, carry them out or support them – falls within the objectives of the sanctions provided
         for by Resolution (2002), as is apparent in particular from the third and ninth recitals in the preamble to that resolution
         and from paragraph thereof, those objectives being to combat and root out international terrorism, inter alia by cutting
         off international terrorism networks from their financial sources.
      
Moreover, as the German Government rightly states, if the argument put forward by the sellers were to be accepted, it would
         be necessary to determine on the facts of each case whether there is a true economic balance between the consideration given
         under a contract and the consideration received, with the attendant risk that the prohibition might be circumvented, and presenting
         the Member States with difficult problems of implementation.
      
As the German Government further submits, even if there were such an economic balance in the case before the referring court,
         the possibility remains that the asset obtained by the person on the list in Annex I to Regulation No 881/may offer better
         prospects for value enhancement: that asset may, for example, be easier to convert, or it may even be possible, as observed
         by the Advocate General in point of his Opinion, by a subsequent act of disposal of the property, to obtain sums of money
         greater than those expended for its acquisition.
      
The conclusion from the foregoing must be that a transaction such as final registration of transfer of ownership of immovable
         property in the Land Register is prohibited under Article 2(3) of Regulation No 881/if, in consequence of that transaction,
         were it to be allowed, an economic resource is made available to a person listed in Annex I to that regulation, which would
         enable the latter to obtain funds, goods or services.
      
That conclusion cannot be affected, first, by the fact that, in the case before the referring court, a number of steps in
         the property transaction which are necessary, under the relevant German law, to transfer the ownership of immovable property
         – in particular, conclusion both of the contract of sale and of the agreement on transfer of ownership, and in addition payment
         of the sale price – had already been accomplished before that prohibition became applicable to one of the buyers following
         his inclusion on the list.
      
Article of Regulation No 881/must be understood as meaning that the measures laid down in that regulation, including
         the freezing of economic resources, preclude also the completion of acts which implement contracts concluded before the entry
         into force of that regulation, such as final registration of transfer of ownership in the Land Register.
      
As the Advocate General stated in point of his Opinion, the application in that way of those measures, with immediate effect,
         is moreover consistent with the objective pursued by Regulation No 881/– namely, immediately to prevent persons associated
         with Usama bin Laden, the Al-Qaida network or the Taliban from having at their disposal any financial or economic resources,
         in order to impede the financing of terrorist activities – which could not be achieved as effectively if those persons were
         allowed to complete transactions concluded before their inclusion in the list in Annex I to that regulation.
      
Further confirmation that the provisions of Regulation No 881/are to apply immediately is to be found in the fact that
         the Community legislation allows no exception under which it would be possible, after the date on which the regulation entered
         into force, to carry out an act in implementation of a contract concluded before that date, such as (as in the case before
         the referring court) final registration of the transfer of ownership in the Land Register, an act which, as has already been
         stated, entails making available the property concerned within the meaning of Article 2(3) of the regulation.
      
In that connection, it should be noted that Article 2a(4)(b) of Regulation No 881/2002, which reproduces verbatim the content
         of paragraph of Resolution (2002), provides for an exception to the prohibition laid down in Article 2(2) of that regulation,
         as regards the addition to frozen accounts of payments due under contracts, agreements or obligations that arose prior to
         the date on which those accounts became subject to the provisions of the Security Council resolutions implemented, inter alia,
         by Regulation No 881/2002, requiring such payments also to be frozen, in the same manner as the account to which they are
         added. 
      
However, no such exception is provided for in the Community legislation as regards the prohibition laid down in Article 2(3)
         of Regulation No 881/concerning the making available of economic resources such as those at issue in the main proceedings.
         Nor is any such exception to be found in the relevant Security Council Resolutions.
      
Next, the conclusion reached as to the applicability of the prohibition laid down in Article 2(3) of Regulation No 881/in circumstances such as those of the case before the referring court cannot be called in question, either, by the difficulties
         which would be caused, according to the referring court, by the fact that it would not be possible to proceed with final registration
         of the transfer of ownership of the immovable property concerned in the Land Register.
      
As the referring court stated, it follows from the relevant national law that, since the lack of such registration precludes
         completion of the contract of sale, the sellers are under an obligation to repay to the buyers the sale price paid by the
         latter for the immovable property. There then arises the question whether such repayment is compatible with the prohibition
         provided for in Article 2(2) of Regulation No 881/2002.
      
In that regard, it must be stated that, even if such a difficulty were to arise as a result of the implications under national
         law of the application of Article 2(3) of Regulation No 881/2002, it cannot on any view have any effect on the answer to be
         given to the question whether, under Community law, the prohibition laid down in that provision applies in a case such as
         that before the referring court.
      
In any event, the repayment of the sale price, as provided for under national law, certainly seems to be permitted under Article
         2a(4)(b) of Regulation No 881/2002. That provision in fact provides for an exception to the prohibition laid down in Article
         2(2) of that regulation, provided that the conditions for the application of that exception are met, one such condition being
         the freezing of the funds repaid.
      
Furthermore, as regards the question whether, in cases where there is more than one buyer and, in particular, where the buyers
         are all members of a partnership, repayment of the sale price for the property concerned must be suspended in its entirety
         or only in proportion to the entitlement of the buyer affected by the restrictive measures, it must be held that this also
         is a question which relates to the implementation, in the light of the national law, of the prohibition laid down in Article
         2(3) of Regulation No 881/2002. 
      
However, as has already been stated in paragraph of this judgment, such a question, which concerns the implications of
         rules of national law relating to the consequences entailed by application of the prohibition, cannot affect the interpretation
         which must be given by the Court to Article 2(3) of Regulation No 881/2002.
      
On that point, it is appropriate to point out that, in accordance with Article of Regulation No 881/2002, the Commission
         and the Member States are to inform each other, inter alia, of any problems relating to the implementation of the regulation.
      
Lastly, the sellers and the notary submitted at the hearing that the application, in the proceedings before the referring
         court, of the prohibition laid down in Article 2(3) of Regulation No 881/is incompatible with the fundamental right of
         disposal enjoyed by the owners of property.
      
In that regard, it should be stated that there is no question in this case of an alleged disproportionate infringement of
         the right to property of a person listed in Annex I to Regulation No 881/as a result of the restrictive measures provided
         for in that regulation in respect of such a person.
      
The alleged infringement of the right to property concerns indirect effects, on the property rights of persons other than
         those so listed, brought about by the obligation to repay which may arise, in accordance with the applicable national law,
         as a result of the fact that, pursuant to Article 2(3) of Regulation No 881/it is not possible to proceed with final
         registration of the transfer of ownership of the immovable property in the Land Register.
      
Consequently, the question whether, in view of the special features of the case before the referring court, such an obligation
         to make repayment is a disproportionate infringement of the right to property cannot have any effect on the question whether
         Article 2(3) of Regulation No 881/applies to a situation such as that in the case before the referring court. That question
         is therefore a matter of national law and cannot be examined in the context of the present reference for a preliminary ruling.
      
However, as regards the application of Regulation No 881/2002, it should also be pointed out that, in accordance with settled
         case-law, the requirements flowing from the protection of fundamental rights within the Community legal order are also binding
         on Member States when they implement Community rules, and that consequently they are bound, as far as possible, to apply the
         rules in accordance with those requirements (see, inter alia, Joined Cases C‑20/and C‑64/00, Booker Aquaculture and Hydro Seafood [2003] ECR I‑7411, paragraph and case-law cited there).
      
Accordingly, it is for the referring court to determine whether, in view of the special features of the case before it, repayment
         of the sums received by the sellers would constitute a disproportionate infringement of their right to property and, if that
         is the case, to apply the national legislation in question, so far as is possible, in such a way that the requirements flowing
         from Community law are not infringed.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the questions referred must be that in a situation where both the contract for
         the sale of immovable property and the agreement on transfer of ownership of that property have been concluded before the
         date on which the buyer is included in the list in Annex I to Regulation No 881/and where the sale price has also been
         paid before that date, Article 2(3) of that regulation must be interpreted as prohibiting the final registration, in performance
         of that contract, of the transfer of ownership in the Land Register subsequent to that date.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
In a situation where both the contract for the sale of immovable property and the agreement on transfer of ownership of that
            property have been concluded before the date on which the buyer is included in the list in Annex I to Council Regulation (EC)
            No 881/of May imposing certain specific restrictive measures directed against certain persons and entities associated
            with Usama bin Laden, the Al-Qaida network and the Taliban, and repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 467/prohibiting
            the export of certain goods and services to Afghanistan, strengthening the flight ban and extending the freeze of funds and
            other financial resources in respect of the Taliban of Afghanistan, as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 561/of March 2003, and where the sale price has also been paid before that date, Article 2(3) of that regulation, as amended by Regulation
            No 561/2003, must be interpreted as prohibiting the final registration, in performance of that contract, of the transfer of
            ownership in the Land Register subsequent to that date.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 