
Case C-106/Lidl & Companhia
v
Fazenda Pública
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Supremo Tribunal Administrativo)
(Taxation – Directive 2006/112/EC – VAT – Taxable amount – Tax payable on the manufacture, assembly, admission or import of vehicles)
Summary of the Judgment
Tax provisions – Harmonisation of laws – Turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax – Taxable amount
(Council Directive 2006/112, Art. 78, first para., (a))
A vehicle tax, the chargeable event for which is linked directly to the supply of a vehicle falling within the ambit of that
         tax and which is paid by the supplier of that vehicle, is covered by the definition of ‘taxes, duties, levies and charges’
         for the purpose of point (a) of the first paragraph of Article of Directive 2006/on the common system of value added
         tax and must, pursuant to that provision, be included in the taxable amount for value added tax on the supply of that vehicle.
      
Sums paid by the supplier by way of that vehicle tax by reason of the manufacture, assembly, admission or import into Portuguese
         territory of vehicles that must be registered in Portugal are, therefore, included in the value of the vehicle supplied. 
         The purchaser of a vehicle subject to that vehicle tax, paid by the supplier of that vehicle in his own name and on his own
         behalf, pays, therefore, for a previous transaction carried out by that taxable person.
      
(see paras 34, 37, 42, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Seventh Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Taxation – Directive 2006/112/EC – VAT – Taxable amount – Tax payable on the manufacture, assembly, admission or import of vehicles)
In Case C‑106/10,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the Supremo Tribunal Administrativo (Portugal), made by decision
         of January 2010, received at the Court on February 2010, in the proceedings
      
Lidl & Companhia
v
Fazenda Pública,
intervener:
Ministério Público,
THE COURT (Seventh Chamber),
composed of D. Šváby (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, G. Arestis and J. Malenovský, Judges,
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: A. Impellizzeri, administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on May 2011,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Lidl & Companhia, by M. Lourenço and I. Ramos, advogados,
–        the Fazenda Pública, by N. Severino, advogado,
–        the Portuguese Government, by L. Fernandes and R. Laires, acting as Agents,
–        the European Commission, by M. Afonso, acting as Agent,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
The reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of point (a) of the first paragraph of Article and point
         (c) of the first paragraph of Article of Council Directive 2006/112/EC of November on the common system of value
         added tax (JO L 347, p. 1, and corrigendum OJ L 335, p. 60) (‘the Directive’).
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between Lidl & Companhia and the Fazenda Pública (the Portuguese Treasury) concerning
         the inclusion in the taxable amount for value added tax (‘VAT’) of the vehicle tax (imposto sobre veículos, ‘ISV’) relating
         to the purchase of two vehicles from a Portuguese motor-vehicle importing company.
      
 Legal context
 European Union legislation
Article of Directive 2006/provides:
      
‘In respect of the supply of goods or services, other than as referred to in Articles to 77, the taxable amount shall include
         everything which constitutes consideration obtained or to be obtained by the supplier, in return for the supply, from the
         customer or a third party, including subsidies directly linked to the price of the supply.’
      
Point (a) of the first paragraph of Article of that directive states:
      
‘The taxable amount shall include the following factors:
(a)      taxes, duties, levies and charges, excluding the VAT itself’.
Article of the Directive provides:
      
‘The taxable amount shall not include the following factors:
…
(c)      amounts received by a taxable person from the customer, as repayment of expenditure incurred in the name and on behalf of
         the customer, and entered in his books in a suspense account.
      
The taxable person must furnish proof of the actual amount of the expenditure referred to in point (c) of the first paragraph
         and may not deduct any VAT which may have been charged.’
      
Article of the Directive provides:
      
‘In respect of the intra-Community acquisition of goods, the taxable amount shall be established on the basis of the same
         factors as are used in accordance with Chapter to determine the taxable amount for the supply of the same goods within the
         territory of the Member State concerned …’
      
 National legislation
 The VAT legislation
Article of the VAT Code (Código do Imposto sobre o Valor Acrescentado, ‘the CIVA’) provides:
      
‘1.      Without prejudice to paragraph 2, the taxable amount in respect of the taxable supply of goods or services shall be equivalent
         to the value of the consideration received or to be received from the purchaser, the recipient of services or a third party.
      
...
5.      The taxable amount in respect of the taxable supply of goods or services shall include the following factors:
(a)       taxes, duties, levies and charges, excluding the VAT itself;
...
6.       The taxable amount shall not include the following factors:
…
(c)      amounts paid in the name and on behalf of the purchaser of the goods or of the recipient of the services, duly recorded in
         a third party account by the taxpayer:
      
...’
Article of the CIVA states:
      
‘1.       The taxable amount of imported goods shall be their value for customs purposes, determined in accordance with the European
         Union provisions in force.
      
2.       The taxable amount shall include the following factors, in so far as they are not already included:
(a)      taxes, duties, levies and other charges due outside the Member State of importation, and those due by reason of importation,
         excluding the VAT to be levied:
      
...’
Article of the VAT Rules applicable to intra-Community transactions (Regime do IVA nas Transacções Intracomunitárias) is
         worded as follows:
      
‘1.      For the purposes of determining the taxable amount for intra-Community purchases of goods, the provisions of Article of
         the CIVA relating to the supply of goods shall apply on the same conditions.
      
...
3.       In the case of intra-Community purchases of goods subject to excise duties or vehicle tax, those duties or taxes shall be
         included in the taxable amount, even if they are not charged at the same time.’ 
      
 The vehicle tax rules
The vehicle tax code (Código do ISV), published as an annex to Law No 22‑A/of June (Diário da República I, No 124, of June 2007, ‘the CISV’) entered into force on July 2007.
      
Article 3(1) of the CISV provides:
      
‘The tax shall be payable by registered operators [licensed dealers], authorised operators and private individuals, as defined
         in this Code, engaged in the release for consumption of vehicles liable to the tax, such persons being considered to be those
         persons in whose name the customs declaration for vehicles or the supplementary declaration for vehicles is made.’
      
Article of the CISV reads as follows:
      
‘1.      The chargeable event for the tax shall be the manufacture or assembly in, or admission or import into, national territory
         of vehicles liable to tax that must be registered in Portugal. 
      
2.      The following also shall be a chargeable event for the tax:
(a)      the allocation of a new, definitive registration number following voluntary national deregistration, together with reimbursement
         of the tax or any other tax advantage;
      
...
(d)       the presence of the vehicle in national territory in breach of the provisions of this Code. 
3.      For the purposes of this Code, the following definitions shall apply:
(a)       “admission” means the entry into national territory of a vehicle originating or released for free circulation in another Member
         State of the European Union;
      
(b)       “import” means the entry into national territory of a vehicle originating in a non-member country.
...’
In accordance with Article 6(1) of the CISV, ISV becomes payable at the moment of release for consumption, that is to say:
      
‘(a)      at the time when the application for release for consumption is made by registered operators and authorised operators;
(b)      at the time when the customs declaration for vehicles or the supplementary declaration for vehicles is made by private individuals.’
Article of the CISV defines private individuals as ‘any taxable persons carrying out the admission or import of vehicles
         liable to tax, whether new or second-hand, for the principal purpose of satisfying their own transport needs’. 
      
In accordance with Article 27(3) of the CISV, the authorities responsible for registration may not consent to register vehicles
         unless proof is supplied of payment, in particular of ISV when that tax is payable.
      
Pursuant to Article 58(1) of the CISV entitled ‘Transfer of residence’, vehicles belonging to persons moving their residence
         to Portugal from another Member State of the Union or from a non-member State are exempt from payment of ISV.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
On September 2007, Lidl & Companhia bought two motor vehicles. The invoices issued by the supplier and paid by that undertaking
         included the basic price, the ISV and miscellaneous expenses. VAT was applied to the total amount at the rate of 21%. 
      
On January 2008, Lidl & Companhia brought an administrative appeal against the notice of assessment of liability for the
         VAT charged on the two abovementioned invoices, the amounts of VAT assessed coming to EUR 601.and EUR 554.33, respectively.
         On April 2008, the director of the Sintra Region tax office rejected that appeal, by order of which the appellant was
         notified. 
      
The Tribunal Administrativo e Fiscal de Sintra having dismissed in its entirety the action brought by Lidl & Companhia against
         the notice of assessment to VAT, that undertaking appealed to the Supremo Tribunal Administrativo. Before this court, the
         appellant maintains that the decision of the Tribunal Administrativo e Fiscal de Sintra, in accepting the argument that the
         ISV charged and paid on the import of vehicles into national territory must be included in the calculation of the taxable
         amount for VAT, infringes Article 16(6)(c) of the CISV and point (c) of the first paragraph of Article of Directive 2006/112.
         Lidl & Companhia argues that, although it is not the taxable person in respect of the ISV imposed on the vehicles it purchased,
         that tax was passed on to it and gave rise to the payment of an excessive amount of VAT, of which it claims repayment. 
      
The Ministério Público (State Counsel’s office) for the national court takes the view that ISV is a ‘single-stage’ tax, payable
         once only, when, on its first registration in Portugal, the vehicle is first brought onto the Portuguese market. It has argued
         that this tax, the chargeable event for which is the bringing of the vehicle onto the Portuguese market on its first registration
         in Portugal, possesses features similar to those of the registration duty giving rise to the judgment in Case C‑98/De Danske Bilimportører [2006] ECR I‑4945. In consequence, it suggests that a reference should be made to the Court of Justice seeking a preliminary
         ruling.
      
Having regard to the claims made by the appellant and by the Ministério Público, but considering none the less that to include
         ISV within the taxable amount for VAT does not infringe European Union law, the Supremo Tribunal Administrativo has decided
         to stay the proceedings and to refer the following question to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Is point (a) of the first paragraph of Article 78, read in conjunction with point (c) of the first paragraph of Article 79,
         of Directive 2006/112/EC of November to be interpreted as prohibiting, in the case of intra-Community purchases, the
         inclusion in the taxable amount for VAT of the vehicle tax introduced by Law No 22-A/of June 2007?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
 Admissibility
In its observations, the Portuguese Government challenges the admissibility of this reference for a preliminary ruling. 
      
In particular, it argues that the order for reference does not give sufficient information, first, as to the nature of the
         operation at issue in the main proceedings, whether supply of goods or intra-Community purchase, next, as to the manner in
         which Lidl & Companhia paid the ISV and the disputed VAT and, last, as to the link between the dispute in the main proceedings
         and the provisions of which interpretation is sought.
      
In this regard it is to be borne in mind that, in accordance with settled case‑law, in proceedings under Article TFEU,
         based on a clear separation of functions between the national courts and the Court of Justice, the national court alone has
         jurisdiction to find and assess the facts in the case before it and to interpret and apply national law. Similarly, it is
         solely for the national court, before which the dispute has been brought and which must assume responsibility for the judicial
         decision to be made, to determine, in the light of the particular circumstances of the case, both the need for and the relevance
         of the questions that it submits to the Court. Consequently, where the questions submitted concern the interpretation of European
         Union law, the Court is in principle bound to give a ruling (see Joined Cases C‑165/to C‑167/Stichting Natuur en Milieu and Others [2011] ECR I‑0000, paragraph and case-law cited).
      
It follows that questions referred for a preliminary ruling concerning European Union law enjoy a presumption of relevance.
         The Court may refuse to rule on a question referred by a national court only where it is quite obvious that the interpretation
         of European Union law sought is unrelated to the actual facts of the main action or its purpose, where the problem is hypothetical,
         or where the Court does not have before it the factual or legal material necessary to give a useful answer to the questions
         submitted to it (Case C‑225/Jakubowska [2011] ECR I‑0000, paragraph and case-law cited).
      
It must be stated that the order for reference contains an adequate description of the legal and factual background to the
         dispute in the main proceedings, and that the information provided by the referring court makes it possible for the significance
         of the questions referred to be determined. Moreover, it is not for the Court of Justice to call in question either the classification
         as an intra-Community purchase of the transaction at issue in the main proceedings, made by the national court in the question
         it has referred, or the implied view that the appellant in the main proceedings paid VAT on the sum of the ISV and that it
         seeks repayment thereof. Having regard to the reference made in Article of Directive 2006/to Article et seq. of
         the latter, interpretation of Articles and of the Directive is, on any view, relevant to the settlement of the case
         in the main proceedings, whether the transaction at issue in those proceedings is a supply of goods or an intra-Community
         acquisition.
      
It follows that the reference for a preliminary ruling is admissible.
      
 Substance
By its question, the national court seeks, in essence, to ascertain whether a tax such as ISV must be included in the taxable
         amount for VAT as a tax, duty, levy or charge within the meaning of point (a) of the first paragraph of Article of Directive
         2006/or must, on the contrary, be left out of that taxable amount pursuant to point (c) of the first paragraph of Article
         of the Directive. 
      
The first point to be noted here is that, according to Article of Directive 2006/112, in respect of the intra-Community
         acquisition of goods, the taxable amount is to be established on the basis of the same factors as are used, in accordance
         with Articles to of the Directive, to determine the taxable amount for the supply of the same goods within the territory
         of the Member State concerned.
      
Point (a) of the first paragraph of Article of the Directive provides, more particularly, that, in respect of the supply
         of goods, taxes, duties, levies and charges, excluding VAT itself, are to be included in the taxable amount.
      
Point (c) of the first paragraph of Article of the Directive provides that amounts received by a taxable person from the
         customer, as repayment of expenditure incurred in the name and on behalf of the customer, and entered in his books in a suspense
         account, are not to be included in the taxable amount. 
      
In order to ascertain whether a tax such as ISV must be included in the taxable amount for VAT or must, on the contrary, be
         left out of that amount, it has to be determined, first, whether that tax falls within the definition of ‘taxes, duties, levies
         and charges,’ for the purpose of point (a) of the first paragraph of Article of Directive 2006/and, secondly, whether
         it is covered by the exception provided for by point (c) of the first paragraph of Article of the Directive.
      
As regards, first, point (a) of the first paragraph of Article of Directive 2006/112, the Court has stated that if taxes,
         duties, levies and charges are to fall within the basis of assessment, even though they do not represent any added value and
         do not constitute the financial consideration for the supply of the goods, they must be directly linked to that supply (judgment
         of December in Case C‑433/Commission v Austria, paragraph and case-law cited).
      
In this regard, it is clear from the case-law that whether or not the supplier of the vehicle has paid a tax in his own name
         and on his own behalf is decisive in ascertaining whether a tax is to be included in the value of the goods supplied and,
         if so, that the consideration to be taken into account in computing the taxable amount must, as a general rule, include the
         amount of the tax in question (see, to that effect, the judgment of May in Case C‑228/Commission v Poland, paragraph 40).
      
In this instance, according to Article 3(1) of the CISV the tax is payable by registered operators, authorised operators and
         private individuals releasing for consumption vehicles liable to the tax, that is to say, those persons in whose name the
         customs declaration for vehicles or the supplementary declaration for vehicles is made. With regard to individuals, as defined
         by Article of the CISV, it is apparent that they are merely residuary taxable persons, as maintained by the Portuguese
         Republic at the hearing. 
      
It is, therefore, clear that in principle the expenditure paid by way of ISV was paid, not on behalf of the purchaser of the
         vehicle but by its supplier within the meaning of Article of Directive 2006/112, a direct link being thus established between
         the supply transaction performed by the supplier and that tax.
      
To the same effect, it must be noted that, although supply is not expressly mentioned as the chargeable event for ISV, it
         is clear from Article 5(1) of the CISV that the chargeable events for this tax are all established as being carried out upstream
         and forming part of the supply transaction. The sums paid by the supplier by way of ISV by reason of the manufacture, assembly,
         admission or import into Portuguese territory of vehicles that must be registered in Portugal are, therefore, included in
         the value of the vehicle supplied, as the Portuguese Republic has maintained. By so doing so, the purchaser of a vehicle subject
         to ISV paid by the supplier of that vehicle pays for a previous transaction carried out by that taxable person.
      
Furthermore, no direct legal connection can be made between ISV and the registration operation, unlike the circumstances of
         the tax at issue in the case giving rise to the judgment in De Danske Bilimportører. It may, in particular, be noted that the CISV provides for several cases in which ISV is not payable, notwithstanding the
         registration of a vehicle falling within its ambit. This is most particularly so in the case of the exemption, allowed in
         accordance with Article 58(1) of the CISV, for vehicles belonging to persons moving their residence to Portugal. It is also
         relevant here that both the chargeable event and the liability to pay ISV predate the registration operation, as is made clear
         by Article of the CISV, according to which a vehicle liable to the tax may be registered only if all the relevant taxes
         and duties have been paid. 
      
Accordingly, a tax such as ISV must be regarded as directly linked to the supply of vehicles falling within its ambit and,
         in consequence, be included in the taxable amount for VAT in accordance with point (a) of the first paragraph of Article of Directive 2006/112.
      
As regards, in the second place, point (c) of the first paragraph of Article of Directive 2006/112, it cannot reasonably
         be maintained that the expenditure incurred by a registered operator or an authorised operator by way of ISV was incurred
         in the name and on behalf of the purchaser of the vehicle in question. To that effect, it is enough to state that, as is apparent
         from paragraph above, the persons liable to pay ISV are the suppliers of the vehicles, not their purchasers (see, by analogy,
         Commission v Austria, paragraph 48).
      
A tax such as ISV may not, therefore, be left out of the taxable amount for VAT under point (c) of the first paragraph of
         Article of Directive 2006/112.
      
Having regard to the foregoing, the answer to be given to the question referred is that a tax such as ISV, at issue in the
         main proceedings, the chargeable event for which is linked directly to the supply of a vehicle falling within the ambit of
         that tax and which is paid by the supplier of that vehicle, is covered by the definition of ‘taxes, duties, levies and charges’
         for the purpose of point (a) of the first paragraph of Article of Directive 2006/and must, pursuant to that provision,
         be included in the taxable amount for VAT on the supply of that vehicle.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Seventh Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      A tax such as vehicle tax (imposto sobre veículos), at issue in the main proceedings, the chargeable event for which is linked
            directly to the supply of a vehicle falling within the ambit of that tax and which is paid by the supplier of that vehicle,
            is covered by the definition of ‘taxes, duties, levies and charges’ for the purpose of point (a) of the first paragraph of
            Article of Council Directive 2006/112/EC of November on the common system of value added tax and must, pursuant
            to that provision, be included in the taxable amount for value added tax on the supply of that vehicle.
[Signatures]
*  Language of the case: Portuguese.
      
Top  
 