
ORDER OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)
June (*)
      
(Appeal in part manifestly inadmissible and in part manifestly unfounded – European Ombudsman – Decision to take no further action on a complaint of maladministration – Action for annulment – Dismissal on the grounds of manifest inadmissibility and manifest lack of jurisdiction – Challenge)
In Case C‑580/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice lodged on December 2008,
Devrajan Srinivasan, residing in Dublin (Ireland), represented by J.B. Morton, Solicitor,
      
appellant,
the other party to the proceedings being:
European Ombudsman,
defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
composed of J.-C. Bonichot, President of the Chamber, K. Schiemann and L. Bay Larsen (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: P. Mengozzi,
Registrar: R. Grass,
after hearing the Advocate General,
makes the following
Order
By his appeal, Mr Srinivasan requests the Court to set aside the order of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities
         of November in Case T‑196/Srinivasan v Ombudsman (‘the order under appeal’), by which the Court of First Instance dismissed his application seeking an order that that court
         should: 
      
–        declare that Ireland has ‘conspired’ with the Permanent Trustee Savings Bank (‘TSB’) in a fraud against most depositors from
         June to February in breach of Council Directive 84/450/EEC of September relating to the approximation
         of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning misleading advertising (OJ L 250,
         p. 17);
      
–        declare that the decision of the Commission of the European Communities of October to take no further action on complaint
         No 2004/lodged by the appellant is illegal and in breach of Article EC;
      
–        annul the decision of the European Ombudsman of April adopted following complaint No 3125/2005/BB lodged by the appellant;
–        order the Ombudsman to recommend to the Commission:
–        that it prosecute Ireland for conspiring in the alleged fraud, in breach of Directive 84/450;
–        that it inform the European Parliament that Ireland ‘conspired’ with TSB in the fraud against most depositors from to
         February 1993; 
      
–        declare that the appellant has locus standi to represent those depositors;
      
–        rule on costs. 
 The facts 
By letter of June 2004, Mr Srinivasan lodged a complaint with the Commission, registered under number 2004/4490, seeking
         a declaration: (1) that actions by TSB had infringed Directive 84/450; and (2) that the Irish authorities had failed to fulfil
         their supervisory obligation, contrary to the provisions of that directive. 
      
By letter of July 2005, Mr Srinivasan submitted a complaint to the Ombudsman, complaining of maladministration by the Commission
         and infringement of its obligations under Article EC in its handling of his complaint. 
      
By decision of October 2005, the Commission decided to take no further action on the complaint lodged with it, on the ground
         that the information contained therein did not demonstrate any infringement of Community law by the Irish authorities. 
      
By letter of April 2008, the Ombudsman informed Mr Srinivasan that, on the basis of his investigation following the complaint,
         he had found no maladministration on the part of the Commission and had therefore decided to close his file. 
      
 The proceedings before the Court of First Instance and the order under appeal 
By application lodged at the Registry of the Court of First Instance on May 2008, the appellant brought an action claiming
         that that court should grant the form of order sought in paragraph of this order. 
      
By the order under appeal, made pursuant to Article of its Rules of Procedure, the Court of First Instance, without taking
         further steps in the proceedings, dismissed the action in part as manifestly inadmissible and in part on the ground of clear
         lack of jurisdiction.
      
 The form of order sought by the appellant before the Court of Justice 
By his appeal, Mr Srinivasan asks that the Court of Justice: 
      
–        set aside the order under appeal;
–        grant the form of order sought at first instance, as reproduced in full in the appeal; 
–        rule on the costs of the appeal proceedings and of the proceedings at first instance. 
 The appeal 
Under Article of its Rules of Procedure, where an appeal is, in whole or in part, clearly inadmissible or clearly unfounded,
         the Court may at any time, acting on a report from the Judge-Rapporteur and after hearing the Advocate General, dismiss the
         appeal in whole or in part by reasoned order. 
      
It is appropriate to apply that provision in this case. 
      
 The application that the order under appeal should be set aside
In support of his application that the order under appeal should be set aside, the appellant submits that the Court of First
         Instance: 
      
–        without having competence in this respect, in its statement of the form of order sought before it, altered one of the terms
         in which the application was couched, thereby misinterpreting the application; 
      
–        also without having competence in this respect, failed to reproduce certain facts referred to in the application; 
–        infringed Article 6(1) of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, signed in Rome
         on November (‘ECHR’);
      
–        infringed Articles 24(6) and of its Rules of Procedure; 
–        infringed Articles EC, EC, 153(1) EC, EC, EC, EC and EC, read in conjunction with Directive 84/and
         Article of the First Additional Protocol to the ECHR and Article of the ECHR;
      
–        misconstrued the application for annulment of the Ombudsman’s decision by considering that that application was based on Article
         EC.
      
 The plea that the Court of First Instance altered one of the terms in which the form of order sought in the application at
         first instance was couched 
      
The appellant complains that in the statement of the form of order sought in the application set out in paragraph of the
         order under appeal, the Court of First Instance stated that it had been asked to ‘order the Ombudsman to direct the Commission
         as follows …’, using the verb ‘direct’ instead of the verb ‘recommend’, which appears in the application. 
      
In this respect, it should be noted that, in the version of the order under appeal in the language of the case, the Court
         of First Instance did indeed use the verb ‘direct’ instead of the verb ‘recommend’ and that the first verb has a stronger
         meaning than the second one.
      
However, that alteration affects only the statement of the consequence that the appellant was requesting the Court of First
         Instance to draw from the annulment of the decision of April which he was asking it to pronounce at the outset.
      
In the event, the application for annulment of that decision was declared manifestly inadmissible by the Court of First Instance
         at paragraph of the order under appeal. 
      
Accordingly, the Court of First Instance did not have to examine the question of any consequence of an annulment. 
      
The alleged alteration did not therefore have any effect on the decision of the Court of First Instance. 
      
This plea is therefore clearly unfounded. 
      
 The plea that the order under appeal failed to reproduce certain facts referred to in the application 
The appellant complains that in the order under appeal the Court of First Instance did not recite verbatim the statement of
         facts contained in the application. More specifically, the Court of First Instance is criticised for making no mention of
         the convictions against TSB during as a result of a private prosecution by the appellant. 
      
In this respect, it must be recalled that, in accordance with the 10th indent of Article of the Rules of Procedure of the
         Court of First Instance, its decisions are to contain a ‘summary of the facts’. 
      
It follows that, contrary to what the appellant claims, the Court of First Instance is not required to set out all the facts
         relied on by the appellant or to reproduce verbatim each of the facts that it actually sets out in its summary. 
      
The summary may confine itself to stating, in language which is not necessarily that used by the parties, the facts relevant
         to the outcome of the case, namely the facts which must necessarily be analysed by that court for the purposes of its decision.
         
      
In the present case, the facts whose omission is complained of are part of the facts submitted to the Ombudsman for the purposes
         of his intervention. They were examined by the Ombudsman as part of his assessment of whether there had been an instance of
         maladministration in the activity of a Community institution. Analysis of those facts led to the Ombudsman’s decision to close
         the file opened following the appellant’s complaint. 
      
The facts at issue thus relate to the substance of the dispute brought before the Court of First Instance.
      
However, as has already been noted, the application for annulment of the Ombudsman’s decision has been declared manifestly
         inadmissible.
      
In those circumstances, the Court of First Instance was not required to examine the substance of the dispute, and therefore
         the summary of the facts at issue in the order under appeal was of no relevance to the outcome of that dispute. 
      
It follows that this plea is manifestly unfounded.
      
 The plea alleging infringement of Article 6(1) of the ECHR 
The appellant submits that the Court of First Instance infringed Article 6(1) of the ECHR by failing to take any account of
         the convictions against TSB during to which the appellant had referred in his application. He claims that, in accordance
         with the case‑law of the European Court of Human Rights, the effect of that provision is, inter alia, to place a court under
         a duty to conduct a proper examination of the submissions, arguments and evidence adduced by the parties, without prejudice
         to its assessment of whether they are relevant to its decision (Eur. Court H.R., Kraska, judgment of April 1993, Series A No 254-B, § 30). 
      
However, it has already been pointed out during the examination of the plea alleging failure to reproduce certain facts referred
         to in the application that the convictions against TSB during relate to the substance of the dispute. The same is true
         of the arguments expounded in relation to those convictions.
      
Consequently, since the application for annulment of the Ombudsman’s decision was declared manifestly inadmissible by the
         Court of First Instance, the latter was not required to examine those arguments, which had become irrelevant to the outcome
         of the dispute. 
      
It follows that this plea is manifestly unfounded.
      
 The pleas alleging infringements of Articles 24(6) and of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance 
The appellant complains that the Court of First Instance made its order without previously publishing in the Official Journal of the European Union the notice provided for in Article 24(6) of its Rules of Procedure or hearing the Advocate General pursuant to Article of those rules.
      
In this regard, it must be pointed out that Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance allows that
         court, where it is clear that it has no jurisdiction to take cognisance of an action or where the action is manifestly inadmissible
         or manifestly lacking any foundation in law, by reasoned order, after hearing the Advocate General, to give a decision on
         the action without taking further steps in the proceedings.
      
The expression ‘without taking further steps in the proceedings’ in that provision allows the Court of First Instance, where
         the conditions of that provision are fulfilled, to give a decision on an action without previously publishing a notice in
         the Official Journal of the European Union. 
      
The Court of First Instance’s obligation to hear the Advocate General before giving a decision on an action must be read in
         the light of Articles 2(2), and of its Rules of Procedure, from which it is apparent, first, that the designation of
         a Judge of the Court of First Instance as Advocate General is optional where the Court of First Instance sits in chamber and,
         second, that references to the Advocate General in those Rules of Procedure are to apply only where a Judge has in fact been
         designated as Advocate General. 
      
In the present case, the Court of First Instance sat in chamber without designating a judge to perform the function of Advocate
         General.
      
Accordingly, the obligation to hear the Advocate General laid down in Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of
         First Instance was not applicable. 
      
It follows from the foregoing that these two pleas are manifestly unfounded. 
      
 The pleas alleging infringements of Articles EC, EC, 153(1) EC, EC, EC, EC and EC, read in conjunction
         with Directive 84/450, and Article of the First Additional Protocol to the ECHR and Article of the ECHR 
      
The appellant submits that the order under appeal is in breach of Articles EC, EC, 153(1) EC, EC, EC, EC
         and EC, read in conjunction with Directive 84/450, and Article of the First Additional Protocol to the ECHR and Article
         of the ECHR in respect of depositors who were defrauded. 
      
In this respect, it is apparent from settled case‑law (see, in particular, order of November in Case C‑107/P Weber v Commission, paragraphs and 25, and order of February in Case C‑290/P Correia de Matos v Commission, paragraphs and and case‑law cited) that: 
      
–        an appeal must indicate precisely the contested elements of the judgment or order which the appellant seeks to have set aside
         and also the legal arguments specifically advanced in support of the appeal; 
      
–        that requirement is not satisfied by an appeal which does not include any argument specifically identifying the error of law
         allegedly vitiating the judgment or order in question;
      
–        a mere abstract statement of the grounds in the appeal does not satisfy the requirements of Article of the Statute of the
         Court of Justice and Article 112(1)(c) of its Rules of Procedure.
      
In the present case, it is sufficient to note that the appellant merely states in general and abstract terms that, in respect
         of the depositors who were allegedly defrauded, the order under appeal is in breach of the various provisions which he lists.
      
It must be stated that an appeal with such characteristics is not capable of being the subject of judicial assessment which
         enables the Court of Justice to perform its function in the area in question and to carry out its review of legality (orders
         in Weber v Commission, paragraph 28, and Correia de Matos v Commission, paragraph 21).
      
It follows that these pleas are manifestly inadmissible. 
      
 The plea that the Court of First Instance wrongly took the view that the application was based on Article EC
The appellant submits that his application before the Court of First Instance was brought on the basis of the audi alteram partem rule and the ‘Wednesbury’ case-law. In his view, the Court of First Instance has wrongly taken the view that the application was based on Article
         EC.
      
In this regard, it should be borne in mind that the jurisdiction of the Community judicature concerning review of legality
         is determined and governed by Article EC. 
      
The Court of First Instance was therefore right to examine the appellant’s application for annulment in the light of that
         provision and not in the light of the general principle and the national case-law relied on by him. 
      
This plea is therefore manifestly unfounded. 
      
In those circumstances, it is necessary, pursuant to Article of the Rules of Procedure, to dismiss the appeal as in part
         manifestly inadmissible and in part manifestly unfounded, without its being necessary to serve it on the Ombudsman.
      
 The form of order seeking the same form of order as that sought at first instance 
Since the appeal has been dismissed, there is no need to give a decision on the appellant’s form of order submitted on the
         basis of Article 113(1), second indent, of the Rules of Procedure, seeking the same form of order as that sought at first
         instance.
      
Such a form of order can be examined only if the order under appeal is set aside.
      
 Costs
Article 69(1) of the Rules of Procedure, which applies to appeal proceedings by virtue of Article thereof, provides that
         a decision as to costs is to be given in the order which closes the proceedings. 
      
As the present order was adopted prior to service of the application on the Ombudsman and therefore before the latter could
         have incurred costs, it is sufficient to decide that the appellant must bear his own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Sixth Chamber) hereby orders:
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
2.      Mr Srinivasan shall bear his own costs. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 