
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-49/Proceedings brought by Heidelberger Bauchemie GmbH
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Bundespatentgericht)
(Trade marks – Harmonisation of laws – Directive 89/104/EEC – Signs capable of constituting a trade mark – Combinations of colours – Colours blue and yellow for certain products used in the building trade)
Summary of the Judgment
Approximation of laws – Trade marks – Directive 89/– Signs capable of constituting a trade mark – Colours or combinations
            of colours – Conditions – Requirement for the competent authority to examine the other conditions for registration – Scope
            of the examination
(Council Directive 89/104, Arts and 3)
Colours or combinations of colours which are the subject of an application for registration as a trade mark, claimed in the
         abstract, without contours, and in shades which are named in words by reference to a colour sample and specified according
         to an internationally recognised colour classification system may constitute a trade mark for the purposes of Article of
         the First Trade Marks Directive 89/where:
      
–        it has been established that, in the context in which they are used, those colours or combinations of colours in fact represent
         a sign, and
      
–        the application for registration includes a systematic arrangement associating the colours concerned in a predetermined and
         uniform way, as the mere juxtaposition of two or more colours, without shape or contours, or a reference to two or more colours
         ‘in every conceivable form’ does not exhibit the qualities of precision and uniformity required by Article of the directive,
         and/or
      
–        the colours or combinations of colours in question are capable of conveying precise information, particularly as regards the
         origin of a product or service.
      
Even if a combination of colours satisfies the requirements for constituting a trade mark for the purposes of Article of
         the directive, it is still necessary for the competent authority for registering trade marks to decide whether the combination
         claimed fulfils the other requirements laid down, particularly in Article of the directive, for registration as a trade
         mark in relation to the goods or services of the undertaking which has applied for its registration. Such an examination must
         take account of all the relevant circumstances of the case, including any use which has been made of the sign in respect of
         which trade mark registration is sought. That examination must also take account of the public interest in not unduly restricting
         the availability of colours for other traders who market goods or services of the same type as those in respect of which registration
         is sought.
      
 (see paras 34, 37, 42, operative part)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)June 2004(1)
(Trade marks  –  Harmonisation of laws  –  Directive 89/104/EEC  –  Signs capable of constituting a trade mark  –  Combinations of colours  –  Colours blue and yellow for certain products used in the building trade)
 In Case C-49/02,
             REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Bundespatentgericht (Germany) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings
            brought before that court by
            
Heidelberger Bauchemie GmbH,
            
 on the interpretation of Article of the First Council Directive (89/104/EEC) of December to approximate the laws
            of the Member States relating to trade marks (OJ L 40, p. 1),
THE COURT (Second Chamber),,
 composed of: C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber,  J.-P. Puissochet, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur), R. Schintgen
            and N. Colneric, Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: P. Léger,Registrar: H. von Holstein, Deputy Registrar
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
–
 Heidelberger Bauchemie GmbH, by V. Schmitz, Rechtsanwalt,
               
–
 the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster, acting as Agent,
               
–
 the United Kingdom Government, by P. Ormond, acting as Agent, and D. Alexander, Barrister,
               
–
 the Commission of the European Communities, by N.B. Rasmussen and T. Jürgensen, acting as Agents,
               
after hearing the oral observations of Heidelberger Bauchemie GmbH and the Commission at the hearing on November 2003,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By order of January 2002, received at the Court on February 2002, the Bundespatentgericht (Federal Patents Court) referred
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC two questions on the interpretation of Article of the First Council
         Directive (89/104/EEC) of December to approximate the laws of the Member States relating to trade marks (OJ L 40,
         p. 1) (hereinafter ‘the Directive’).
         
            
 Those questions were raised in proceedings brought by Heidelberger Bauchemie GmbH (hereinafter ‘Heidelberger Bauchemie’) against
         the refusal by the Deutsches Patentamt (German Patent Office) (hereinafter ‘the Patent Office’) to register the colours blue
         and yellow as a trade mark for certain products used in the building trade.
         
Legal framework
The TRIPS Agreement
            
 The Agreement on Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (hereinafter ‘the TRIPS Agreement’), which is set out
         in an annex to the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation of April 1994, was approved on behalf of the European
         Community, as regards matters within its competence, by Council Decision 94/800/EC of December (OJ L 336, pp.
         and 214). It entered into force on January 1995. However, according to Article 65(1) of the Agreement, Members were not
         obliged to apply its provisions before the expiry of a general period of one year, that is to say before January 1996.
         
            
 Article 15(1) of the TRIPS Agreement states:
         ‘Any sign, or any combination of signs, capable of distinguishing the goods or services of one undertaking from those of other
         undertakings, shall be capable of constituting a trade mark. Such signs, in particular words including personal names, letters,
         numerals, figurative elements and combinations of colours as well as any combination of such signs, shall be eligible for
         registration as trade marks. Where signs are not inherently capable of distinguishing the relevant goods or services, Members
         may make registrability depend on distinctiveness acquired through use. Members may require, as a condition of registration,
         that signs be visually perceptible.’
         
Community legislation
            
 Article of the Directive, headed ‘Signs of which a trade mark may consist’, is worded as follows:
         ‘A trade mark may consist of any sign capable of being represented graphically, particularly words, including personal names,
         designs, letters, numerals, the shape of goods or of their packaging, provided that such signs are capable of distinguishing
         the goods or services of one undertaking from those of other undertakings.’
         
            
 Article of the Directive, headed ‘Grounds for refusal or invalidity’ provides:
         ‘1.     The following shall not be registered or if registered shall be liable to be declared invalid:
         
(a)
signs which cannot constitute a trade mark; 
(b) 
trade marks which are devoid of any distinctive character; 
(c) 
trade marks which consist exclusively of signs or indications which may serve, in trade, to designate the kind, quality, quantity,
               intended purpose, value, geographical origin, or the time of production of the goods or of rendering of the service, or other
               characteristics of the goods;
            
 (d) 
trade marks which consist exclusively of signs or indications which have become customary in the current language or in the
               bona fide and established practices of the trade;
            
…
 3.        A trade mark shall not be refused registration or be declared invalid in accordance with paragraph 1(b), (c) or (d) if, before
         the date of application for registration and following the use which has been made of it, it has acquired a distinctive character.
         Any Member State may in addition provide that this provision shall also apply where the distinctive character was acquired
         after the date of application for registration or after the date of registration.
         …’
         
German legislation
            
 The Gesetz über den Schutz von Marken und sonstigen Kennzeichen (Law on Trade Marks and other Distinctive Signs) of October
         (BGB1. I, p. 3082) (hereinafter ‘the Markengesetz’), contained in Article of the Gesetz zur Reform des Markenrechts
         und zur Umsetzung der Ersten Richtlinien (Law to reform the Law of Trade Marks and implement the First Directive), which entered
         into force on January 1995, is intended to transpose the Directive into German law.
         
            
 Paragraph 3(1) of the Markengesetz states:
         ‘Any sign, particularly words, including personal names, designs, letters, numerals, acoustic signs, three-dimensional forms
         including the shape of goods or their packaging as well as other get-ups including colours and combinations of colours, which
         is capable of distinguishing the goods or services of one undertaking from those of other undertakings may be protected as
         a trade mark.’
         
            
 Paragraph of the Markengesetz provides:
         ‘1.     Signs protectable as trade marks for the purposes of Paragraph but not capable of being represented graphically shall not
         be eligible for registration.
          2.       Trade marks shall not be eligible for registration
         
which are incapable of distinguishing the goods or services concerned,
…
          3.       Subparagraph 2(1), (2) and (3) shall not apply where the trade mark became accepted by the relevant section of the public
         before the date of the decision on registration, following its use for the goods and services in respect of which the application
         for registration was made.’
         
The main proceedings and the questions referred
            
 On March 1995, Heidelberger Bauchemie applied to the Patent Office for the registration of the colours blue and yellow
         as a trade mark. The section headed ‘reproduction of the mark’ comprised a rectangular piece of paper, the upper part of which
         was blue and the lower half yellow. The following description of the mark accompanied the application:
         ‘The trade mark applied for consists of the applicant’s corporate colours which are used in every conceivable form, in particular
         on packaging and labels.
          The specification of the colours is:
          RAL 5015/HKS – blue
          RAL 1016/HKS – yellow.’
         
            
 Registration of the mark was applied for in relation to a list of various products used in the building trade, including adhesives,
         solvents, varnishes, paints, lubricants and insulating materials.
         
            
 By decision of September 1996, the Patent Office rejected that application on the grounds, first, that the sign which it
         was sought to register was not capable of constituting a trade mark and was not capable of being represented graphically and,
         secondly, that the mark was devoid of any distinctive character. However, following the ‘black/yellow colour mark’ decision
         of the Bundesgerichtshof (Federal Court of Justice) (Germany) of December 1998, the Patent Office reviewed its position.
         By decision of May 2000, it accepted that colours are in principle able to constitute a trade mark, but rejected the application
         on the ground of lack of any distinctive character. Heidelberger Bauchemie brought an appeal against that decision before
         the Bundespatentgericht.
         
            
 The Bundespatentgericht considered that it was uncertain whether abstract, undelineated marks could be treated as ‘signs’
         capable of being represented graphically within the meaning of Article of the Directive. That provision refers to signs
         that are clearly defined and specific, indirectly visible and capable of being represented graphically. The capability of
         a sign of being graphically represented specified in Article of the Directive reflects the principle of precision, which
         is a prerequisite of registration under trade mark law. It is doubtful whether a mark consisting of an abstract colour can
         satisfy that principle. An interpretation of Article of the Directive is therefore necessary in order to determine whether
         abstract colours or combinations of colours are signs capable of constituting a trade mark. Consideration should also be given
         to how far the protection of ‘abstract colour marks’ is compatible with the requirement of legal certainty for all operators
         in the market or prevents the free movement of goods and services by granting the proprietors of trade marks over-extensive
         monopoly rights which are unreasonable from the point of view of their competitors.
         
            
 In those circumstances, the Bundespatentgericht decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to the
         Court for a preliminary ruling:
         ‘Do colours or combinations of colours which are the subject of an application for registration as a trade mark, claimed in
         the abstract, without contours and in shades which are named in words by reference to a colour sample (colour specimen) and
         specified according to a recognised colour classification system, satisfy the conditions for capability of constituting a
         trade mark for the purposes of Article of [the Directive]? 
          In particular, for the purposes of Article of the Directive, is such an “(abstract) colour mark”
         (a)      a sign,
         (b)      sufficiently distinctive to be capable of indicating origin,
         
(c) 
capable of being represented graphically?’
The questions referred
            
 By its questions, which should be dealt with together, the national court is essentially asking whether, and if so under what
         conditions, colours or combinations of colours designated in the abstract and without contours are capable of constituting
         a trade mark for the purposes of Article of the Directive.
         
            
 In that regard, the Court noted at paragraphs to of its judgment in Case C‑104/Libertel [2003] ECR I-that the Council of the European Union and the Commission made a joint declaration, entered in the minutes
         of the Council meeting on the adoption of the Directive, that they ‘consider that Article does not exclude the possibility
         ... of registering as a trade mark a combination of colours or a single colour ... provided that they are capable of distinguishing
         the goods or services of one undertaking from those of other undertakings’ (OHIM OJ No 5/96, p. 607).
         
            
 That declaration cannot be used to interpret a provision of secondary legislation where, as in this case, no reference is
         made to the content thereof in the wording of the provision in question and it therefore has no legal significance (Case C‑292/Antonissen [1991] ECR I-745, paragraph 18, and Case C-329/VAG Sverige [1997] ECR I-2675, paragraph 23). The Council and the Commission also explicitly recognised that limitation in the preamble
         to their declaration, which states: ‘since the following statements of the Council and the Commission are not part of the
         legal text they are without prejudice to the interpretation of that text by the Court of Justice of the European Communities’.
         
            
 Accordingly, it is for the Court to determine whether, and if so under what conditions, Article of the Directive is to be
         interpreted as meaning that colours or combinations of colours designated without any form of spatial delimitation are capable
         of constituting a trade mark.
         
            
 Article 15(1) of the TRIPS Agreement provides that ‘combinations of colours … shall be eligible for registration as trade
         marks’. However, that Agreement does not define a ‘combination of colours’.
         
            
 Since the Community is a party to the TRIPS Agreement, it is required to interpret its legislation on trade marks so far as
         possible in the light of the wording and purpose of that Agreement (see, to that effect, Case C‑53/Hermès [1998] ECR I-3603, paragraph 28).
         
            
 It should therefore be established whether Article of the Directive can be interpreted as meaning that ‘combinations of
         colours’ are capable of constituting a trade mark.
         
            
 To constitute a trade mark under Article of the Directive, colours or combinations of colours must satisfy three conditions.
         First, they must be a sign. Secondly, that sign must be capable of being represented graphically. Thirdly, the sign must be
         capable of distinguishing the goods or services of one undertaking from those of other undertakings (see, to that effect,
         Libertel, paragraph 23).
         
            
 As the Court has already held, colours are normally a simple property of things (Libertel, paragraph 27). Even in the particular field of trade, colours and combinations of colours are generally used for their attractive
         or decorative powers, and do not convey any meaning. However, it is possible that colours or combinations of colours may be
         capable, when used in relation to a product or a service, of being a sign.
         
            
 For the purposes of the application of Article of the Directive, it is necessary to establish that in the context in which
         they are used colours or combinations of colours which it is sought to register in fact represent a sign. The purpose of that
         requirement is in particular to prevent the abuse of trademark law in order to obtain an unfair competitive advantage.
         
            
 Moreover, it is clear from the Court’s case-law (Case C-273/Sieckmann [2002] ECR I-11737, paragraphs to 55, and Libertel, paragraphs and 29) that a graphic representation in terms of Article of the Directive must enable the sign to be represented
         visually, particularly by means of images, lines or characters, so that it can be precisely identified.
         
            
 Such an interpretation is necessary for the proper working of the trade mark registration system.
         
            
 The function of the requirement of graphic representation is in particular to define the mark itself in order to determine
         the precise subject of the protection afforded by the registered mark to its proprietor.
         
            
 The entry of the mark in a public register has the aim of making it accessible to the competent authorities and to the public,
         particularly to economic operators.
         
            
 On the one hand, the competent authorities must know with clarity and precision the nature of the signs of which a mark consists
         in order to be able to fulfil their obligations in relation to the prior examination of applications for registration and
         the publication and maintenance of an appropriate and precise register of trade marks.
         
            
 On the other hand, economic operators must be able to acquaint themselves, with clarity and precision, with registrations
         or applications for registration made by their actual or potential competitors, and thus to obtain relevant information about
         the rights of third parties.
         
            
 In those circumstances, in order to fulfil its role as a registered trade mark, a sign must always be perceived unambiguously
         and uniformly, so that the function of mark as an indication of origin is guaranteed. In the light of the duration of a mark’s
         registration and the fact that, as the Directive provides, it can be renewed for varying periods, the representation must
         also be durable.
         
            
 It follows from the above that a graphic representation for the purpose of Article of the Directive must be, in particular,
         precise and durable.
         
            
 Accordingly, a graphic representation consisting of two or more colours, designated in the abstract and without contours,
         must be systematically arranged by associating the colours concerned in a predetermined and uniform way.
         
            
 The mere juxtaposition of two or more colours, without shape or contours, or a reference to two or more colours ‘in every
         conceivable form’, as is the case with the trade mark which is the subject of the main proceedings, does not exhibit the qualities
         of precision and uniformity required by Article of the Directive, as construed in paragraphs to of this judgment.
         
            
 Such representations would allow numerous different combinations, which would not permit the consumer to perceive and recall
         a particular combination, thereby enabling him to repeat with certainty the experience of a purchase, any more than they would
         allow the competent authorities and economic operators to know the scope of the protection afforded to the proprietor of the
         trade mark.
         
            
 As regards the manner in which each of the colours concerned is represented, it is clear from paragraphs 33, 34, 37, and
         of Libertel that a sample of the colour concerned, accompanied by a designation using an internationally recognised identification code,
         may constitute a graphic representation for the purposes of Article of the Directive.
         
            
 As regards the question whether, for the purposes of this provision, colours or combinations of colours are capable of distinguishing
         the goods or services of one undertaking from those of other undertakings, it must be determined whether or not those colours
         or combinations of colours are capable of conveying precise information, particularly as regards the origin of a product or
         service.
         
            
 It follows from paragraphs 40, and to of Libertel that, whilst colours are capable of conveying certain associations of ideas, and of arousing feelings, they possess little
         inherent capacity for communicating specific information, especially since they are commonly and widely used, because of their
         appeal, in order to advertise and market goods or services, without any specific message.
         
            
 Save in exceptional cases, colours do not initially have a distinctive character, but may be capable of acquiring such character
         as the result of the use made of them in relation to the goods or services claimed.
         
            
 Subject to the above, it must be accepted that for the purposes of Article of the Directive colours and combinations of
         colours, designated in the abstract and without contours, may be capable of distinguishing the goods or services of one undertaking
         from those of other undertakings.
         
            
 It should be added that, even if a combination of colours which it is sought to register as a trade mark satisfies the requirements
         for constituting a trade mark for the purposes of Article of the Directive, it is still necessary for the competent authority
         for registering trade marks to decide whether the combination claimed satisfies the other requirements laid down, particularly
         in Article of the Directive, for registration as a trade mark in relation to the goods or services of the undertaking which
         has applied for its registration. That examination must take account of all the relevant circumstances of the case, including
         any use which has been made of the sign in respect of which trade mark registration is sought (Libertel, paragraph 76, and Case 363/Koninklijke KPN Nederland [2004] ECR I-0000, paragraph 37). That examination must also take account of the public interest in not unduly restricting
         the availability of colours for other traders who market goods or services of the same type as those in respect of which registration
         is sought (Libertel, paragraphs to 56).
         
            
 In light of the above, the answer to the questions must be that colours or combinations of colours which are the subject of
         an application for registration as a trade mark, claimed in the abstract, without contours, and in shades which are named
         in words by reference to a colour sample and specified according to an internationally recognised colour classification system
         may constitute a trade mark for the purposes of Article of the Directive where:
         
–
it has been established that, in the context in which they are used, those colours or combinations of colours in fact represent
               a sign, and
            
–
the application for registration includes a systematic arrangement associating the colours concerned in a predetermined and
               uniform way.
            
 Even if a combination of colours satisfies the requirements for constituting a trade mark for the purposes of Article of
         the Directive, it is still necessary for the competent authority for registering trade marks to decide whether the combination
         claimed fulfils the other requirements laid down, particularly in Article of the Directive, for registration as a trade
         mark in relation to the goods or services of the undertaking which has applied for its registration. Such an examination must
         take account of all the relevant circumstances of the case, including any use which has been made of the sign in respect of
         which trade mark registration is sought. That examination must also take account of the public interest in not unduly restricting
         the availability of colours for other traders who market goods or services of the same type as those in respect of which registration
         is sought.
         
Costs
            
 The costs incurred by the Netherlands and United Kingdom Governments and the Commission, which have submitted observations
         to the Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action
         pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court.
         
On those grounds,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
 in answer to the questions referred to it by the Bundespatentgericht by order of January 2002, hereby rules:
         Colours or combinations of colours which are the subject of an application for registration as a trade mark, claimed in the
               abstract, without contours, and in shades which are named in words by reference to a colour sample and specified according
               to an internationally recognised colour classification system may constitute a trade mark for the purposes of Article of
               the First Council Directive (89/104/EEC) of December to approximate the laws of the Member States relating to trade
               marks where:
 
–
it has been established that, in the context in which they are used, those colours or combinations of colours in fact represent
                     a sign, and
                  
 
–
the application for registration includes a systematic arrangement associating the colours concerned in a predetermined and
                     uniform way.
                  
Even if a combination of colours satisfies the requirements for constituting a trade mark for the purposes of Article of
               the Directive, it is still necessary for the competent authority for registering trade marks to decide whether the combination
               claimed fulfils the other requirements laid down, particularly in Article of the Directive, for registration as a trade
               mark in relation to the goods or services of the undertaking which has applied for its registration. Such an examination must
               take account of all the relevant circumstances of the case, including any use which has been made of the sign in respect of
               which trade mark registration is sought. That examination must also take account of the public interest in not unduly restricting
               the availability of colours for other traders who market goods or services of the same type as those in respect of which registration
               is sought.
Timmermans
Puissochet
Cunha Rodrigues
Schintgen
Colneric
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg onJune 2004.
         
R. Grass
C.W.A. Timmermans
Registrar
President of the Second Chamber
 –
            
Language of the case: German.
Top  
 