
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Tenth Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Reference for a preliminary ruling — Regulation (EEC) No 2658/— Common Customs Tariff — Tariff classification — Combined Nomenclature — Headings and — Plasma screens — Function as computer screen — Potential function as a television screen, after insertion of a video card)
In Case C‑472/12,
REQUEST for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the Corte suprema di cassazione (Italy), made by decision of
         January 2012, received at the Court on October 2012, in the proceedings
      
Panasonic Italia SpA,
Panasonic Marketing Europe GmbH,
Scerni Logistics Srl
v
Agenzia delle Dogane di Milano,
THE COURT (Tenth Chamber),
composed of E. Juhász, President of the Chamber, A. Rosas and C. Vajda (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: Y. Bot,
Registrar: A. Impellizzeri, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on December 2013,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Panasonic Italia SpA, Panasonic Marketing Europe GmbH and Scerni Logistics Srl, by P. Vander Schueren, advocaat, and by G. Cambareri
         and L. Pierallini, avvocati,
      
–        the Italian Government, by G. Palmieri, acting as Agent and G. Albenzio, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the European Commission, by L. Keppenne, D. Recchia and B.-R. Killmann, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
The request for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of the Combined Nomenclature (‘the CN’) set out in Annex
         I to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/of July on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs
         Tariff (OJ L 256, p. 1), in the versions resulting successively from Commission Regulation (EC) No 2388/of October
         (OJ L 264, p. 1), Commission Regulation (EC) No 2031/of August (OJ L 279, p. 1), Commission Regulation
         (EC) No 1832/of August (OJ L 290, p.1), and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1789/of September (OJ L 281, p. 1). 
      
That request has been made in proceedings between Panasonic Italia SpA, Panasonic Marketing Europe GmbH and Scerni Logistics
         Srl and the Agenzia delle Dogane di Milano (Customs Office of Milan, ‘the Agenzia’) concerning the tariff classification of
         plasma screens in the CN.
      
 Legal context
 The Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System.
The Customs Cooperation Council, now the World Customs Organisation (‘WCO’), established by the convention creating that council,
         which was concluded in Brussels on December 1950. The Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System (‘the HS’) was
         drawn up by the WCO and established by the International Convention on the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System
         (‘the HS Convention’) concluded in Brussels on June and approved, with its amending protocol of June 1986, on behalf
         of the European Economic Community by Council Decision 87/369/EEC of April (OJ L 198, p. 1).
      
Under Article 3(1) of the HS Convention, each Contracting Party undertakes to ensure that its customs tariff and statistical
         nomenclatures will be in conformity with the HS, to use all of the headings and subheadings of the HS without addition or
         modification, together with their related codes, and to follow the numerical sequence of that system. Each Contracting Party
         also undertakes to apply the General Rules for the interpretation of the HS and all the section, chapter and subheading notes
         of the HS, and not to modify their scope.
      
The WCO is to approve, under the conditions laid down in Article of the HS Convention, the Explanatory Notes and Classification
         Opinions adopted by the HS Committee. 
      
In the version adopted in 2002, the Explanatory Notes to the HS relating to Heading were drafted as follows:
      
‘1.      Automatic data-processing machines and units thereof;  
…
D.      Separately Presented Units
…
A unit is to be regarded as being a part of a complete data processing system, if it performs a data processing function and
         satisfies the following conditions:
      
(a)      It is of a kind solely or principally used in an automatic data processing system;
(b)      It is connectable to the central processing unit either directly or through one or more other units; and
(c)      It is able to accept or deliver data in a form (codes or signals) which can be used by the system.
If the unit performs a specific function other than data processing, it is to be classified in the heading appropriate to
         that function or, failing that, in a residual heading (see Note (E) to this Chapter).
      
…
Among the constituent units included are display units of automatic data-processing machines which provide a graphical representation
         of the data processed. They differ from the video monitors and television receivers of heading in several ways, including
         the following: 
      
(1)      Display units of automatic data processing machines are capable of accepting a signal only from the central processing unit
         of an automatic data processing machine and are therefore not able to reproduce a colour image from a composite video signal
         whose waveform conforms to a broadcast standard (NTSC, SECAM, PAL, D-MAC, etc.). They are fitted with connectors characteristic
         of data processing systems (e.g., RS-232C interface, DIN or SUB-D connectors) and do not have an audio circuit. They are controlled
         by special adaptors (e.g., monochrome or graphics adaptors) which are integrated in the central processing unit of the automatic
         data processing machine.
      
(2)      These display units are characterised by low electromagnetic field emissions. Their display pitch size starts at 0.mm for
         medium resolution and gets smaller as the resolution increases.
      
(3)      In order to accommodate the presentation of small yet well-defined images, display units of this heading utilise smaller dot
         (pixel) sizes and greater convergence standards than those applicable to video monitors and television receivers of heading
         8528. (Convergence is the ability of the electron gun(s) to excite a single spot on the face of the cathode-ray tube without
         disturbing any of the adjoining spots.) 
      
(4)      In these display units, the video frequency (bandwidth), which is the measurement determining how many dots can be transmitted
         per second to form the image, is generally MHz or greater, whereas, in the case of video monitors of heading 8528, the
         bandwidth is generally no greater than MHz. The horizontal scanning frequency of these display units varies according to
         the standards for various display modes, generally from kHz to over kHz. Many are capable of multiple horizontal scanning
         frequencies. The horizontal scanning frequency of the video monitors of heading is fixed, usually 15.or 15.kHz depending
         on the applicable television standard. Moreover, the display units of automatic data-processing machines do not operate in
         conformity with national or international broadcast frequency standards for public broadcasting or with frequency standards
         for closed-circuit television. 
      
(5)      Display units covered by this heading frequently incorporate tilt and swivel adjusting mechanisms, glare-free surfaces, flicker-free
         display, and other ergonomic design characteristics to facilitate prolonged periods of viewing at close proximity to the unit.
         
      
…’
In the version adopted in 2002, the Explanatory Notes to the HS relating to Heading were worded as follows:
      
‘This heading covers television receivers (including video monitors and video projectors), whether or not incorporating radio‑broadcast
         receivers or sound or video recording or reproducing apparatus.
      
The heading includes:
(1)      Television receivers of the kind used in the home (table models, consoles, etc.) including coin‑operated television sets.
         They include LCD and plasma televisions.
      
…
This heading does not cover: 
(a)      Separately presented units of an automatic data-processing machine are to be classified under heading No 8471. 
…’
 The CN
Regulation No 2658/established the CN, which is based on the HS, from which it takes the six-digit headings and subheadings,
         only the seventh and eighth digits forming subdivisions specific to the combined nomenclature. 
      
Under Article 12(1) of that regulation, as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 254/of January (OJ L 28,
         p. 16), the European Commission is required to adopt each year a regulation reproducing the complete version of the CN and
         the rates of customs duty, as they result from measures adopted by the Council of the European Union or by the Commission.
         They are to apply from January of the following calendar year. 
      
The versions of the CN applicable at the material time, from to 2004, are those resulting from Regulations No 2388/2000,
         No 2031/2001, No 1832/and No 1789/2003. The relevant provisions of the CN, which are those set out below, are worded
         in an identical manner in each of those versions.
      
The general rules for the interpretation of the CN, which are set out in Part One, Title I A, provide: 
      
‘Classification of goods in the [CN] shall be governed by the following principles: 
…
2.      (a)   Any reference in a heading to an article shall be taken to include a reference to that article incomplete or unfinished, provided
         that, as presented, the incomplete or unfinished article has the essential character of the complete or finished article.
         It shall also be taken to include a reference to that article complete or finished (or falling to be classified as complete
         or finished by virtue of this rule), presented unassembled or disassembled. 
      
…’
The second part of the CN includes Section XVI, entitled ‘Machinery and Mechanical Appliances; Electrical Equipment; Parts
         thereof; sound recorders and reproducers, television image and sound recorders and reproducers, and parts and accessories
         of such articles’. 
      
Notes and to Section XVI of the CN are worded as follows:
      
‘3.      Unless the context otherwise requires, composite machines consisting of two or more machines fitted together to form a whole
         and other machines designed for the purpose of performing two or more complementary or alternative functions are to be classified
         as if consisting only of that component or as being that machine which performs the principal function. 
      
…
5.      For the purposes of these notes, the expression “machineˮ means any machine, machinery, plant, equipment, apparatus or appliance
         cited in the headings of Chapter or 85.’
      
Section XVI of the CN includes Chapter 84, entitled ‘Nuclear reactors, boilers, machinery and mechanical appliances; parts
         thereof’.
      
Note to Chapter is worded as follows:
      
‘B.      Automatic data-processing machines may be in the form of systems consisting of a variable number of separate units.  Subject to paragraph E below, a unit is to be regarded as being a part of a complete system if it meets all of the following
         conditions: 
      
(a)      it is of a kind solely or principally used in an automatic data-processing system;
(b)      it is connectable to the central processing unit either directly or through one or more other units; 
and 
(c)      it is able to accept or deliver data in a form (codes or signals) which can be used by the system.
C.      Separately presented units of an automatic data-processing machine are to be classified under heading No 8471. 
…
E.      Machines performing a specific function other than data processing and incorporating or working in conjunction with an automatic
         data-processing machine are to be classified in the headings appropriate to their respective functions or, failing that, in
         residual headings.’
      
Note to Chapter of the CN is worded as follows: 
      
‘Subject to note to this chapter and note to Section XVI, a machine the principal purpose of which is not described in
         any heading or for which no one purpose is the principal purpose is, unless the context otherwise requires, to be classified
         in heading No 8479. 
      
…’
Heading of the CN reads as follows: 
      
‘Automatic data-processing machines and units thereof; magnetic or optical readers, machines for transcribing data onto
         data media in coded form and machines for processing such data, not elsewhere specified or included:
      
…
– Input or output units, whether or not containing storage units in the same housing 
–      –      For use in civil aircraft –      –      Other:
–      –      –      Printers
–      –      –      Keyboards
–      –      –      Other
…’
Section XVI of the CN also includes Chapter 85, entitled ‘Electrical Machinery and Equipment and Parts thereof; Sound Recorders
         and Reproducers, Television Image and Sound Recorders and Reproducers, and Parts and Accessories of Such Articles’.
      
Heading of the CN is worded as follows:
      
‘Reception apparatus for television, whether or not incorporating radio broadcast receivers or sound or video recording or
         reproducing apparatus; video monitors and video projectors:
      
…
–        Video monitors: 
–       –       Colour: 
…
–      –      –      Other
…’
 Regulation (EC) No 754/Commission Regulation (EC) No 754/of April concerning the classification of certain goods in the Combined Nomenclature
         (OJ L 118, p. 32), which entered into force after the imports at issue in the main proceedings, set out the classification
         in the CN of certain colour plasma-screens with a diagonal measurement of the screen of cm, with the characteristics described
         in the annex to that regulation.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
From to 2004, the applicants in the main proceedings imported into Italy from countries outside the European Union, plasma
         screens with the characteristics described by the national court as follows:
      
–        those screens are colour monitors with a diagonal screen measurement of 106.centimetres;
–        in the state in which they are imported, those screens are capable of reproducing only data generated by an automatic data-processing
         system;
      
–        however, with the insertion of a video card into the appropriate slot with which the screen is equipped they are also able
         to receive composite AV video signals and thus also to be connected to sound and image recording and reproducing apparatus,
         DVD players, video cameras and television satellite receivers;
      
–        the screens in question are not supplied with a video card at the time of importation, but such a card can easily be purchased
         separately and at very low cost, and can easily be inserted into the appropriate slot provided for that purpose;
      
–        at the time of importation, the screens are equipped with two loudspeakers and a remote control, and that those parts could
         be used only if the screen is used to receive composite AV video signals if a video card is inserted; and 
      
–        the user manual for those screens refers specifically to the product’s audiovisual capabilities and to the possibility of
         inserting a video card in order to activate reception of television signals.
      
For the purpose of making customs declarations, the applicants in the main proceedings classified the screens imported under
         heading of the CN, as screens exclusively intended for the transmission of images generated by a computer, with
         the result that those goods were exempt from customs duties and the payment of value added tax at the rate of 20%.
      
However, the Agenzia took the view that those screens should have been classified under heading of the CN, which refers
         inter alia to reception apparatus for television and video monitors, with the result that customs duties at a rate of 14%
         were applicable.
      
The applicants in the main proceedings brought actions before the Commissione tributaria provinciale di Milano (Provincial
         Tax Court, Milan), which rejected those actions on the ground that the possibility to programme the screen to receive composite
         video signals simply by inserting a video card meant that the apparatus could not be classified under tariff heading of the CN, because it no longer met the condition that the screen had to be used principally or predominantly in an automatic
         data-processing system.
      
The applicants in the main proceedings appealed against the judgments at first instance before the Commissione tributaria
         regionale di Milano (Regional Tax Court, Milan). That court confirmed the classification of the imported screens under tariff
         heading of the CN, but held that the administrative penalties imposed were to be annulled, given that objective uncertainties
         of interpretation existed.
      
Both the applicants in the main proceedings and the Agenzia brought appeals in cassation against the judgments delivered in
         the appeal. In their appeal, the applicants in the main proceedings maintained their position, according to which the imported
         screens must be classified under subheading of the CN since, at the time of importation, they were without video
         cards and, therefore, could only be used to transmit images generated by a computer. The Agenzia restated its argument that
         the classification of those screens under heading of the CN was well-founded and challenged the annulment by the court
         of appeal of the administrative penalties imposed.
      
The referring court considers that the imported screens must be classified under heading of the CN, which refers, inter
         alia, to reception apparatus for television and video monitors, for the following reasons. First, the reception of composite
         video signals is one of the intrinsic characteristics of those screens even before the insertion of a video card, given the
         slot expressly provided for that purpose. Second, no economic or technological reason justifies the design of those screens,
         which are able to receive composite video signals only after the insertion of a video card, so that the only conceivable explanation
         remains the desire to unfairly profit from the more favourable customs treatment provided for computer screens.
      
The referring court also asks about the possibility to apply the provisions of Regulation No 754/retroactively, under
         which the imported screens should be classified under heading of the CN.
      
In those circumstances the Corte suprema di cassazione decided to stay the proceedings before it and to refer the following
         questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Was it necessary, before the entry into force of [Regulation No 754/2004], to classify under heading 8471, or under heading
         of the CN, a plasma colour screen with a diagonal measurement of the screen of 106.centimetres, equipped with two loudspeakers
         and a remote control, and with an input device designed for the insertion of a video card (very inexpensive and easy to find
         and insert) which was not imported with the screen, but which, once inserted, meant that the screen was capable of receiving
         composite AV video signals and could be connected, not only to automatic data-processing machines, but also to recording and
         reproducing apparatus, DVD players, video cameras and satellite receivers? 
      
(2)      If the answer to the above question is in the negative … does Regulation No 754/actually require a screen of that type
         to be classified under heading of the CN, and, if the answer to that question is affirmative … do the provisions of Regulation
         No 754/have to be regarded as interpretative and, as such, as having retroactive effect save where earlier specific provisions
         to the contrary apply.’
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 The first question
By its first question, the referring court wishes to know whether the screens at issue in the main proceedings should be classified
         under heading of the CN or heading thereof.
      
It must be observed that the wording of heading of the CN refers, inter alia, to automatic data-processing machines and
         their units, whereas the wording of heading of the CN, relates, inter alia, reception apparatus for television and video
         monitors. Subheading includes in particular data entry or production units other than printers and keyboards which
         may contain units of memory in the same housing, while subheading includes colour video monitors (Kamino International Logistics C‑376/07, EU:C:2009:105, paragraph 33).
      
However, when the Court is requested to give a preliminary ruling on a matter of tariff classification, its task is to provide
         the national court with guidance on the criteria which will enable the latter to classify the products at issue correctly
         in the CN, rather than to effect that classification itself, a fortiori since the Court does not necessarily have available to it all the information which is essential in that regard. In any event
         the national court is in a better position to do so (Lohmann and Medi Bayreuth, C‑260/to C‑263/EU:C:2002:637, paragraph 26; Digitalnet and Others, C‑320/11, C‑330/11, C‑382/and C‑383/11, EU:C:2012:745, paragraph 61; X, C‑380/12, EU:C:2014:21, paragraph 34).
      
It will thus be for the referring court to classify the products at issue in the main proceedings in the light of the answers
         provided by the Court to the questions it has referred (X EU:C:2014:21, paragraph 35).
      
Therefore, the first question must be reformulated so that the referring court asks the Court of Justice about the criteria
         to be applied in order to determine whether the screens at issue in the main proceedings are to be classified under heading
         of the CN or, if not, under heading thereof.
      
It is settled case-law that, in the interests of legal certainty and ease of verification, the decisive criterion for the
         classification of goods for customs purposes is in general to be sought in their objective characteristics and properties
         as defined in the wording of the relevant heading of the CN and in the section or chapter notes (see, inter alia, RUMA, C‑183/06, EU:C:2007:110, paragraph 27, and Medion and Canon Deutschland, C‑208/and C‑209/06, EU:C:2007:553, paragraph 34). 
      
The decisive criterion for the customs classification of goods under the common customs tariff must be sought in the objective
         characteristics and properties of the products at the time of their presentation for customs clearance. The objective characteristics
         and properties of products must be capable of being assessed at the time of customs clearance (Foods Import, C‑38/95, EU:C:1996:488, paragraph 17, and Medion and Canon Deutschland EU:C:2007:553, paragraph 36). 
      
In that connection, it is clear from the objective characteristics set out in paragraph of the present judgment that, at
         the time of their importation, the screens at issue in the main proceedings can only reproduce data from an automatic data-processing
         machine but, following the insertion in the slot provided for that purpose of a video card, sold separately and very inexpensively,
         those screen are also capable of reproducing composite video signals.
      
It is also clear from those objective characteristics that those screens are equipped with two loud speakers and a remote
         control which may only be used if those screens are used for the reception of composite video signals, and that their user
         manual expressly mentions the audiovisual functions of the product and the possibility to insert a video card in order to
         activate the reception of television signals.
      
According to settled case-law, the intended use of a product may also constitute an objective criterion for classification
         if it is inherent to the product, and that inherent character must be capable of being assessed on the basis of the product’s
         objective characteristics and properties (see RUMA EU:C:2007:110, paragraph 36, and X EU:C:2014:21, paragraph 39).
      
According to that case-law, for the purposes of the customs classification of the screens at issue in the main proceedings,
         account must be taken of their inherent intended purpose, defined on the basis of their objective characteristics. In the
         light of the objective characteristics which have been described by the referring court, the inherent intended purpose of
         the screens at issue in the main proceedings consists in reproducing data from an automatic data-processing machine and composite
         video signals.
      
In particular, it should be noted that the manufacturer of those screens expressly designed them so as to be capable of reproducing
         composite video signals by incorporating elements enabling the reproduction of such signals following the insertion of a video
         card, which may be obtained very inexpensively, in the slot provided for that purpose, by supplying two loud speakers and
         a remote control which may only be used if those screens are used for the reception of composite video signals, and by mentioning
         that function in the user manual.
      
In that connection, the facts of the present case must be distinguished from those which gave rise to the judgment in Medion and Canon Deutschland (EU:C:2007:553), which concerned camcorders made capable, after a modification, of recording images and sounds from external
         video signals in addition to those from the integrated camera and microphone. It is clear from that judgment that those camcorders
         had not been expressly designed to fulfil that function, since they were capable of fulfilling it only after a relatively
         complex modification (see, to that effect, Medion and Canon Deutschland EU:C:2007:553, paragraphs and 42). 
      
It follows from the foregoing that, for the purpose of the tariff classification of screens with the objective characteristics
         at issue in the main proceedings, as described by the referring court, account must be taken of their inherent intended purpose
         consisting in the reproduction of data from an automatic data-processing machine and composite video signals.
      
It remains necessary to determine the method to be followed in order to make the tariff classification of such screens, capable
         of reproducing data from an automatic data-processing machine and composite video signals.
      
In the judgment in Kamino International Logistics (EU:C:2009:105), the Court has already had occasion to rule on the criteria to be used to carry out a tariff classification
         of such screens which are capable of reproducing both data from an automatic date-processing machine and from composite video
         signals.
      
In that judgment, the Court set out the settled case-law, according to which both the notes which head the chapters of the
         CN and the Explanatory Notes to the WCO Nomenclature are important means of ensuring the uniform application of the common
         customs tariff and, as such, may be regarded as useful aids to its interpretation (see Siemens Nixdorf, C‑11/93, EU:C:1994:206, paragraph 12, and Kamino International Logistics EU:C:2009:105, paragraph 32).
      
In the present case, Note B(a) to (c) of Chapter of the CN states that screens such as those at issue in the main proceedings
         fall within heading of the CN as units of an automatic data-processing machine if they satisfy simultaneously three conditions,
         namely they are of a kind solely or principally used in an automatic data-processing system; they are connectable to the central
         processing unit either directly or through one or more other units; and they are able to accept or deliver data in a form
         (codes or signals) which can be used by the system (Kamino International Logistics EU:C:2009:105, paragraph 41).
      
Nothing in the file submitted to the Court suggests that, in the case in the main proceedings, the second and third conditions
         set out above are not fulfilled.
      
As regards the first condition set out above, the Court has held that the mere fact that screens are able to display images
         coming from sources other than an automatic data-processing machine does not preclude their classification in heading of the CN, having regard to Note 5(B)(a) to Chapter of the CN, which refers to units used ‘solely or mainly’ in an automatic
         data-processing system (Kamino International Logistics EU:C:2009:105, paragraphs to 45).
      
As regards the criteria to establish whether screens such as those at issue in the main proceedings are units of a kind used
         ‘mainly’ in an automatic data-processing system, the Court has already had the opportunity to state that it is appropriate
         to refer to the Explanatory Notes relating to heading of the HS, in particular to points to of Part One, Chapter
         I(D) thereof, relating to display units of automatic data-processing machines (Kamino International Logistics EU:C:2009:105, paragraph 59).
      
It is apparent from those points that monitors used principally in an automatic data-processing system can be identified
         not only by the fact that they are fitted with standard sockets for connection to data-processing systems, but also by other
         technical characteristics, in particular by the fact that they are intended to be viewed close up, that they cannot display
         television signals, that they have low magnetic field emissions, that their display pitch starts at 0.mm for medium resolution
         and gets smaller as the resolution increases, that their bandwidth is MHz or greater and that the dimension of the pixels
         on the screen is smaller than for video monitors in heading of the HS, whereas the convergence of the former is greater
         than that of the latter (Kamino International Logistics EU:C:2009:105, paragraph 60).
      
In that connection, the Commission has observed that certain objective characteristics of the screens at issue in the main
         proceedings, described in paragraph of the present judgment, seem to indicate that they are not intended to be used mainly
         for the reproduction of data from an automatic data-processing system on account of the fact that, in particular, their substantial
         size corresponds to a diagonal measurement of 106.cm, their dot pitch is considerably greater than 0.and they are equipped
         with two loud speakers and a remote control which can only be used if the screen is used for reception of composite video
         signals.
      
It is for the national court to determine, on the basis of the objective characteristics of the screens at issue in the main
         proceedings and, in particular, those mentioned in the Explanatory Notes on heading of the HS, in particular those in
         points to of the part of Chapter I D of the HS concerning display units for automatic data-processing machines, if the
         screens at issue in the main proceedings are monitors used mainly in an automatic data-processing machine and, therefore,
         whether they must be classified under subheading of the CN.
      
In the light of the foregoing considerations, the answer to the first question is that, for the purpose of the tariff classification
         in the CN of screens with the objective characteristics at issue in the main proceedings, account should be taken of their
         inherent intended purpose, which consists in reproducing the data from an automatic data-processing machine and from composite
         video signals. Such screens must be classified under subheading of the CN if they are used solely or mainly in
         an automatic data-processing system, within the meaning of Note 5B(a) of Chapter of the CN, or under subheading of the CN if that is not the case, which is a matter for the national court to determine on the basis of the objective characteristics
         of the screens at issue in the main proceedings, and in particular those mentioned in the Explanatory Notes relating to heading
         to the HS, in particular those in points to of the part of Chapter I D of the HS relating to display units for automatic
         data-processing machines.
      
 The second question
By its second question, the referring court asks the Court of Justice essentially whether Regulation No 754/must be applied
         retroactively.
      
Regulation No 754/requires the classification under heading of the CN of colour plasma screens with a diagonal
         screen measurement of cm with the characteristics described in the annex to that regulation. It is apparent from the file
         submitted to the Court that the imports of the goods at issue in the main proceedings took place on a date prior to the entry
         into force of Regulation No 754/2004.
      
According to settled case-law, the principle of legal certainty precludes a regulation from being applied retroactively, regardless
         of whether such application might produce favourable or unfavourable effects for the person concerned, unless a sufficiently
         clear indication can be found, either in the terms of the regulation or its stated objectives, which allows the conclusion
         to be drawn that the regulation was not merely providing for the future (Duchon, C‑290/00, EU:C:2002:234, paragraph and the case-law cited). In the present case, nothing in the preamble to Regulation
         No 754/2004, in the wording of its provisions or in its annex suggest that that regulation is to be applied retroactively.
      
In any event, the Court has already had occasion to state that a regulation specifying the conditions for classification in
         a tariff heading or subheading of the CN cannot have retroactive effect (see, to that effect, Siemens, 30/71, EU:C:1971:111, paragraph 8; Gervais-Danone, 77/71, EU:C:1971:129, paragraph 8; and Biegi, 158/78, EU:C:1979:87, paragraph 11). 
      
Consequently, the answer to the second question is that Regulation No 754/cannot be applied retroactively.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable. 
      
On those grounds, the Court (Tenth Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      For the purpose of tariff classification in the Combined Nomenclature set out in Annex I to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/of July on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff, in the versions resulting successively
            from Commission Regulation (EC) No 2388/of October 2000, Commission Regulation (EC) No 2031/of August 2001,
            Commission Regulation (EC) No 1832/of August 2002, and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1789/of September of screens with the objective characteristics at issue in the main proceedings, account should be taken of their inherent
            intended purpose, which consists in reproducing the data from an automatic data-processing machine and from composite video
            signals. Such screens must be classified under subheading of the Combined Nomenclature if they are used solely
            or mainly in an automatic data-processing system, within the meaning of Note 5B(a) of Chapter of the Combined Nomenclature,
            or under subheading thereof if that is not the case, which is a matter for the national court to determine on the
            basis of the objective characteristics of the screens at issue in the main proceedings, and in particular those mentioned
            in the Explanatory Notes relating to heading of the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System established by
            the International Convention on the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System concluded in Brussels on June 1983,
            with its amending protocol of June 1986, in particular in points to of the part of Chapter I D relating to display
            units for automatic data-processing machines. 
2.      Commission Regulation (EC) No 754/of April concerning the classification of certain goods in the Combined Nomenclature
            cannot be applied retroactively.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 