
Case C-163/P
Republic of Finland
v
Commission of the European Communities
(Appeals – Actions for annulment – Inadmissibility – Act without binding legal effects – Own resources of the European Communities – Infringement proceedings – Article of Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1150/– Default interest – Negotiation of an agreement concerning a conditional payment – Letters of refusal)
Order of the Court (Eighth Chamber), June Summary of the Order
1.     Own resources of the European Communities – Establishment and making available by the Member States 
(Council Regulation No 1150/2000)
2.     Actions for annulment – Actionable measures – Measures producing binding legal effects 
(Art. EC; Council Regulation No 1150/2000)
3.     European Communities – Institutions – Obligations – Duty of loyal cooperation 
(Art. EC; Council Regulation No 1150/2000)
1.     Regulation No 1150/implementing Decision 94/on the system of the Communities’ own resources does not confer on the
         Commission the power to enter into any negotiations with the Member States concerning conditional payment of those resources.
      
Moreover, the inseparable nature of the link between the obligation to establish the Communities’ own resources, the obligation
         to credit them to the Commission’s account within the prescribed time-limit and the obligation to pay default interest does
         not permit the Commission to open separate negotiations concerning one of those factors.
      
(see paras 29-30)
2.     The only decisions which may be the subject of an action for annulment within the meaning of Article EC are measures the
         legal effects of which are binding on, and capable of affecting the interests of, the applicant by bringing about a distinct
         change in his legal position.
      
Refusal by the Commission to enter into negotiations with a Member State regarding the conditional payment of customs duties
         demanded retroactively, plus accumulated default interest, by way of Community own resources, contained in letters sent by
         the Commission to that State does not constitute a decision adversely affecting the Member State. Only the result of such
         negotiations is capable of affecting the interests of the Member State in question. The question of a result cannot however
         arise, since the Commission has no power under Regulation No 1150/implementing Decision 94/on the system of the Communities’
         own resources either to conclude an agreement leading to such a result or to enter into negotiations for that purpose.
      
(see paras 40-41)
3.     The principles of loyal cooperation and legal certainty do not confer on a Member State the right to require the Commission
         to enter into negotiations with it for the purpose of reaching an agreement on a conditional payment of own resources. Although
         the Commission cannot refuse a Member State the right to make a conditional payment, the recognition of such a right is subject
         to the Community rules surrounding the conditional payment.
      
Thus, to the question of the possible opening of negotiations on such a payment, in the context of infringement proceedings
         and an action for failure to fulfil obligations, the Commission must apply the legal rules in force at the time when the letters
         at issue were sent to the Member State. That assessment cannot be affected by a judgment of the Court of Justice bringing
         that action to a close, and in consequence delivered after those letters were sent.
      
Moreover, neither an obligation on the part of the Commission to bring an action for failure to fulfil obligations before
         the Court of Justice nor an obligation to refrain from requesting the allegedly confidential information provided for by Regulation
         No 1150/implementing Decision 94/on the system of the Communities’ own resources can imply an obligation on the Commission
         to negotiate a payment subject to the condition that the Commission undertakes to bring the matter before the Court of Justice
         and that the payment takes place without the Commission requiring the information provided for by Article of Regulation
         No 1150/2000.
      
(see paras 33, 35-36, 45)
  
  
ORDER OF THE COURT (Eighth Chamber)
June 2007(*)
      
(Appeals – Actions for annulment – Inadmissibility – Act without binding legal effect – Own resources of the European Communities – Infringement proceedings – Article of Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1150/– Default interest – Negotiation of an agreement concerning a conditional payment – Letters of refusal)
In Case C‑163/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, lodged on March 2006,
Republic of Finland, represented by E. Bygglin, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
the other party to the proceedings being:
Commission of the European Communities, represented by G. Wilms and P. Aalto, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Eighth Chamber),
composed of E. Juhász, President of the Chamber, J. Malenovský and T. von Danwitz (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: D. Ruiz‑Jarabo Colomer,
Registrar: R. Grass,
after hearing the Advocate General,
makes the following
Order
In this appeal, the Republic of Finland asks the Court of Justice to set aside the order of the Court of First Instance of
         the European Communities of January in Case T‑177/Finland v Commission [2006], unpublished, (‘the order under appeal’), by which that Court dismissed as inadmissible its action for annulment of
         the decision of the Commission of the European Communities (Directorate‑General for Budget), contained in the letter of February and in the confirmatory letter of April 2005, whereby the Commission refused to enter into negotiations with
         the Republic of Finland regarding the conditional payment of customs duties demanded retroactively, plus default interest
         up to the date of payment, which the Commission claimed from the Republic of Finland in the context of infringement proceeding
         No 2003/2180, brought under Article EC.
      
 Legal context
Article of Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1150/of May implementing Decision 94/728/EC, Euratom on the
         system of the Communities’ own resources (OJ L 130, p. 1), appearing under Title II thereof under the heading ‘Accounts
         for own resources’, requires accounts for those resources to be kept at the Treasury of each Member State or at the body appointed
         by each Member State and broken down by type of resources. That article lays down the procedure relating to that accounting
         and to the information to be sent to the Commission.
      
Article 9(1) of Regulation No 1150/2000, appearing under Title III under the heading ‘Making available own resources’, provides
         that:
      
‘In accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 10, each Member State shall credit own resources to the account opened
         in the name of the Commission with its Treasury or the body it has appointed.
      
This account shall be kept free of charge.’
According to Article of that Regulation, ‘[a]ny delay in making the entry in the account referred to in Article 9(1) shall
         give rise to the payment of interest by the Member State concerned at the interest rate applicable on the Member State’s money
         market on the due date for short‑term public financing operations, increased by two percentage points. This rate shall be
         increased by 0.of a percentage point for each month of delay. The increased rate shall be applied to the entire period
         of delay.’
      
 Facts of the case 
The factual background to the dispute was summarised by the Court of First Instance in paragraphs to of the order under
         appeal as follows:
      
‘1.      On October 2003, the Commission initiated infringement procedure No 2003/against the Republic of Finland and subsequently
         adopted a reasoned opinion pursuant to Article EC, considering that the Member State had failed to fulfil its obligations
         under Community law in failing to calculate and make available to the Commission unlevied own resources relating to imports
         of military equipment from to and in refusing to pay the default interest accrued thereon.
      
2.      The Republic of Finland challenged the Commission’s legal assessment, asserting that Article EC entitled it, in order
         to protect the essential interests of its security, not to communicate confidential information concerning the import of military
         equipment and, moreover, during the period which is the subject of the infringement proceedings, not to levy customs duties
         on the imports at issue.
      
3.      On January 2005, in order to suspend the accrual of default interest applicable in the circumstances pursuant to Article of Regulation No 1150/(EC, Euratom) […], the Republic of Finland called on the Commission to negotiate with it the conditional
         payment of the customs duties demanded retroactively and the default interest accrued thereon up to the date of payment. The
         Member State referred to the case‑law of the Court of Justice regarding the possibility of making such a conditional payment.
         It stated that it hoped to conclude with the Commission an agreement concerning the conditional payment at issue.
      
4.      The Commission, by letter of February from the European Commissioner responsible for the budget, stated to the Republic
         of Finland that it was possible for it to make, in accordance with the case‑law of the Court of Justice, a conditional payment
         protecting the rights of the Member State pending the decision of the Court. It called on the Finnish authorities to contact
         the Directorate‑General (DG) for Budget of the Commission as regards the practical aspects of making the payment.
      
5.      Following a telephone call, the Commission, by letter of the Director General for Budget of February (first contested
         letter), informed the Republic of Finland that it did not legally have the right to enter into an agreement of the kind sought
         by the Finnish authorities, having regard to the obligations of the Member States concerning the Communities’ own resources
         and the fact that they could not negotiate specific conditions regarding a given payment, save in the case of particular difficulties
         of calculation, not relied on in the present case.
      
6.      The Director General for Budget […] confirmed to the Finnish authorities the possibility of making a conditional payment as
         provided for in the case‑law of the Court of Justice. He explained the practical procedure for making such a payment and the
         consequences thereof for the legal proceedings.
      
7.      By letter of March 2005, the Republic of Finland stated to the Commission that the issue in dispute in the infringement
         proceedings concerned the question of whether Article EC entitled a Member State to withhold confidential information
         relating to the import of military equipment and to suspend the associated customs duties and that the express purpose of
         a conditional payment was to suspend the accrual of default interest provided for by Regulation No 1150/2000.
      
8.      The Finnish authorities moreover stated that their conditional payment was subject to two conditions: (i) that the Commission
         undertake to bring the case before the Court and (ii) that the Republic of Finland receive a guarantee that they may make
         the payment with the benefit of a derogation from the normal procedure, in other words, without their being required to communicate
         information which would jeopardise the essential interests of security of the Member State.
      
9.      The Commission, by letter of the Director General for Budget of April (second contested letter), again stated to the
         Finnish authorities that it was unable to negotiate the agreement requested. Furthermore, it confirmed the terms of its letter
         of the February 2005.’
      
 The action before the Court of First Instance and the order under appeal
By application lodged on May 2005, the Finnish Government brought the action which gave rise to the order under appeal.
The Commission, having entered a plea of inadmissibility, contended that the Court of First Instance should dismiss the action
         as inadmissible and, in the alternative, dismiss it as to substance.
      
The Republic of Finland claimed that the Court of First Instance should declare the action admissible and annul the decision
         of the Commission contained in the letter of February and in that of April confirming the earlier letter (together
         ‘the letters at issue’), by which the Commission refused to enter into negotiations with the Republic of Finland on the conditional
         payment of customs duties demanded retroactively, plus default interest up to the date of payment, which were claimed from
         the Republic of Finland in the context of infringement proceeding No 2003/brought under Article EC.
      
By the order under appeal, issued pursuant to Article of its Rules of Procedure, the Court of First Instance, without
         opening the oral procedure, dismissed the action as inadmissible.
      
The Court of First Instance held that the letters at issue addressed to the Republic of Finland during the pre‑litigation
         stage of the proceedings for failure to fulfil obligations do not contain any decision capable of producing obligatory legal
         effects affecting the interests of that Member State.
      
It states, at paragraph of the order under appeal, that the refusal to open negotiations does not constitute a decision
         aversely affecting the Member State. The opening of negotiations such as those at issue in the present dispute, even if the
         Commission were to have the power so to consent, would not in itself affect the legal position of the Republic of Finland,
         since only the conclusion of an agreement at the end of that negotiation, were it to prove successful, could possibly have
         such an effect.
      
At paragraph of the order under appeal, the Court of First Instance held that, in respect of the Communities’ own resources,
         neither the provisions of Regulation No 1150/nor the case‑law of the Court of Justice confers the power on the Commission
         to enter into any negotiations with the Member States.
      
With regard to the conditional payment, the Court of First Instance points out, at paragraph of the order under appeal,
         that, in accordance with the case‑law of the Court of Justice, any ‘conditional’ nature of the payment lies in the confirmation,
         notwithstanding the payment, that a disagreement exists between the Member State and the Commission as to the justification
         for the debt claimed by that institution.
      
It goes on to hold, at paragraphs and of that order, that, far from refusing to allow the Republic of Finland to make
         a conditional payment of the customs duties which are the subject of the infringement proceedings, the Commission had, on
         the contrary, pointed out the possibility that the Finnish authorities had of making a conditional payment in accordance with
         the case‑law of the Court of Justice. The Commission stated that it was sufficient for the Finnish authorities to calculate
         the unpaid customs duties and credit the corresponding amounts, equivalent to payment of the principal, to it on its own‑resources
         account; in the light of that transaction, the Commission would calculate the default interest included from the moment when
         the customs duties in question should have been credited to it (information communicated by the Member State) and the date
         of actual payment. Finally, if the Republic of Finland were vindicated in the action for failure to fulfil obligations which
         is before the Court of Justice, the Commission would repay the amounts which were paid on a conditional basis.
      
At paragraphs to of the order under appeal, the Court of First Instance rejected the two ‘conditions’ advanced by the
         Finnish Government in connection with the conditional payment, namely, an undertaking by the Commission to bring an action
         for failure of a Member State to fulfil its obligations and a dispensation for confidential information. First, the discretion
         which the Commission enjoyed as to whether to bring such an action before the Court of Justice precluded the right of anyone
         to require that it adopt a particular position. Second, the Commission had never required the communication, upon the conditional
         payment, of confidential information which would jeopardise the essential security interests of the Member State.
      
The Court of First Instance therefore held that, in those circumstances, the letters at issue did not display the attributes
         of decisions within the meaning of Article EC and as such could not be the subject of an application for their annulment.
         Consequently, the action for annulment had to be dismissed as inadmissible.
      
 Forms of order sought
The Republic of Finland claims that the Court should:
–       set aside the order under appeal,
–       declare the action brought by the Republic of Finland to be admissible pursuant to Article EC, and
–       refer the case back to the Court of First Instance for a judgment on its substance and order the Commission also to pay the
         Republic of Finland the costs incurred in the appeal proceedings.
      
The Commission contends that the Court should:
–       dismiss the appeal as unfounded, and
–       order the Republic of Finland to pay the costs.
 The appeal
Pursuant to Article of its Rules of Procedure, where the appeal is clearly inadmissible in whole or in part or clearly
         unfounded, the Court of Justice may at any time, acting on a report from the Judge‑Rapporteur and after hearing the Advocate
         General, dismiss it in whole or in part by reasoned order without initiating the oral procedure.
      
In support of the claim for the setting aside of the order under appeal, the Finnish Government relies on a single plea in
         law, divided into four parts. That plea alleges that the Court of First Instance erred in law when it refused to acknowledge
         that the letters at issue constituted a decision capable of being the subject of an action under Article EC.
      
The Commission states that since the letters at issue were simply letters of notification, setting out the approach being
         followed by the Commission in the present case, none of them affect the interests of the Finnish Government nor do they change
         its legal position from that which existed before they were received. It is, consequently, of the view that the Court of First
         Instance correctly applied Community law, since the Republic of Finland has failed to demonstrate that the Court of First
         Instance erred in law.
      
 The second and third parts, alleging errors of assessment in holding that the Commission lacks competence and that the letters
            at issue are of no binding legal effect
 Arguments of the Finnish Government
The Finnish Government challenges the findings of the Court of First Instance at paragraphs to of the order under appeal,
         first, that the Commission has no power to enter into negotiations with the Member States and, second, that those negotiations
         were not necessary.
      
It submits that the possibility of making a conditional payment in the context of infringement proceedings cannot be assessed
         on the basis of Regulation No 1150/2000, since it does not provide for procedures relating to payments other than those connected
         with the Community’s own resources.
      
Community law has not established a system whereby a conditional payment can be made in a way which secures the rights of
         the Member State. In that respect, the Finnish Government states that it is not clear by what means a Member State can satisfy
         itself that the Commission will bring the case before the Court of Justice once it has paid the funds plus default interest
         up to the date of payment, nor in what way it should proceed if the Commission refuses to bring an action, since Community
         law does not provide for a guarantee that that State will obtain repayment of its conditional payment.
      
In particular, in the third part of its plea in law, the Finnish Government submits that the Court of First Instance erred
         in its findings at paragraphs and of the order under appeal and in its finding at paragraph thereof that the letters
         at issue are of no binding legal effect since the Commission did not refuse the conditional payment.
      
In those circumstances, the Finnish Government submits that the Member States should be able to agree with the Commission
         the procedure for a conditional payment. It also considers it necessary, if that payment is to be made, for negotiations to
         be opened with the purpose of concluding an agreement in that respect. That follows both from the principle of loyal cooperation
         enshrined in Article EC and from the principle of legal certainty.
      
 Findings of the Court
As a preliminary point the Court finds that the second and third parts of the plea in law should be dealt with together. In
         order to show that the refusal to open negotiations concerning a conditional payment is a reviewable act pursuant to Article EC,
         those two parts essentially refer to the Commission’s power to open such negotiations and the need for those negotiations.
      
It should be noted, first, that the complaint alleging the irrelevance of Regulation No 1150/is inoperative. While the
         Regulation is relevant inasmuch as it seeks to govern the system of the Communities’ own resources, it does not lay down any
         provisions concerning negotiations such as those sought by the Finnish Government. It follows from the second sentence of
         the 20th recital in the preamble to Regulation No 1150/2000, that the Commission ‘should exercise its powers in accordance with this
         Regulation’.
      
Thus, the Court of First Instance was justified in holding that the Regulation does not confer on the Commission the power
         to enter into any negotiations with the Member States.
      
It is necessary to state, second, that according to the settled case law to which the Court of First Instance referred at
         paragraph of the order under appeal, there is an inseparable link between the obligation to establish the Communities’
         own resources, the obligation to credit them to the Commission’s account within the prescribed time-limit and the obligation
         to pay default interest (see, also, Case C‑392/Commission v Denmark [2005] ECR I-9811, paragraph 67). The inseparable nature of that link does not permit the Commission to open separate negotiations
         concerning one of those factors.
      
It is in the same line of reasoning that the Court of Justice found that the default interest under Article of Council
         Regulation (EEC, Euratom) No 1552/of May implementing Decision 88/376/EEC, Euratom on the system of the Communities’
         own resources (OJ L 155, p. 1), a provision repeated by Regulation No 1150/(see Case C‑363/Commission v Italy [2003] ECR I‑5767, paragraph 23), is payable in respect of any delay, regardless of the reason for the delay in crediting
         them to the Commission’s account (see, inter alia, Case C‑96/Commission v Netherlands [1991] ECR I‑2461, paragraph 38; Commission v Italy, above, paragraph 44, and Case C‑460/Commission v Netherlands [2005] ECR I‑2613, paragraph 91).
      
Thus, the Commission had no choice but to inform the Finnish Government of the fact that according to Community legislation
         and the case‑law of the Court of Justice it does not have the power to negotiate the conditions and procedures for payment
         of own resources. It follows that, as acts of a purely informative nature, limited to explaining the state of the law regarding
         a conditional payment, the letters at issue could neither affect the interests of the Republic of Finland nor change its legal
         position from that which existed before those letters were received.
      
It is necessary to point out that for the purpose of the action for failure to fulfil obligations following the infringement
         proceedings, referred to at paragraph of the present order and in the context of which the question of the opening of the
         negotiations on the conditional payment arises, the Commission had to apply the legal rules in force at the time when the
         two letters at issue were communicated (see, to that effect, Joined Cases C‑361/and C‑362/Tsapalos and Diamantakis [2004] ECR I‑6405, paragraph 19, and Case C‑293/Beemsterboer Coldstore Services [2006] ECR I‑2263, paragraph 19). Therefore, that assessment cannot be affected by a judgment of the Court of Justice bringing
         that action to a close, and in consequence delivered after the communication of the two letters.
      
The Finnish Government maintains that, read together, the principles of loyal cooperation and legal certainty require the
         Commission to enter into negotiations. According to the Finnish Government it follows that the refusal in the letters at issue
         to enter into the negotiations, affects the interests of the Republic of Finland within the meaning of the case‑law of the
         Court of Justice (see, Case C‑147/Netherlands v Commission [2000] ECR I-4723, paragraph and the case‑law cited, and Case C‑123/P Commission v Greencore [2004] ECR I‑11647, paragraph 44). That argument however cannot be upheld.
      
Although it is clear from the case‑law that the Commission cannot refuse a Member State the right to make a conditional payment
         (see, to that effect, Case C‑96/Commission v Netherlands, paragraph 17, and Case C‑359/Commission v United Kingdom [2000] ECR I‑6355, paragraph 31), the recognition of such a right is subject to the Community rules surrounding the conditional
         payment. However, Community law does not require the Commission to conclude an agreement with the Member State concerned confirming
         the pre‑existing Community obligations in favour of that Member State. The possibility of negotiating the conditions and procedures
         of payment runs counter to the system of own resources. In this respect, the Court of Justice has, in particular, emphasised
         the importance of securing efficient and rapid availability of the Community’s own resources (Case C‑378/Commission v Belgium [2006] ECR I-9805, paragraph and the case‑law cited).
      
It follows that the principles of loyal cooperation and legal certainty do not confer on the Republic of Finland the right
         to require that negotiations be entered into for this purpose.
      
It follows from all of the foregoing that the second and third parts of the plea in law are inoperative and must be dismissed
         as manifestly unfounded.
      
 The first part, alleging an error of assessment of the refusal to negotiate
 Arguments of the Finnish Government
The Finnish Government claims that the Court of First Instance erred in finding, at paragraph of the order under appeal,
         that the refusal to grant the request to enter into the negotiations does not constitute a decision adversely affecting the
         Member State. Only the conclusion of an agreement at the end of the negotiations could constitute a measure having an adverse
         affect.
      
According to the Finnish Government, no agreement could have been concluded at the end of negotiations, if they had never
         been started. In refusing to enter into the negotiations, disregarding thereby Article EC, the Commission in fact deprived
         the Republic of Finland of the chance of making a conditional payment within the meaning of the case‑law of the Court of Justice
         (Case C‑96/Commission v Netherlands, paragraph 17, and Commission v United Kingdom, paragraph 31). The decision at issue therefore adversely affected the Republic of Finland.
      
 Findings of the Court
As a preliminary point, it is necessary to point out, as the Court of First Instance did at paragraph of the order under
         appeal, that, according to settled case‑law, the only decisions which may be the subject of an action for annulment within
         the meaning of Article EC are measures the legal effects of which are binding on, and capable of affecting the interests
         of, the applicant by bringing about a distinct change in his legal position (see Netherlands v Commission, paragraph 25, and Commission v Greencore, paragraph 44).
      
The Court of First Instance did not err in finding that the refusal to enter into negotiations contained in the letters at
         issue does not constitute a decision adversely affecting the Member State. As the Finnish Government maintains, entry into
         negotiations is indeed an essential pre‑condition in order to reach any agreement. However, given that such an entry does
         not guarantee that the negotiations will lead to a result, only the result itself is capable of affecting the interests of
         the Finnish Government. The question of a result cannot however arise, since the Commission has no power to conclude an agreement
         leading to such a result or to enter into negotiations for that purpose.
      
Therefore, it must be held that, by the first part of its plea in law, the Republic of Finland is also not able to establish
         that the two letters at issue constitute decisions within the meaning of the case‑law of the Court of Justice. Therefore,
         that part is inoperative and must accordingly be dismissed as manifestly unfounded.
      
 The fourth part, alleging errors of assessment of the two conditions for a conditional payment
 Arguments of the Finnish Government
The Finnish Government criticises the Court of First Instance’s assessment, at paragraphs and of the order under appeal,
         of the two conditions advanced by the Republic of Finland in connection with a conditional payment, namely, an undertaking
         by the Commission to bring an action for failure of Finland to fulfil its obligations and a dispensation granted to that Member
         State exempting it from the requirement to provide confidential information which would jeopardise the essential interests
         of its security – conditions which, according to the Court of First Instance, are not appropriate for the conclusion of an
         agreement.
      
 Findings of the Court
The findings made by the Court of First Instance at paragraphs and of the order under appeal correctly show that the
         Finnish Government cannot require that the payment at issue be made subject to the condition that the Commission undertakes
         to bring the matter before the Court of Justice and that the payment takes place without the Commission requiring the information
         provided for by Article of Regulation No 1150/2000.
      
Neither an obligation on the part of the Commission to bring an action for failure to fulfil obligations before the Court
         of Justice nor an obligation to refrain from requesting the allegedly confidential information provided for by Regulation
         No 1150/can imply that an obligation exists to negotiate a payment subject to such conditions. Even if the Commission
         were to be required to abide by those conditions, they would not require it, as pointed out at paragraph of the present
         order, to enter into the negotiations sought.
      
Consequently, the letters at issue are not capable of affecting, either by the Commission’s refusal to negotiate a payment
         subject to a condition that it bring the matter before the Court of Justice or by its refusal to accept the non‑communication
         of the information provided for by Regulation No 1150/2000, the interests of the Republic of Finland since they do not significantly
         change the Republic of Finland’s legal position. They cannot therefore be considered to be decisions capable of being the
         subject of an action for annulment. The Court of First Instance was therefore justified in holding, at paragraph of the
         order under appeal, that neither of the ‘conditions’ were appropriate for the conclusion of an agreement.
      
Therefore, the fourth part of the plea in law is also inoperative and, as such, must be dismissed as manifestly unfounded.
It follows from all of the foregoing that the plea in law is unfounded in all of its parts.
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, which applies to appeal proceedings by virtue of Article thereof, the unsuccessful
         party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. As the Commission
         has applied for costs against the Republic of Finland, which has been unsuccessful, the Republic of Finland must be ordered
         to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Eighth Chamber) hereby orders:
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
2.      The Republic of Finland is ordered to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Finnish.
      
Top  
 