
Case C-61/Commission of the European Communities
v
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – EAEC Treaty – Scope – Military installations – Health and safety – Decommissioning of a nuclear reactor – Disposal of radioactive waste)
Opinion of Advocate General Geelhoed delivered on December Judgment of the Court (Grand Chamber), April 2005. 
Summary of the Judgment
1.     EAEC – Treaty – Provisions taking account of the defence interests of the Member States – Provisions with a limited scope
            which do not support the finding that the rules of the EAEC Treaty, save in the case of express exceptions, are applicable
            to the military uses of nuclear energy
(Arts EA to EA and 84, para. 3, EA)
2.     EAEC – Treaty – Scope – Activities falling within the military sphere – Excluded – Article EA not applicable to radioactive
            waste from military installations
(Art. EA)
3.     EAEC – Health and safety – Plans for the disposal of radioactive waste – Communication to the Commission – Purpose – Interpretation
            of Article EA allowing Member States discretion as to the time for communicating data and its content – Rejected
(Art. EA)
4.     EAEC – Objective of protecting the health of the public and the environment against the dangers related to the use of nuclear
            energy, including for military purposes – Applicability of the provisions of the EC Treaty
1.     The existence in the EAEC Treaty of provisions which take account of the defence interests of the Member States, namely Articles
         EA to EA and the third paragraph of Article EA, does not necessarily lead to the conclusion that its rules are applicable,
         save express exceptions, to the military uses of nuclear energy. The existence of those provisions may also be explained by
         the fact that the application of certain rules introduced by that Treaty, even if it relates only to civil activities, is
         nevertheless liable to have an impact on activities and interests within the field of the national defence of the Member States.
         That is certainly the case for the rules laid down in Title II, Chapter 2, of the Treaty, which concern dissemination of information,
         and those in Chapter of Title II, relating to safeguards. Furthermore, the provisions in question are limited in scope.
         Apart from the two chapters in which those provisions are found, the Treaty does not contain any other provisions which take
         account of the interests and specific requirements connected with military activities.
      
(see paras 32-33)
2.     Several provisions of the EAEC Treaty confer on the Commission substantial powers which enable it to intervene actively, by
         means of legislation or in the form of an opinion containing individual decisions, in various spheres of activity which, in
         the Community, are concerned with the use of nuclear energy. The application of such provisions to military installations,
         research programmes and other activities might be such as to compromise essential national defence interests of the Member
         States. Consequently, the absence in the Treaty of any derogation laying down the detailed rules according to which the Member
         States would be authorised to rely on and protect those essential interests leads to the conclusion that activities falling
         within the military sphere are outside the scope of that Treaty. Since the Treaty is not applicable to uses of nuclear energy
         for military purposes, the Commission is not justified in relying on Article EA in order to require Member States to provide
         it with information on the disposal of radioactive waste from military installations.
      
(see paras 35-36, 44)
3.     Article EA must be interpreted as meaning that the Commission must be provided with general data relating to any plan for
         the disposal of radioactive waste before such disposal is authorised by the competent authorities of the Member State concerned.
         In order to maintain the effectiveness of that provision, whose objective is to prevent radioactive contamination, and given
         the very great importance of the guidelines that the Commission can give to the Member State concerned, it is essential that
         the Commission be aware in good time of the general data relating to any plan for the disposal of radioactive waste in order,
         after consulting the group of experts, to be able to deliver an opinion which could be examined in detail by that State in
         circumstances such that the Commission’s suggestions may be taken into account before the authorisation is issued.
      
An interpretation of Article EA to the effect that the Member State concerned might decide both the time from which a military
         source of radioactive waste must be regarded as civil waste and the actual content of the data which must be communicated
         to the Commission would be in contradiction with the purpose of that provision. First, any late communication of the data
         would render nugatory the objective of prevention. Second, any partial communication of the relevant data would make it impossible
         to deliver an opinion with full knowledge of the facts.
      
(see paras 39-40)
4.     The fact that the Treaty is not applicable to uses of nuclear energy for military purposes does not by any means reduce the
         vital importance of the objective of protecting the health of the public and the environment against the dangers related to
         the use of nuclear energy, including for military purposes. In so far as that Treaty does not provide the Community with a
         specific instrument in order to pursue that objective, it is possible that appropriate measures may be adopted on the basis
         of the relevant provisions of the EC Treaty.
      
(see para. 44)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
April (*)
      
(Failure by a Member State to fulfil its obligations – EAEC Treaty – Scope – Military installations – Health and safety – Decommissioning of a nuclear reactor – Disposal of radioactive waste)
In Case C-61/03,
ACTION for failure to fulfil obligations under Article EA, brought on February 2003,
Commission of the European Communities,  represented by L. Ström and X. Lewis, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg, 
      
applicant,
v
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, represented by P. Ormond and C. Jackson, acting as Agents, and D. Wyatt QC and S. Tromans, Barrister, with an address for
         service in Luxembourg, 
      
defendant,
supported by:
French Republic,  represented by R. Abraham, G. de Bergues and E. Puisais, acting as Agents,
      
intervener,
 
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Rosas (Rapporteur), R. Silva de Lapuerta and A. Borg Barthet, Presidents
         of Chambers, N. Colneric, S. von Bahr, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, P. Kūris, E. Juhász, G. Arestis and M. Ilešič, Judges,
      
Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed,
Registrar: H. von Holstein, Deputy Registrar,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on October 2004,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on December 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application the Commission of the European Communities seeks from the Court a declaration that, by failing to provide
         general data relating to a plan for the disposal of radioactive waste associated with the decommissioning of the Jason reactor
         at Royal Naval College, Greenwich, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations
         under Article EA.
      
 Legal background 
It is clear from the preamble to the EAEC Treaty that the signatories thereto ‘[recognised] that nuclear energy represents
         an essential resource for the development … of industry and will permit the advancement of the cause of peace’, were ‘resolved
         to create the conditions necessary for the development of a powerful nuclear industry which will provide extensive energy
         resources … and contribute, through its many other applications, to the prosperity of their peoples’, were ‘anxious to create
         the conditions of safety necessary to eliminate hazards to the life and health of the public’ and ‘[desired] … to cooperate
         with international organisations concerned with the peaceful development of atomic energy’.
      
Under Article EA the task of the European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom) is ‘to contribute to the raising of the standard
         of living in the Member States and to the development of relations with the other countries by creating the conditions necessary
         for the speedy establishment and growth of nuclear industries’.
      
Article EA is worded as follows:
‘In order to perform its task, the Community shall, as provided in this Treaty:
(a)      promote research and ensure the dissemination of technical information; 
(b)      establish uniform safety standards to protect the health of workers and of the general public and ensure that they are applied; 
(c)      facilitate investment and ensure, particularly by encouraging ventures on the part of undertakings, the establishment of the
         basic installations necessary for the development of nuclear energy in the Community; 
      
(d)      ensure that all users in the Community receive a regular and equitable supply of ores and nuclear fuels; 
(e)      make certain, by appropriate supervision, that nuclear materials are not diverted to purposes other than those for which they
         are intended;
      
(f)      exercise the right of ownership conferred upon it with respect to special fissile materials; 
(g)      ensure wide commercial outlets and access to the best technical facilities by the creation of a common market in specialised
         materials and equipment, by the free movement of capital for investment in the field of nuclear energy and by freedom of employment
         for specialists within the Community;
      
(h)      establish with other countries and international organisations such relations as will foster progress in the peaceful uses
         of nuclear energy.’
      
Title II of the Treaty, entitled ‘Provisions for the encouragement of progress in the field of nuclear energy’, includes,
         inter alia, Chapter 3, itself entitled ‘Health and Safety’, which consists of Articles EA to EA.
      
Articles EA and EA provide for the establishment in the Community of basic standards for the protection of the health
         of workers and the general public against the dangers arising from ionising radiations. Article EA provides a definition
         of basic standards. Article EA describes the procedure which applies to the working out and adoption of those standards.
      
Under Article EA:
‘Any Member State in whose territories particularly dangerous experiments are to take place shall take additional health and
         safety measures, on which it shall first obtain the opinion of the Commission.
      
The assent of the Commission shall be required where the effects of such experiments are liable to affect the territories
         of other Member States.’
      
Article EA provides:
‘Each Member State shall provide the Commission with such general data relating to any plan for the disposal of radioactive
         waste in whatever form as will make it possible to determine whether the implementation of such plan is liable to result in
         the radioactive contamination of the water, soil or airspace of another Member State. 
      
The Commission shall deliver its opinion within six months, after consulting the group of experts referred to in Article 31.’
The second indent of Article EA states:
‘In order to ensure the development of nuclear energy within the Community, the Commission shall:
…
–       formulate recommendations or deliver opinions in the fields covered by this Treaty, if the Treaty expressly so provides or
         if the Commission considers it necessary.’
      
In order to enable plans for the disposal of radioactive waste within the meaning of Article EA to be appraised in a consistent
         manner, the Commission considered it necessary to specify which types of operation may result in such disposal and, for the
         different types of operation, which information is to be supplied as the general data. Commission Recommendation 91/4/Euratom
         of December on the application of Article of the Euratom Treaty (OJ L 6, p. 16) met that objective and it remained
         in force from December to December 1999. With effect from December it was replaced by Commission Recommendation
         1999/829/Euratom of December on the application of Article of the Euratom Treaty (OJ L 324, p. 23).
      
 The facts
The Jason reactor, which had a maximum thermal output of kW, was operated by the United Kingdom Ministry of Defence at
         Royal Naval College, Greenwich, from to 1996. It was used to train personnel and for research in support of the nuclear
         propulsion programme implemented by the United Kingdom Government for the nuclear submarines of the Royal Navy.
      
The file submitted to the Court does not state the date on which the decommissioning of the Jason reactor was completed. However,
         according to that file, the decommissioning took place after an application to and a decision of the Environment Agency for
         England and Wales to that effect.
      
In the Commission was informed that the Jason reactor was to be decommissioned and dismantled. The file does not specify
         the source of that information and nor does it show whether the decommissioning had already occurred at the date on which
         the Commission was informed thereof.
      
By letter of January 1999, the Commission requested the United Kingdom to send it details concerning the decommissioning
         of the Jason reactor. According to the reply of March of the competent United Kingdom authorities to that request,
         the Environment Agency for England and Wales had previously given revised approval for the disposal of radioactive waste arising
         from decommissioning that reactor.
      
 Pre-litigation procedure
On January 2001, the Commission sent the United Kingdom a letter of formal notice, setting out the arguments which justified
         its view that, by failing to provide it with general data relating to a plan for the disposal of radioactive waste resulting
         from the decommissioning of the Jason reactor, the United Kingdom had failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EA.
      
The United Kingdom authorities replied to the letter of formal notice by letter of March 2001, which set out the reasons
         why in their view Article EA is not applicable to military installations, and in which they contended that the United Kingdom
         has no obligation to provide the Commission with data relating to the decommissioning of the Jason reactor.
      
In the reasoned opinion sent to the United Kingdom on December 2001, the Commission first confirmed the view it had expressed
         in the letter of formal notice and second requested the United Kingdom to submit its observations within two months of notification
         of that opinion. The United Kingdom authorities likewise reiterated their view in their reply dated February 2002.
      
In those circumstances the Commission decided to bring this action.
 Procedure before the Court and forms of order sought
By order of the President of the Court of August 2003, the French Republic was granted leave to intervene in support of
         the form of order sought by the United Kingdom. 
      
The Commission claims that the Court should:
–       declare that, by failing to provide general data relating to a plan for the disposal of radioactive waste associated with
         the decommissioning of the Jason reactor at Royal Naval College, Greenwich, the United Kingdom has failed to fulfil its obligations
         under Article EA; and
      
–       order the United Kingdom to pay the costs.
The United Kingdom and the French Republic contend that the Court should dismiss the Commission’s application and order it
         to pay the costs.
      
 The action
The Commission submits that Article EA applies to disposal of radioactive waste from both civil and military installations.
         It argues, essentially, that that provision aims to prevent any risk of radioactive contamination of another Member State
         and that, since the protection of the general public against the dangers arising from ionising radiations is an indivisible
         objective, it must extend to all sources of danger including those resulting from the decommissioning of military installations,
         such as the Jason reactor.
      
The United Kingdom, supported by the French Republic, replies that Article EA cannot apply to the disposal of radioactive
         waste from military installations since the Treaty itself covers only the civil uses of nuclear energy and the provisions
         of the chapter of the Treaty on health and safety cannot have a scope wider than that of the provisions in other chapters
         of the same Treaty.
      
In that context, it should be pointed out that, although the Commission has relied in support of its action on arguments based
         on the specific objectives of Article EA and the other provisions in Title II, Chapter 3, of the Treaty, on health and
         safety, it has not stated that the provisions of that chapter might be afforded a field of application which differs from
         that of the Treaty as a whole. The Commission has, by contrast, claimed that its interpretation of Article EA, the only
         provision which is alleged to be infringed in this case, is supported, in particular, by the fact that the Treaty does not
         contain any express provision excluding military activities in general from its scope.
      
It is therefore appropriate for the Court to consider at the outset the merits of the interpretation which is the basis of
         the Commission’s action, to the effect that the military uses of nuclear energy may fall within the scope of the Treaty, subject
         to certain express provisions which lay down limited exceptions.
      
In that regard the signatories of the Treaty, by referring in the preamble thereto to the advancement of the cause of peace,
         the applications of the nuclear industry contributing to the prosperity of their peoples and the peaceful development of atomic
         energy, intended to emphasise the non-military character of that Treaty and the supremacy of the aim of promoting the use
         of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
      
Articles EA and EA, which define respectively the mission and the tasks entrusted to the Community, confirm that the objectives
         pursued by the Treaty are essentially civil and commercial. 
      
However, it should be stated that, in the absence of an express provision excluding activities connected to defence from the
         scope of the Treaty, it is necessary to have regard to other factors in order to determine whether the Treaty is intended
         also to govern, at least in certain spheres, the use of nuclear energy for military purposes.
      
The evidence on interpretation to be taken into consideration cannot be limited to the historical background to the drawing
         up of the Treaty, or to the contents of the unilateral declarations made by the representatives of certain States who took
         part in the negotiations which led to the signature of that Treaty. As the Advocate General rightly pointed out in points
         and of his Opinion, it is clear from that background and certain declarations mentioned in the travaux préparatoires
         of the Treaty that its possible application to the military uses of nuclear energy was envisaged and discussed by the representatives
         of the States who took part in those negotiations. However, it is also apparent that they held differing opinions on that
         issue and that they decided to leave it unresolved. Consequently, the guidance provided by that evidence is not sufficient
         for it to be asserted that the framers of the Treaty intended to make its provisions applicable to military installations
         and military applications of nuclear energy.
      
According to the United Kingdom and the French Republic, the main objection to the argument that the EAEC Treaty may also
         apply to military uses of nuclear energy is the fact that, unlike the EC Treaty which was signed on the same day as the EAEC
         Treaty and by the same States, the EAEC Treaty does not contain any derogating provisions specifically intended to safeguard
         the national defence interests of the Member States. Given the vital importance that the Member States, like all other States,
         attach to safeguarding those interests, it is inconceivable that they impliedly waived the right to establish adequate guarantees
         in a field as sensitive as that of the military applications of nuclear energy. The total exclusion of military activities
         from the scope of the EAEC Treaty is the only explanation for the absence from that Treaty of provisions equivalent to those
         in Article 48(4) of the EEC Treaty (which became Article 48(4) of the EC Treaty, now, after amendment, Article 39(4) EC) and
         Article EEC (which became Article of the EC Treaty, now, after amendment, Article EC). 
      
The Commission refutes that argument and submits that Articles EA to EA and the third subparagraph of Article EA
         show, on the contrary, that the defence interests of the Member States were taken into consideration and that they were the
         subject of appropriate provisions. Articles EA to EA concern the security system to which information the disclosure
         of which is liable to harm the defence interests of one or more Member States is to be subject. Article EA lays down the
         duty for the Community to make good the damage caused, in particular where, as a result of their communication to the Commission,
         patents or utility models classified for defence reasons are improperly used or come to the knowledge of an unauthorised person.
         As to the third paragraph of Article EA, in Title II, Chapter 7, of the Treaty, relating to safeguards, it excludes from
         those safeguards materials intended to meet defence requirements which are in the course of being specially processed for
         this purpose or which, after being so processed, are, in accordance with an operational plan, placed or stored in a military
         establishment.
      
However, as the United Kingdom pointed out at the hearing, the existence of those provisions in the EAEC Treaty does not necessarily
         lead to the conclusion that its rules are applicable, save express exceptions, to the military uses of nuclear energy. The
         existence of those provisions may also be explained by the fact that the application of certain rules introduced by that Treaty,
         even if it relates only to civil activities, is nevertheless liable to have an impact on activities and interests within the
         field of the national defence of the Member States. That is certainly the case for the rules laid down in Title II, Chapter
         2, of the Treaty, which concern dissemination of information, and those in Chapter of Title II, relating to safeguards.
      
Furthermore, it should be emphasised that the allegedly derogating provisions relied on by the Commission are limited in scope.
         Apart from the two chapters in which those provisions are found, the Treaty does not contain any other provisions which take
         account of the interests and specific requirements connected with military activities. 
      
The United Kingdom argues that if the Treaty had been intended to apply also to military uses of nuclear energy it would have
         been essential to insert in it a general provision with a content comparable to that of Article EC. Under Article 296(1),
         the provisions of the EC Treaty are not to preclude the right of each Member State, first, not to supply information the disclosure
         of which it considers contrary to the essential interests of its security and, second, to take such measures as it considers
         appropriate for the protection of those interests which are connected with the production of or trade in arms, munitions and
         war material. 
      
In that connection it should be stated that several provisions of the EAEC Treaty confer on the Commission substantial powers
         which enable it to intervene actively, by means of legislation or in the form of an opinion containing individual decisions,
         in various spheres of activity which, in the Community, are concerned with the use of nuclear energy. By way of example it
         is sufficient to mention, apart from the provisions of Title II, Chapter 3, of that Treaty, on health and safety, in particular
         Articles EA, EA and EA, the provisions of Title II, Chapter I, on promotion of research. The text of those provisions
         does not in any way specify whether the activities thus governed are exclusively civil. 
      
However, it is clear that the application of such provisions to military installations, research programmes and other activities
         might be such as to compromise essential national defence interests of the Member States. Consequently, as the United Kingdom
         and the French Republic have rightly argued, the absence in the Treaty of any derogation laying down the detailed rules according
         to which the Member States would be authorised to rely on and protect those essential interests leads to the conclusion that
         activities falling within the military sphere are outside the scope of that Treaty. 
      
It should, however, be noted that at the hearing the Commission nevertheless maintained that, according to its interpretation
         of Article EA, the Member States are not obliged to provide it with any information relating to their military activities.
         The general data mentioned in that provision, the communication of which is required by the Commission, would concern solely
         the equipment or installations which are no longer assigned to military use and which the Member State concerned has, for
         that reason, classified as ‘waste’. Furthermore, according to that interpretation, it would be for each Member State to decide
         both the time from which a military source of radioactive waste must be regarded as waste and the actual content of the general
         data which, without harming the national defence interests of the Member State concerned, must be communicated to the Commission
         so that it may perform the task which is entrusted to it under Article EA.
      
The United Kingdom argues that even if the Commission, by its more subtle interpretation of Article EA put forward during
         the oral procedure, were now prepared to require from the Member States only information which was more limited than that
         mentioned in Recommendation 1999/829, the action would still be unfounded. By its new interpretation of Article EA, the
         Commission attempts to read into it safeguards which are not provided for, precisely because military activities have always
         been excluded from the scope of the Treaty. Furthermore, that interpretation of Article EA contradicts that given by the
         Commission to the other provisions of the chapter of the Treaty concerning health and safety. The United Kingdom recalls that,
         according to the Commission, Article EA, relating to particularly dangerous experiments, also applies to nuclear weapons
         tests. 
      
It should be pointed out that, as the Court has already ruled in Case 187/Land deSarre and Others [1988] ECR 5013, Article EA must be interpreted as meaning that the Commission must be provided with general data relating
         to any plan for the disposal of radioactive waste before such disposal is authorised by the competent authorities of the Member
         State concerned. The Court held that, in order to maintain the effectiveness of that provision, whose objective is to prevent
         radioactive contamination, and given the very great importance of the guidelines that the Commission can give to the Member
         State concerned, it was essential that the Commission be aware in good time of the general data relating to any plan for the
         disposal of radioactive waste in order, after consulting the group of experts, to be able to deliver an opinion which could
         be examined in detail by that State in circumstances such that the Commission’s suggestions may be taken into account before
         the authorisation is issued.
      
An interpretation of Article EA to the effect that the Member State concerned might decide both the time from which a military
         source of radioactive waste must be regarded as civil waste and the actual content of the data which must be communicated
         to the Commission would be in contradiction with the purpose of that provision. First, any late communication of the data
         would render nugatory the objective of prevention. Second, any partial communication of the relevant data would make it impossible
         to deliver an opinion with full knowledge of the facts.
      
Furthermore, an interpretation of Article EA which allowed Member States such discretion as to the time for communicating
         data and its content would be a source of dispute and would undermine the effective application of that provision. 
      
It follows from those considerations that the interpretation of Article EA proposed by the Commission at the hearing cannot
         be accepted. 
      
It must therefore be held that the Commission has not demonstrated that the application of Article EA to the decommissioning
         of the military installation in question is justified. 
      
It is necessary, however, to emphasise that the fact that the Treaty is not applicable to uses of nuclear energy for military
         purposes and that, accordingly, the Commission is not justified in relying on Article EA in order to require Member States
         to provide it with information on the disposal of radioactive waste from military installations does not by any means reduce
         the vital importance of the objective of protecting the health of the public and the environment against the dangers related
         to the use of nuclear energy, including for military purposes. In so far as that Treaty does not provide the Community with
         a specific instrument in order to pursue that objective, it is possible that appropriate measures may be adopted on the basis
         of the relevant provisions of the EC Treaty (see, to that effect, Case C-62/Greece v Council [1990] ECR I-1527).
      
Having regard to all the foregoing considerations, it must be held that Article EA does not impose on the United Kingdom
         the obligation to provide the Commission with general data relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste associated
         with the decommissioning of the Jason reactor and, therefore, the Commission’s application must be dismissed.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the United Kingdom has applied for costs and the Commission has been
         unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs. Pursuant to the first subparagraph of Article 69(4) of the Rules
         of Procedure, the Member States which have intervened in the proceedings must bear their own costs.
      
On those grounds the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby:
1.      Dismisses the application;
2.      Orders the Commission of the European Communities to pay the costs;
3.      Orders the French Republic to bear its own costs. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 