
Joined Cases C-344/P and C-345/P
Freixenet SA
v
Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM)
(Appeals – Applications for registration of Community trade marks representing a frosted white bottle and a frosted black matt bottle
         – Refusal to register – Lack of distinctive character)
      
Summary of the Judgment
Community trade mark – Definition and acquisition of the Community trade mark – Absolute grounds for refusal – Marks devoid
            of any distinctive character – Mark consisting of the specific appearance of the surface of the packaging of a liquid product
(Council Regulation No 40/94, Art. 7(1)(b))
The criteria for assessing the distinctive character of three-dimensional trade marks consisting of the appearance of the
         product itself are no different from those applicable to other categories of trade mark.
      
However, when those criteria are applied, account must be taken of the fact that the perception of the average consumer is
         not necessarily the same in relation to a three-dimensional mark consisting of the appearance of the product itself as it
         is in relation to a word or figurative mark consisting of a sign independent of the appearance of the products it designates.
         Average consumers are not in the habit of making assumptions about the origin of products on the basis of their shape or the
         shape of their packaging when there is no graphic or word element, and it could therefore prove more difficult to establish
         distinctive character in relation to such a three-dimensional mark than in relation to a word or figurative mark.
      
In those circumstances, only a mark which departs significantly from the norm or customs of the sector and thereby fulfils
         its essential function of indicating origin is not devoid of any distinctive character for the purposes of Article 7(1)(b)
         of Regulation No 40/on the Community trade mark.
      
That case-law, developed in relation to three-dimensional trade marks consisting of the appearance of the product itself or
         the packaging of goods, such as liquids, which are packaged in trade for reasons linked to the very nature of the product,
         also applies when the trade mark for which registration is sought is an ‘other’ mark consisting of the specific appearance
         of the surface of the packaging of a liquid product. In such a case, the mark likewise does not consist of a sign independent
         of the appearance of the necessary packaging of the products it designates.
      
(see paras 45-48)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Appeal – Applications for registration of Community trade marks representing a frosted white bottle and a frosted black matt bottle
         – Refusal to register – Lack of distinctive character)
      
In Joined Cases C-344/P and C-345/P,
APPEALS under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, brought on July 2010,
Freixenet SA, established in Sant Sadurní d’Anoia (Spain), represented by F. de Visscher, E. Cornu and D. Moreau, avocats,
      
applicant,
the other party to the proceedings being:
Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM), represented by A. Folliard-Monguiral, acting as Agent,
      
defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, J. Malenovský, R. Silva de Lapuerta, G. Arestis (Rapporteur), and T. von
         Danwitz, Judges,
      
Advocate General: E. Sharpston,
Registrar: K. Malacek, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on May 2011,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By its appeals, Freixenet SA (‘Freixenet’) seeks to have set aside the judgments of the General Court of the European Union
         of the April 2010, in Case T-109/Freixenet v OHIM (Frosted white bottle) (‘the judgment in T-109/08’), and in Case T-110/Freixenet v OHIM (Frosted black matt bottle) (‘the judgment in T‑110/08’) (together, ‘the judgments under appeal’), by which the Court dismissed its actions against,
         respectively, the decisions of the First Board of Appeal of the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks
         and Designs) (OHIM) of October (case R 97/2001-1) and of November (case R 104/2001-1), concerning applications
         for registration of signs representing a frosted white bottle and a frosted black matt bottle as Community trade marks (‘the
         contested decisions’).
      
 Legal context
Council Regulation (EC) No 40/of December on the Community trade mark (OJ 1994, L 11, p. 1), repealed by Council
         Regulation (EC) No 207/of February on the Community trade mark (OJ L 78, p. 1), entered into force on April
         2009. Nevertheless, having regard to the dates of the facts, the present disputes are still governed by Regulation No 40/94.
      
In accordance with Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/trade marks which are devoid of any distinctive character are not
         to be registered.
      
Pursuant to Article 7(3) of that regulation, the absolute ground for refusal referred to in Article 7(1)(b) does not prevent
         registration of a mark if that mark has become distinctive in relation to the goods or services for which registration is
         requested in consequence of the use which has been made of it.
      
Article 38(3) of the same regulation provides that the application is not to be refused before the applicant has been allowed
         the opportunity of withdrawing or amending the application or of submitting his observations.
      
Article of Regulation No 40/provides:
      
‘Decisions of [OHIM] shall state the reasons on which they are based. They shall be based only on reasons or evidence on which
         the parties concerned have had an opportunity to present their comments.’
      
 Facts in the main proceedings
On April 1996, Freixenet filed two applications for registration of Community trade marks at OHIM concerning the representations
         at issue. In the applications, Freixenet stated that the marks for which registration was sought were in the category ‘other’
         and consisted of the shape of presentation of a product. In the application giving rise to the judgment in T-109/Freixenet
         claimed the colour ‘golden matt’ and described the mark as a ‘white polished bottle which when filled with sparkling wine
         takes on a golden matt appearance similar to a frosted bottle’. In the application giving rise to the judgment in T-110/08,
         Freixenet claimed the colour ‘black matt’ and described the mark as a ‘frosted black matt bottle’. Furthermore, a declaration
         was annexed to those applications in which Freixenet stated that ‘the applicant for the mark [did] not want to obtain restrictive
         and exclusive protection for the shape of the packaging but for the specific appearance of its surface’.
      
The goods for which registration was sought fall within Class of the Nice Agreement concerning the International Classification
         of Goods and Services for the Purposes of the Registration of Marks of June 1957, as revised and amended, and correspond
         to the following description, namely ‘sparkling wines’.
      
By decisions of November the OHIM examiner dismissed the applications for registration of the marks on the ground
         that the marks were devoid of distinctive character and that the evidence put forward by Freixenet did not lead to the conclusion
         that those marks had acquired a distinctive character through the use made of them, within the meaning of Article 7(3) of
         Regulation No 40/94.
      
By decisions of February in Cases R 97/2001-and R 104/2001-4, the Fourth Board of Appeal of OHIM dismissed the appeals
         brought by Freixenet against the examiner’s decisions.
      
By judgments of October 2006, in Case T-190/Freixenet v OHIM (Shape of a frosted white bottle) and Case T-188/Freixenet v OHIM (Shape of a frosted black matt bottle), the Court annulled those decisions, holding that the Board of Appeal had infringed Article of Regulation No 40/and
         the principle of the rights of defence.
      
By the decisions of December the Presidium of the Board of Appeal of OHIM referred those cases to the First Board
         of Appeal.
      
By letters of June 2007, in consideration of the fact that the Court had criticised the Fourth Board of Appeal of OHIM
         for having based its decisions on evidence which had not been brought to Freixenet’s attention, the First Board of Appeal
         of OHIM sent to Freixenet the drawings of the bottles mentioned in the decisions of the Fourth Board of Appeal which were
         annulled by the Court as well as the addresses of internet websites mentioned in the examiner’s decisions of November 2000.
      
By letters of August Freixenet submitted its comments on the abovementioned information.
      
By the contested decisions the First Board of Appeal dismissed the appeal brought before it.
      
 The procedure before the General Court and the judgments under appeal
By applications lodged at the General Court Registry on February 2008, Freixenet brought two actions calling on the Court
         to annul the contested decisions and to decide that the applications for registration of Community marks for the representations
         at issue satisfied the conditions required for publication in accordance with Article of Regulation No 40/94.
      
In support of those actions, Freixenet put forward three pleas in law alleging infringement of Article of Regulation No
         40/94, of Article 7(1)(b) of that regulation and of Article 7(3) of that regulation respectively.
      
By the judgments under appeal the Court rejected those three pleas in law and dismissed the actions in their entirety.
      
In particular, with regard to the first part of the first plea alleging infringement of the obligation to state reasons referred
         to in the first sentence of Article of Regulation No 40/94, the Court held, at paragraph of the judgments under appeal,
         that the Board of Appeal was not required to provide specific references to the documents of the case file when expressly
         referring to practical experience generally acquired from the marketing of general consumer goods in order to hold that the
         marks for which registration was sought were devoid of any distinctive character under Article 7(1)(b) of that regulation.
         Therefore, at paragraph of those judgments, the Court rejected the first part of the first plea.
      
In the context of that same part, the Court also noted, at paragraph of the judgments under appeal, that the Board of Appeal
         had substantiated its argument that daily experience confirms the idea that the real trade mark for sparkling wine is represented
         by the label, having noted that ‘the illustrations referred to in the decision of the Fourth Board of Appeal, sent to [Freixenet],
         and those which [Freixenet] itself [found] during its research, constitute[d] the best evidence’. The Court held, at paragraph
         of those judgments, that all those illustrations confirmed the idea that the real trade mark for sparkling wine is represented
         by the label and not by the shape of its packaging, and that constituted the reasoning given by the Board of Appeal as the
         basis for the contested decisions.
      
As regards the second part of the first plea, alleging infringement of the right to be heard referred to in the second sentence
         of Article of Regulation No 40/94, the General Court noted, at paragraphs of the judgments under appeal, that according
         to the First Board of Appeal the essential element allowing the relevant consumer to identify the origin of the product is
         the label affixed to the bottle of sparkling wine rather than the shape of the bottle or its appearance. The Court stated,
         at paragraph of the judgments, that that assessment represented OHIM’s final position and that it did not therefore have
         to be submitted to Freixenet for observations. According to the Court, that assessment was not based on facts collected of
         its own motion by the Board of Appeal, but was an extension of the arguments raised by the examiner on November 1998, indicating
         to Freixenet that the mark for which registration was sought took the standard appearance of a bottle of sparkling wine and
         was accordingly devoid of any distinctive character under Article 7(1)(b) of that regulation.
      
In the context of the second part of the first plea, the Court also noted, at paragraph of the judgments under appeal,
         that the inferences from practical experience, namely the importance of the label on a sparkling wine as an element allowing
         the consumer concerned to establish the origin of the product and the variety of presentations, could be assumed to be known
         to everyone, in particular, to Freixenet. According to the Court, those inferences were within the category of well known
         facts, the accuracy of which did not have to be established by OHIM. The Court also noted that the argument put forward by
         the Board of Appeal in the contested decisions was in the context of the discussions between Freixenet and OHIM concerning
         the elements to be taken into consideration to establish the distinctive character of the marks for which registration was
         sought.
      
At paragraph of the judgments under appeal, the Court stated that the idea that the label constitutes the point of reference
         for the consumer of sparkling wine, which is not based on other elements, such as the colour of the glass of the bottle or
         its surface appearance, constitutes the central reasoning of OHIM and is merely a finding resulting from practical experience.
         Considering that Freixenet could not have been unaware of that idea, the Court held that Freixenet was therefore perfectly
         able to refute the argument put forward by the examiner and then accepted by the First Board of Appeal to establish the absence
         of any distinctive character of the marks for which registration was sought; it could thus have argued that it was not the
         label but the packaging of the sparkling wine which was normally taken into consideration by the consumer concerned in choosing
         that product.
      
Furthermore, finding that Freixenet had indeed had the opportunity to submit its observations on the illustrations of the
         bottles mentioned in the decisions of the Fourth Board of Appeal, the Court held, at paragraph of those judgments, that
         Freixenet was not therefore justified in pleading, in that regard, infringement of the second sentence of Article of Regulation
         No 40/94.
      
The Court found, at paragraph of the judgments under appeal, that Freixenet had been heard in accordance with the second
         sentence of Article of Regulation No 40/since it could have presented its comments on the reasons why OHIM was minded
         to reject the applications for registration of the marks in so far as they did not have the distinctive character required
         in that regard. The Court then held, at paragraph of the judgments, that Freixenet was therefore wrong in claiming that
         the Board of Appeal had failed to comply with that provision by not inviting it to present its observations on well-known
         facts of which it could not have been unaware and which constituted the final position of OHIM or on the illustrations of
         the bottles. Therefore, the Court rejected the second part of the first plea.
      
As regards the second plea, alleging infringement of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94, the Court noted in particular,
         at paragraphs and of the judgments in T-109/and T-110/respectively, that, in respect of the actual assessment
         of the distinctive character of the marks for which registration was sought, the Board of Appeal was of the opinion that the
         colour and matting of the glass of the bottle could not ‘function as a trade mark’ for sparkling wine. In addition, the Court
         stated, at paragraphs and of the judgments in T-109/and T-110/respectively, that, in that context, Freixenet relied
         on the original character of those marks at April 1996, which was not actually disputed by that Board of Appeal in the contested
         decisions. According to the Court, such originality would not suffice, however, to establish the distinctive character of
         those marks for the goods concerned and the relevant public.
      
At paragraphs and of the judgments in T-109/and T-110/respectively, the Court held that the assessments by the
         Board of Appeal, not disputed as such by Freixenet and based, on the one hand, on the fact that no bottle was sold without
         a label or equivalent and, on the other, on the fact that Freixenet itself used the mark FREIXENET on the bottles for which
         it sought registration as marks, confirmed the idea drawn from practical experience, namely that the colour and matting of
         the glass of the bottle could not ‘function as a trade mark’ for sparkling wine as regards the relevant public.
      
In the context of the second plea, the Court noted, furthermore, at paragraphs and of the judgments in T-109/and
         T-110/respectively, that the original aspect of the marks for which registration was sought was not disputed. What was
         disputed was the fact that the great majority of consumers do not perceive the appearance of the bottles as a useful factor
         in determining the origin of the sparkling wine in question, but prefer to refer to the label.
      
Furthermore, at paragraphs and of the judgments in T-109/and T-110/respectively, the Court held that, as regards
         the argument that none of the illustrations of the bottles of sparkling wine in the contested decisions referred to a bottle
         marketed at the time registration of the marks was sought, it was sufficient to point out that that argument was ineffective
         in so far as the Board of Appeal of OHIM had rightly stated, in those decisions, that ‘there [was] no history of wine producers
         having offered wine to the public in bottles without inscription, by solely or principally relying on the formal appearance
         of the bottle as the indicator of the industrial or commercial origin of the product’. The Court held that, in any event,
         even if Freixenet was the first to use the packaging for which registration of the marks was sought, the fact remained that
         the originality of the packaging did not suffice, since the consumer took account of, and regardless of the time, another
         element when deciding what to purchase, taking account particularly of the large variety of presentations in the shops. 
      
Consequently, at paragraphs and of the judgments in T-109/and T‑110/respectively, the Court held that the Board
         of Appeal had correctly found that the marks for which registration was sought were devoid of any distinctive character and,
         therefore, it rejected the second plea.
      
In respect of the third plea, alleging infringement of Article 7(3) of Regulation No 40/94, the Court noted in particular,
         at paragraphs and of the judgments in T-109/and T-110/respectively, that it could not be disputed that nine
         of the fifteen Member States that made up the European Community at the time of the filing of the applications for registration
         were not covered by the market studies submitted by Freixenet.
      
The Court stated further, at paragraphs and of the judgments in T-109/and T-110/respectively, that since the
         marks for which registration was sought consisted of the presentation of a product, there was no language barrier to their
         registration and it was, therefore, in principle, in all parts of the Community where the inherent distinctive character was
         missing that the acquisition of distinctive character through use had to be established in order for those marks to be registered
         in accordance with Article 7(3) of Regulation No 40/94.
      
The Court concluded, at paragraphs and of the judgments in T-109/and T-110/respectively, that, in the absence
         of sufficiently probative evidence for fourteen of the fifteen Member States concerned, the acquisition of distinctive character
         through use in Spain could not therefore be considered sufficient to obtain registration of a Community trade mark, which
         had a unitary character and produced effects in the entire Community. The Court also held that Freixenet could not invoke
         for that purpose and by analogy Case C-301/PAGO International [2009] ECR I-9429, which relates to a reference for a preliminary ruling concerning Article 9(1)(c) of Regulation No 40/and the question of the protection conferred by reputation to a Community trade mark which has already been registered. Consequently,
         the Court held that the Board of Appeal correctly found that the evidence furnished by Freixenet was insufficient to demonstrate
         distinctive character acquired through use of the signs for which registration was sought and, therefore, rejected the third
         plea.
      
 Forms of order sought and the procedure before the Court of Justice
Freixenet claims that the Court should:
      
–        set aside the judgments under appeal;
–        grant the form of order sought before the Court, and 
–        order OHIM to pay the costs.
OHIM contends that the Court should:
      
–        dismiss the appeal, and
–        order Freixenet to pay the costs.
By an order of the President of the Court of November 2010, Cases C-344/P and C-345/P were joined for the purposes
         of the oral procedure and the judgment.
      
 The appeals
In support of its appeals, Freixenet puts forward three pleas in law, alleging, first, infringement of Articles 38(3) and
         of Regulation No 40/94, and Article TFEU and Article of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights
         and Fundamental Freedoms, signed in Rome on November 1950, second, infringement of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/and, third, infringement of Article 7(3) of that regulation. It is appropriate to examine the second plea first. 
      
 Arguments of the parties
By its second plea, Freixenet claims that the Court infringed Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/by holding, in the judgments
         under appeal, that the Board of Appeal was not required to put forward specific evidence in support of its refusals to register
         and could merely affirm a supposedly well-known fact in denying the distinctive character of the marks for which registration
         was sought, when Freixenet had provided specific and substantiated information showing the original character of the marks
         at the relevant time, so that they varied significantly from the norm or customs of the sector concerned. Since, according
         to the case-law, the assessment of distinctive power must be concrete, OHIM is required to respond in concrete terms to the
         specific arguments adduced by the applicant for a trade mark and not merely with vague and general denials, as the General
         Court wrongly accepted in the judgments under appeal.
      
Furthermore, Freixenet stresses that the marks for which registration was sought were substantially different from the norms
         of the sector on April and it points out that, in that regard, the original character of those marks was recognised
         by the Board of Appeal as well as by the General Court at paragraphs and of the judgment in T-109/and at paragraphs
         and of the judgment in T‑110/08. It claims that, since, in accordance with case-law, only an ability to distinguish
         the origin of the goods is sufficient for the ground of refusal referred to in Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/not
         to apply and given that the marks had minimal distinctive character, which the General Court accepted in qualifying them as
         original, the latter erred in law, infringing that provision, by denying the distinctive character of the marks even though
         the protection criterion was met.
      
Freixenet also accuses the Court of having infringed Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/by the importance which it attached
         to the need to combine a word element with the marks for which registration was sought when it endorsed, at paragraphs and of the judgments in T-109/and T-110/respectively, the argument of the Board of Appeal that ‘there is no history
         of wine producers having offered wine to the public in bottles without inscription, by solely or principally relying on the
         formal appearance of the bottle as the indicator of the industrial or commercial origin of the product’. The Court also erroneously
         presumed that a non verbal sign had no distinctive power when not used in combination with a word element, although neither
         that regulation nor the case‑law makes the registration of a mark constituted by the shape of a product or the presentation
         of its packaging subject to the presence of inscriptions or word elements.
      
OHIM disputes Freixenet’s arguments and claims that the second plea must be rejected as unfounded.
      
 Findings of the Court
According to settled case-law, for a trade mark to possess distinctive character for the purposes of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation
         No 40/it must serve to identify the goods in respect of which registration is sought as originating from a particular undertaking,
         and thus to distinguish those goods from those of other undertakings (see, in particular, Joined Cases C-456/P and C-457/P
         Henkel v OHIM [2004] ECR I-5089, paragraph 34; Case C-136/P Mag Instrument v OHIM [2004] ECR I-9165, paragraph 29, and Case C-238/P Develey v OHIM [2007] ECR I-9375, paragraph 79).
      
That distinctive character must be assessed, first, by reference to the goods or services in respect of which registration
         is sought and, second, by reference to the perception of the relevant public (see, in particular, Henkel v OHIM, paragraph 35; Case C-25/P Storck v OHIM [2006] ECR I-5719, paragraph 25, and Develey v OHIM, paragraph 79).
      
In the present case, as the Court noted at paragraphs and of the judgments in T-109/and T-110/respectively, it
         is not disputed that the goods at issue, namely sparkling wines, are everyday consumer goods and that the target public is
         composed of the general public of the fifteen Member States which made up the Community at the time of the filing of the application
         for registration.
      
It is also settled case-law that, the criteria for assessing the distinctive character of three-dimensional trade marks consisting
         of the appearance of the product itself are no different from those applicable to other categories of trade mark (see, in
         particular, Mag Instrument v OHIM, paragraph 30; Case C-173/P Deutsche SiSi-Werke v OHIM [2006] ECR I-551, paragraph 27; Storck v OHIM, paragraph 26, and Case C-144/P Henkel v OHIM [2007] ECR I-8109, paragraph 36).
      
However, when those criteria are applied, account must be taken of the fact that the perception of the average consumer is
         not necessarily the same in relation to a three-dimensional mark consisting of the appearance of the product itself as it
         is in relation to a word or figurative mark consisting of a sign which is independent of the appearance of the products it
         designates. Average consumers are not in the habit of making assumptions about the origin of products on the basis of their
         shape or the shape of their packaging in the absence of any graphic or word element, and it could therefore prove more difficult
         to establish distinctive character in relation to such a three-dimensional mark than in relation to a word or figurative mark
         (see, in particular, Mag Instrument v OHIM, paragraph 30; Deutsche SiSi-Werke v OHIM, paragraph 28, and Storck v OHIM, paragraph 27).
      
In those circumstances, only a mark which departs significantly from the norm or customs of the sector and thereby fulfils
         its essential function of indicating origin is not devoid of any distinctive character for the purposes of Article 7(1)(b)
         of Regulation No 40/(see, in particular, Mag Instrument v OHIM, paragraph 31; Deutsche SiSi-Werke v OHIM, paragraph 31, and Storck v OHIM, paragraph 28).
      
That case-law, which was developed in relation to three-dimensional trade marks consisting of the appearance of the product
         itself or the packaging of goods, such as liquids, which are packaged in trade for reasons linked to the very nature of the
         product (see Deutsche SiSi-Werke v OHIM, paragraph 29, and Case C-144/P Henkel v OHIM, paragraph 38), also applies where, as in the present case, the trade mark for which registration is sought is an ‘other’
         mark consisting of the specific appearance of the surface of the packaging of a liquid product. In such a case, the mark likewise
         does not consist of a sign that is independent of the appearance of the necessary packaging of the products it designates
         (see, to that effect, Storck v OHIM, paragraph 29).
      
Although the General Court correctly identified, at paragraphs to and to of the judgments in T-109/and T-110/respectively, the criteria laid down by the case-law, it is apparent from those judgments that the General Court did not follow
         that case-law in its assessment of the case.
      
Instead of establishing whether the marks for which registration was sought varied significantly from the norm or customs
         of the sector, the General Court merely stated in a general manner, at paragraphs and of the judgments in T-109/and
         T-110/respectively, that since no bottle had been sold without a label or an equivalent, only that word element could determine
         the origin of the sparkling wine in question, so that the colour and matting of the glass of the bottle could not ‘function
         as a trade mark’ for sparkling wine for the relevant public when they were not used in combination with a word element.
      
Such an assessment means that marks consisting of the appearance of the packaging of the product itself that do not contain
         an inscription or a word element would be excluded automatically from the protection that may be conferred by Regulation No
         40/94.
      
It follows that the General Court infringed Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/(see, to that effect, Case C-383/P Procter & Gamble v OHIM [2001] ECR I‑6251, paragraph 45).
      
In those circumstances, the second plea put forward by Freixenet must be upheld and the judgments under appeal set aside,
         without it being necessary to examine the other grounds of the appeals.
      
 The action before the General Court
Under the second sentence of the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union,
         the Court of Justice may, where the decision of the General Court has been set aside, itself give final judgment in the matter,
         where the state of the proceedings so permits. That is the case here.
      
As regards Freixenet’s applications before the General Court, seeking annulment of the contested decisions and based on infringement
         of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94, they must be upheld for the reasons set out at paragraphs to of this judgment.
         The Board of Appeal of OHIM made the same error in law as the General Court by finding, at paragraphs and and paragraphs
         and of the decisions of October and November respectively, that ‘the formal appearance [did] not fulfil the
         function of the mark but the label does’, and by not examining therefore whether the marks for which registration was sought
         varied so significantly from the norm or customs of the sector that they had distinctive character.
      
In those circumstances, the contested decisions must be annulled, and it is not necessary to examine the other grounds put
         forward by Freixenet in the context of the appeals before the General Court.
      
 Costs
Under Article of the Rules of Procedure, where the appeal is well founded and the Court itself gives final judgment in
         the case, the Court is to make a decision as to costs. Under Article 69(2) of those rules, which apply to appeals by virtue
         of Article of that regulation, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for
         in the successful party’s pleadings. Since Freixenet has applied for costs to be awarded against OHIM, and since OHIM has
         been unsuccessful, it must be ordered to pay the costs of the proceedings at first instance and in the appeals.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby
1.      Sets aside the judgments of the General Court of the European Union of April in Case T-109/Freixenet v OHIM (Frosted white bottle), and in Case T-110/Freixenet v OHIM (Frosted black matt bottle);
2.      Annuls the decisions of the First Board of Appeal of the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and
            Designs) (OHIM) of October (case R 97/2001-1) and of November (case R 104/2001-1);
3.      Orders the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM) to pay the costs both at first
            instance and in the appeals.
[Signatures]
*Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 