
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-421/Traunfellner GmbHvÖsterreichische Autobahnen- und Schnellstraßen-Finanzierungs-AG (Asfinag)(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Bundesvergabeamt (Austria))
         
«(Directive 93/37/EEC – Public works contracts – Concept of a variant – Conditions for consideration and assessment for the purpose of awarding a contract)»
Opinion of Advocate General Alber delivered on April I - Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber), October I - Summary of the Judgment
1..
Preliminary rulings – Jurisdiction of the Court – Extraction of the relevant points of Community law – Jurisdiction of the national courts – Establishment and evaluation of the facts – Application of provisions interpreted by the Court  (Art. EC) 
2..
Approximation of laws – Procedures for the award of public works contracts – Directive 93/– Award of contracts – Variants submitted by tenderers – Obligation to set out in the contract documents the minimum specifications to be complied with – Scope – Reference to a provision of national legislation – Not permissible  (Council Directive 93/37, Art. 19) 
3..
Approximation of laws – Procedures for the award of public works contracts – Directive 93/– Award of contracts – Application of the criteria for the award of contracts only to variants properly taken into consideration by the contracting
                     authority  
                  (Council Directive 93/37, Arts and 30) 
1.
 Under Article EC, which is based on a clear separation of functions between national courts and tribunals and the Court
         of Justice, the latter is empowered to rule on the interpretation or validity of Community provisions only on the basis of
         the facts which the national court or tribunal puts before it. However, it is for the national court or tribunal to apply
         the rules of Community law to a specific case. No such application is possible without a comprehensive appraisal of the facts
         of the case. The Court therefore has no jurisdiction to give a ruling on the facts in the main proceedings or to apply the
         rules of Community law which it has interpreted to national measures or situations, since those questions are matters for
         the exclusive jurisdiction of the national court or tribunal. see para. 2.
 Article of Directive 93/concerning the coordination of procedures for the award of public works contracts is to be interpreted
         as meaning that the obligation to set out the minimum specifications required by a contracting authority in order to take
         variants into consideration is not satisfied where the contract documents merely refer to a provision of national legislation
         requiring an alternative tender to ensure the performance of work which is qualitatively equivalent to that for which tenders
         are invited. Tenderers may be deemed to be informed in the same way of the minimum specifications with which their variants must comply
         in order to be considered by the contracting authority only where those specifications are set out in the contract documents.
         This involves an obligation of transparency designed to ensure compliance with the principle of equal treatment of tenderers,
         which must be complied with in any procurement procedure governed by the Directive. see paras 29-30, operative part 3.
 Article of Directive 93/concerning the coordination of procedures for the award of public works contracts, which lays
         down the permissible criteria for the award of contracts, can apply only to variants which have been properly taken into consideration
         by the contracting authority in accordance with Article of that directive. Variants may not, in that regard, be properly
         taken into consideration, even if they have not been declared inadmissible in the tender notice as provided for in the second
         paragraph of Article 19, where the contracting authority has failed to comply with the requirements laid down in that provision
         with respect to the statement of the minimum specifications with which those variants must comply. see paras 31-34, operative part JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)October (1)
((Directive 93/37/EEC – Public works contracts – Concept of a variant – Conditions for consideration and assessment for the purpose of awarding a contract))
In Case C-421/01, 
            REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Bundesvergabeamt (Austria) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings
            pending before that tribunal between
            
 Traunfellner GmbH
and
 Österreichische Autobahnen- und Schnellstraßen-Finanzierungs-AG (Asfinag),
on the interpretation of Council Directive 93/37/EEC of June concerning the coordination of procedures for the award
            of public works contracts (OJ L 199, p. 54),
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
composed of: J.-P. Puissochet, President of the Chamber, R. Schintgen, V. Skouris (Rapporteur), F. Macken and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: S. Alber, Registrar: M.F. Contet, Principal Administrator, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
Traunfellner GmbH, by M. Oppitz, Rechtsanwalt, 
               
─
Österreichische Autobahnen- und Schnellstraßen-Finanzierungs-AG (Asfinag), by O. Sturm and F. Lückler, acting as Agents, 
               
─
the Austrian Government, by M. Fruhmann, acting as Agent, 
               
─
the French Government, by G. de Bergues and S. Pailler, acting as Agents, 
               
─
the Commission of the European Communities, by M. Nolin, acting as Agent, assisted by R. Roniger, Rechtsanwalt, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of the Austrian Government and the Commission at the hearing on March 2003,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on April 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
By order of September 2001, received at the Court on October 2001, the Bundesvergabeamt (Federal Procurement Office)
         referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC five questions on the interpretation of the first and
         second paragraphs of Article and Article 30(1) and (2) of Council Directive 93/37/EEC of June concerning the coordination
         of procedures for the award of public works contracts (OJ L 199, p. 54) (
         the Directive). 
         
            
Those questions have been raised in proceedings between the companies Traunfellner GmbH and Österreichische Autobahnen- und
         Schnellstraßen-Finanzierungs-AG (
         Asfinag) concerning the rejection of a tender submitted by Traunfellner for a public works contract. 
         
Legal framework
Community legislation
         
            
Article of the Directive provides: Where the criterion for the award of the contract is that of the most economically advantageous tender, contracting authorities
         may take account of variants which are submitted by a tenderer and meet the minimum specifications required by the contracting
         authorities.The contracting authorities shall state in the contract documents the minimum specifications to be respected by the variants
         and any specific requirements for their presentation. They shall indicate in the tender notice if variants are not permitted.Contracting authorities may not reject the submission of a variant on the sole grounds that it has been drawn up with technical
         specifications defined by reference to national standards transposing European standards, to European technical approvals
         or to common technical specifications referred to in Article 10(2) or again by reference to national technical specifications
         referred to in Article 10(5)(a) and (b).
         
            
Article of the Directive provides: 
         
1.
 The criteria on which the contracting authorities shall base the award of contracts shall be:
         
(a)
either the lowest price only; 
         
(b)
or, when the award is made to the most economically advantageous tender, various criteria according to the contract: e.g.
         price, period for completion, running costs, profitability, technical merit. 
         
2.
 In the case referred to in paragraph 1(b), the contracting authority shall state in the contract documents or in the contract
         notice all the criteria it intends to apply to the award, where possible in descending order of importance. ...
         
National legislation
         
            
The Directive was transposed into Austrian law by the Bundesgesetz über die Vergabe von Aufträgen (Bundesvergabegesetz) (Federal Procurement Law 1997, BGBl. I, 1997/56,  
         the BVergG). 
         
            
Paragraph of the BVergG states: 
         
1.
 In procedures other than the negotiated procedure, tenderers must ensure that their tenders meet the requirements of the tender
         notice. The wording prescribed by the contract documents may not be amended or supplemented. 
         ...
         
4.
 An alternative tender is admissible only if it ensures the performance of qualitatively equivalent work. It shall be for the
         tenderer to prove equivalence. An alternative tender may relate to the work as a whole, to parts of the work or to the legal
         conditions underlying the performance of the work. Alternative tenders shall be designated as such and shall be submitted
         separately. 
         ...
         The main proceedings and the questions referred
            
Acting for and on behalf of Asfinag, the Federal Road Construction Division of the Government of the  
          Land  of Niederösterreich, which comes under the authority of the First Minister of that  
          Land , published throughout the EU, on November 1997, a call for tenders for the repair of the Neumarkt to Vienna section of
         the A Westautobahn between kilometre 100.and kilometre 108.6. The contract concerned bridge and road construction works.
         
         
            
As regards performance of the road resurfacing work outside the areas covered by the motorway bridges, the tender notice stated,
         under the heading  
         Official Project, that concrete surfacing consisting of a two-layer high-grade concrete overlay should be laid without expressly making this
         a minimum specification. 
         
            
The tender notice stated that alternative tenders were permissible but did not expressly set out the minimum technical requirements
         to be satisfied by such alternative tenders. It was merely stipulated that alternative tenders would be accepted only if accompanied
         by a full list of works as required by the tender notice (main tender). 
         
            
No contract award criteria for assessing the economic and technical quality of tenders were defined for either tenders conforming
         to the tender notice or alternative tenders. Nor did the tender notice stipulate that alternative tenders had to ensure performance
         of work equivalent to that required by the official project and it was not explained what was meant by  
         performance of equivalent work. The contract documents merely referred to Paragraph of the BVergG. 
         
            
Traunfellner submitted an alternative tender quoting a total price of ATS 748.53, which was the lowest of all the tenders.
         However, the lowest tender conforming to the tender notice, that is to say, to the official project, was submitted by the
         tenderers' consortium Ilbau ─ LSH Fischer ─ Heilit & Woerner, which quoted a total price of ATS 304.30. 
         
            
In its alternative tender, Traunfellner proposed laying asphalt surfacing made from bitumen-based material rather than the
         concrete resurfacing provided for in the tender notice. 
         
            
On February 1998, the Federal Road Construction Division asked Traunfellner for information on the technical quality of
         its alternative tender. After Traunfellner had provided the requested documents and explanations, the Federal Road Construction
         Division of the Government of the  
          Land  of Niederösterreich drew up a technical test report in which it was stated that experience gathered from previous contracts
         had shown that, despite careful execution of an asphalt design of this kind in compliance with the contract, grooves of some
         considerable depth had appeared after a short time, which had called for additional repair work. 
         
            
According to that test report, preference had to be given to the general repair of the carriageway in concrete in accordance
         with the tender notice, particularly in view of the long life (years as opposed to years in the case of an asphalt overlay)
         and deformation resistance of concrete. In particular, a concrete surface would have a 50% longer life and yet cost only 8.5%
         more. Consequently, Traunfellner's alternative tender had to be deemed not to meet the specifications of the official project
         and therefore had to be rejected. 
         
            
On the basis of that report, the commission responsible for the award of contracts within the Federal Road Construction Division
         decided, on March 1998, to propose that the contract should be awarded to the Ilbau ─ LSH Fischer ─ Heilit & Woerner consortium.
         
         
            
On April 1998, Traunfellner applied to the Bundesvergabeamt for a declaration that the contracting authority's decision
         to reject its alternative tender was null and void. 
         
            
On April 1998, the Bundesvergabeamt dismissed Traunfellner's application, its basic reasoning being that the question of
         the possible technical equivalence of Traunfellner's alternative tender was irrelevant. According to the Bundesvergabeamt,
         that  
         alternative tender departed from the specifications of the tender notice to such an extent that it was no longer an admissible alternative tender
         and had to be rejected in any event. Moreover, even if it were an admissible alternative tender, it would not be technically
         equivalent and should not therefore be taken into consideration. 
         
            
On June 1998, Traunfellner brought an appeal against the Bundesvergabeamt's decision of April before the Verfassungsgerichtshof
         (Constitutional Court) (Austria). By judgment of November 2000, the Verfassungsgerichtshof granted Traunfellner's appeal
         and annulled that decision on the ground that the constitutionally guaranteed right to equality before the law had been infringed.
         It held that that right is infringed, in particular, where an authority bases its decision on statements which have no value
         as supporting reasons. That was true of the present case since the Bundesvergabeamt had failed to set out the reasons on which
         it had based its finding that there was no  
         alternative tender. 
         
            
Under Austrian law, the Bundesvergabeamt is required to reconsider Traunfellner's application of April 1998. However, as
         is explained in the order for reference,  
         the contracting authority's disputed decision may no longer be declared void since the contract has already been awarded and, under the BVergG, the Bundesvergabeamt is merely required to determine whether
         a right has been infringed and thus whether the contracting authority's decision to exclude Traunfellner's alternative tender
         from consideration was lawful. 
         
            
It was in the course of that re-examination that the Bundesvergabeamt decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following
         questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling: 
         
1.
 Is an alternative tender that consists in proposing an asphalt surface instead of overlaying the carriageway with concrete
         as specified in the tender notice a  
         variant within the meaning of the first paragraph of Article of Directive 93/37/EEC? 
         
2.
 Can a criterion established in national legislation to determine the admissibility of the acceptance of a  
         variant within the meaning of the first paragraph of Article of Directive 93/37/EEC, whereby  
         the performance of qualitatively equivalent work is ensured by the variant, properly be regarded as a  
         minimum specification, required and stated by the contracting authority in accordance with the first and second paragraphs of Article of Directive
         93/37/EEC, if the contract documents refer only to the national provision and do not specify the comparative parameters to
         be used to assess  
         equivalence? 
         
3.
 Does Article 30(1) and (2) of Directive 93/37/EEC in conjunction with the principles of transparency and equal treatment prohibit
         a contracting authority from making the acceptance of an alternative tender which differs from a tender conforming to the
         tender document in that it proposes a different technical quality conditional on a positive assessment based on a criterion
         in national legislation requiring that  
         the performance of qualitatively equivalent work is ensured if the contract documents refer only to the national provision and do not specify the comparative parameters to be used to
         assess  
         equivalence? 
         
4.
(a)
If the answer to Question is in the affirmative, may a contracting authority conclude a tendering procedure like that described
         in Question by awarding the contract? 
         
(b)
If the answers to Questions and 4(a) are in the affirmative, must a contracting authority conducting a tendering procedure
         as described in Question reject variants proposed by tenderers without examining their contents, at any rate if it has not
         defined contract award criteria for assessing the technical differences between the variant and the tender notice? 
         
5.
 If the answers to Questions and 4(a) are in the affirmative and the answer to Question 4(b) is in the negative, must a contracting
         authority conducting a tendering procedure as described in Question accept a variant whose technical differences from the
         tender document it is unable to assess on the basis of contract award criteria owing to the absence of appropriate statements
         in the tender document if this variant is the lowest tender and contract award criteria have not otherwise been defined?
         
The first question
            
Under Article EC, which is based on a clear separation of functions between national courts and tribunals and the Court
         of Justice, the latter is empowered to rule on the interpretation or validity of Community provisions only on the basis of
         the facts which the national court or tribunal puts before it. However, it is for the national court or tribunal to apply
         the rules of Community law to a specific case. No such application is possible without a comprehensive appraisal of the facts
         of the case (Case C-107/Teckal  [1999] ECR I-8121, paragraphs and 31). The Court therefore has no jurisdiction to give a ruling on the facts in the main
         proceedings or to apply the rules of Community law which it has interpreted to national measures or situations, since those
         questions are matters for the exclusive jurisdiction of the national court or tribunal (see Case C-318/Fornasar and Others  [2000] ECR I-4785, paragraph 32). 
         
            
In the present case, the Bundesvergabeamt is not, by its first question, seeking to obtain from the Court an interpretation
         of Article of the Directive to enable it then to assess whether Traunfellner's tender is a variant within the meaning of
         that article but is asking the Court to make that assessment itself. 
         
            
Such an assessment would, however, lead the Court to apply itself the aforementioned Community provision to the dispute brought
         before the Bundesvergabeamt, a task which, in accordance with the case-law cited in paragraph of this judgment, does not
         fall within the jurisdiction conferred on the Court by Article EC. 
         
            
It follows that the Court has no jurisdiction to answer the first question. 
         The second question
            
By this question, the national tribunal is essentially asking whether Article of the Directive is to be interpreted as
         meaning that the obligation to set out the minimum specifications required by the contracting authority in order to consider
         variants is satisfied where the contract documents refer only to a provision of national legislation requiring that the alternative
         tender ensure the performance of work which is qualitatively equivalent to that for which tenders have been invited, without
         further specifying the comparative parameters on the basis of which such equivalence is to be assessed. 
         
            
It is apparent from the case-file that the provision of national legislation referred to in the second question is Paragraph
         42(4) of the BVergG and that the term  
         alternative tender used in that provision corresponds to the term  
         variant used in Article of the Directive. 
         
            
This being so, it is clear from the very wording of the second paragraph of Article of the Directive that, where the contracting
         authority has not excluded the submission of variants, it is under an obligation to set out in the contract documents the
         minimum specifications with which those variants must comply. 
         
            
Consequently, the reference made in the contract documents to a provision of national legislation cannot satisfy the requirement
         laid down in the second paragraph of Article of the Directive (see, by analogy, with respect to the reference made to a
         provision of national legislation with a view to defining the criteria for the award of a public works contract to the most
         economically advantageous tender, Case 31/Beentjes  [1988] ECR 4635, paragraph 35, and Case C-225/Commission  v  
          France  [2000] ECR I-7445, paragraph 73). 
         
            
Tenderers may be deemed to be informed in the same way of the minimum specifications with which their variants must comply
         in order to be considered by the contracting authority only where those specifications are set out in the contract documents.
         This involves an obligation of transparency designed to ensure compliance with the principle of equal treatment of tenderers,
         which must be complied with in any procurement procedure governed by the Directive (see, to that effect, with respect to award
         criteria, Case C-19/SIAC Construction  [2001] ECR I-7725, paragraphs and 42). 
         
            
In light of the above findings, the answer to the second question must be that Article of the Directive is to be interpreted
         as meaning that the obligation to set out the minimum specifications required by a contracting authority in order to take
         variants into consideration is not satisfied where the contract documents merely refer to a provision of national legislation
         requiring an alternative tender to ensure the performance of work which is qualitatively equivalent to that for which tenders
         are invited. 
         The third question
            
In order to answer this question, a distinction must be drawn between the minimum specifications referred to in Article of the Directive and the award criteria referred to in Article thereof. Article deals with the circumstances in which
         contracting authorities may take variants into consideration whereas Article 30, which lists the permissible criteria for
         the award of contracts, is concerned with a later stage in the procurement procedure. Accordingly, Article can apply only
         to variants which have been properly taken into consideration in accordance with Article 19. 
         
            
It is clear from paragraphs and of the present judgment that consideration of variants within the meaning of Article
         of the Directive is subject to fulfilment of the requirement that the minimum specifications with which those variants
         must comply be set out in the contract documents and that a mere reference in those documents to a provision of national legislation
         is insufficient to satisfy that requirement. 
         
            
It follows that variants may not be taken into consideration where the contracting authority has failed to comply with the
         requirements laid down in Article of the Directive with respect to the statement of the minimum specifications, even if
         they have not been declared inadmissible in the tender notice as provided for in the second paragraph of Article of the
         Directive. 
         
            
The answer to the third question must therefore be that Article of the Directive can apply only to variants which have
         been properly taken into consideration by the contracting authority in accordance with Article of the Directive. 
         The fourth and fifth questions
            
By these questions, which are referred only in the event that the third question is answered in the affirmative, the national
         tribunal seeks clarification as to the effect which irregularities in the assessment of variants may have on the subsequent
         conduct of the procurement procedure. In particular, the national tribunal is uncertain whether, in the event of such irregularities,
         the contracting authority may conclude the procurement procedure in question by awarding the contract (Question 4(a)) and,
         if so, whether the contracting authority must reject the variants proposed without examining their contents in view of the
         failure to define the award criteria for assessing the technical differences between the variant and the work for which tenders
         have been invited (Question 4(b)) or whether it must accept the variant where it is the lowest tender (Question 5). 
         
            
The defendant in the main proceedings takes the view that Question 4(a) must be declared inadmissible as it bears no relation
         to the actual facts of the case in the main proceedings. On the same ground, the Austrian Government, which also points out
         that, under the BVergG, the national tribunal's competence is limited once the contract has been awarded (see paragraph of this judgment), takes the view that the Court should declare Questions 4(a), 4(b) and to be inadmissible. 
         
            
It is settled case-law that, in the context of the cooperation between the Court of Justice and national courts and tribunals
         provided for in Article EC, it is solely for the national court or tribunal before which the dispute has been brought,
         and which must assume responsibility for the subsequent judicial decision, to determine in the light of the particular circumstances
         of the case both the need for a preliminary ruling in order to enable it to deliver its decision and the relevance of the
         questions which it submits to the Court. The Court may refuse to rule on a question referred for a preliminary ruling by a
         national court or tribunal only where it is quite obvious that the interpretation of Community law sought bears no relation
         to the actual facts of the main proceedings or to their purpose, where the problem is hypothetical, or where the Court does
         not have before it the factual or legal material necessary to give a useful answer to the questions submitted (see, in particular,
          Case C-399/Ordine degli Architetti and Others  [2001] ECR I-5409, paragraph 41). 
         
            
In the present case, it is clear from the case-file that the procurement procedure in question has already been concluded,
         that the contract has already been awarded and that the proceedings before the national tribunal are concerned not with the
         legality of the decision on the award but rather with the legality of the decision by which the contracting authority rejected
         Traunfellner's alternative tender. The question whether that procedure was properly conducted after the latter decision is
         therefore not the subject of the dispute brought before the national tribunal. The fourth and fifth questions, however, relate
         precisely to that stage in the procurement procedure. 
         
            
It follows that those questions must be regarded as hypothetical and must therefore be declared inadmissible. 
         
Costs
            
The costs incurred by the French and Austrian Governments and by the Commission, which have submitted observations to the
         Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main action, a step in the proceedings pending
         before the national tribunal, the decision on costs is a matter for that tribunal. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
in answer to the questions referred to it by the Bundesvergabeamt by order of September 2001, hereby rules: 
         
1.
 Article of Council Directive 93/37/EEC of June concerning the coordination of procedures for the award of public
            works contracts is to be interpreted as meaning that the obligation to set out the minimum specifications required by a contracting
            authority in order to take variants into consideration is not satisfied where the contract documents merely refer to a provision
            of national legislation requiring an alternative tender to ensure the performance of work which is qualitatively equivalent
            to that for which tenders are invited. 
            
2.
 Article of Directive 93/can apply only to variants which have been properly taken into consideration by the contracting
            authority in accordance with Article of that directive. 
            
Puissochet
Schintgen 
Skouris 
Macken
Cunha Rodrigues
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on October 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
V. Skouris  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: German.
Top  
 