
Case C-511/Staat der Nederlanden (Ministerie van Landbouw, Natuurbeheer en Visserij)
v
Ten Kate Holding Musselkanaal BV and Others
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden)
(Human and animal health – Protection against bovine spongiform encephalopathy (mad cow disease) – Feeding of ruminants with proteins derived from species other than ruminants – Liability of a Member State for damage caused to individuals by breaches of Community law for which it may be held responsible
         – Applicable law – Obligation to bring an action against the Commission for failure to act)
      
Opinion of Advocate General Stix-Hackl delivered on February Judgment of the Court (Third Chamber), October Summary of the Judgment
1.     Community law – Actions for annulment or for failure to act – Obligation on a Member State to bring such an action for the
            benefit of one of its citizens – No such obligation – Existence of such an obligation and liability on the part of the State
            under national law – Whether permissible – Limits 
(Arts EC, EC and EC)
2.     Agriculture – Approximation of laws on human and animal health – Veterinary and zootechnical checks in intra-Community trade
            in live animals and animal products – Protection measures against bovine spongiform encephalopathy – Decision 94/– System
            which makes it possible to distinguish protein of ruminant origin from protein of non-ruminant origin – Request by a Member
            State to be authorised to allow ruminants to be fed with protein derived from species other than ruminants – Obligation on
            the Commission to submit a proposal to the Council – No such obligation – Conditions 
(Council Directives 89/662, Art. 17, and 90/425, Art. 17; Commission Decision 94/381, Art. 1(2))
1.     Community law does not impose any obligation on a Member State to bring an action for annulment, pursuant to Article EC,
         or for failure to act, pursuant to Article EC, for the benefit of one of its citizens.  Community law does not, however,
         in principle preclude national law from containing such an obligation or providing for liability to be imposed on the Member
         State for not having acted in such a way.
      
With regard to the latter, it is not apparent how Community law could be infringed if national law contained such an obligation
         or provided that the Member State would be liable in such a case.  A Member State could, however, be in breach of the obligation
         of sincere cooperation laid down in Article EC if it did not retain a degree of discretion as to the appropriateness of
         bringing an action, thereby giving rise to a risk that the Community Courts might be inundated with actions, some of which
         would be patently unfounded, thereby jeopardising the proper functioning of the Court of Justice.
      
(see paras 31-32, operative part 1)
2.     Article 1(2) of Decision 94/concerning certain protection measures with regard to bovine spongiform encephalopathy and
         the feeding of mammalian derived protein, read in conjunction with Article of Directive 90/concerning veterinary and
         zootechnical checks applicable in intra-Community trade in certain live animals and products with a view to the completion
         of the internal market, and with Article of Directive 89/concerning veterinary checks in intra-Community trade with
         a view to the completion of the internal market, must be construed as meaning that, if the material available to the Commission
         does not enable it to establish that the controls carried out within the framework of a system which makes it possible to
         distinguish between animal protein of ruminant origin and that of non-ruminant origin, submitted for its appraisal by a Member
         State with a view to obtaining authorisation, offer adequate guarantees in regard to the protection of public health, and
         if the matter has been referred to the Standing Veterinary Committee at the request of a Member State but that Committee has
         not taken a position, particularly by reason of new information altering the perception of the risk to public health, the
         Commission is not obliged to submit to the Council a proposal relating to the measures to be taken.
      
(see paras 41-43, operative part 2)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Human and animal health – Protection against bovine spongiform encephalopathy (mad cow disease) – Feeding of ruminants with proteins derived from species other than ruminants – Liability of a Member State for damage caused to individuals by breaches of Community law for which it may be held responsible
         – Applicable law – Obligation to bring an action against the Commission for failure to act)
      
In Case C-511/03,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden (Netherlands), made by judgment
         of December 2003, received at the Court on December 2003, in the proceedings
      
Staat der Nederlanden (Ministerie van Landbouw, Natuurbeheer en Visserij)
v
Ten Kate Holding Musselkanaal BV
Ten Kate Europrodukten BV
Ten Kate Produktie Maatschappij BV,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of A. Rosas (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, J.‑P. Puissochet, S. von Bahr, U. Lõhmus and A. Ó Caoimh, Judges,
Advocate General: C. Stix-Hackl,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on December 2004,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Ten Kate Holding Musselkanaal BV, Ten Kate Europrodukten BV and Ten Kate Produktie Maatschappij BV, by H. Bronkhorst and J.A.M.A.
         Sluysmans, advocaten,
      
–       the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster and J.G.M. van Bakel, acting as Agents,
–       the French Government, by R. Abraham and E. Puisais, acting as Agents,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by T. van Rijn, A. Bordes and H. van Vliet, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on February 2005,
gives the following
Judgment
The reference for a preliminary ruling relates essentially to the interpretation of Community law concerning the liability
         of a Member State arising from the fact that it refrained from bringing an action against the Commission of the European Communities
         before the Court of Justice of the European Communities.
      
The questions referred have arisen in the course of a dispute between the Netherlands State and Ten Kate Holding Musselkanaal
         BV, Ten Kate Europrodukten BV and Ten Kate Produktie Maatschappij BV (‘Ten Kate and Others’), which are companies producing
         proteins used in the manufacture of milk substitute for calves and obtained through the processing of pig fat.  The action
         seeks to have liability imposed on the Netherlands State in respect of the harm suffered by Ten Kate and Others by reason
         of the fact that it was impossible for them to market those proteins.
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
The Commission adopted Decision 94/381/EC of June concerning certain protection measures with regard to bovine spongiform
         encephalopathy and the feeding of mammalian derived protein (OJ L 172, p. 23) as a step in its fight against that disease
         (hereinafter referred to as ‘BSE’).  Article of that decision provides:
      
‘1.      Within days of notification of the present Decision, Member States shall prohibit the feeding of protein derived from mammalian
         tissues to ruminant species.
      
2.      However, Member States which enforce a system that makes it possible to distinguish between animal protein from ruminant and
         non-ruminant species shall be authorised by the Commission, under the procedure provided for by Article of Directive 90/425/EEC,
         to permit the feeding of protein from species other than ruminants to ruminants.’
      
Article of Council Directive 90/425/EEC of June concerning veterinary and zootechnical checks applicable in intra-
         Community trade in certain live animals and products with a view to the completion of the internal market (OJ L 224,
         p. 29) provides:
      
‘Where reference is made to the procedure provided for in this Article, the Standing Veterinary Committee set up by Decision
         68/361/EEC shall take decisions in accordance with the rules established in Article of Directive 89/662/EEC.’
      
Article of  Council Directive 89/662/EEC of December concerning veterinary checks in intra-Community trade with
         a view to the completion of the internal market (OJ L 395, p. 13), as amended by corrigendum (OJ L 151, p. 40),
         provides as follows:
      
‘1.      Where the procedure laid down in this Article is to be used, matters shall without delay be referred by the Chairman, either
         on his own initiative or at the request of a Member State, to the Standing Veterinary Committee (hereinafter called the “Committee”)
         set up by Decision 68/361/EEC. 
      
2.      The representative of the Commission shall submit to the Committee a draft of the measures to be taken. The Committee shall
         deliver its opinion on the draft within two days.  The opinion shall be delivered by the majority laid down in Article 148(2)
         of the Treaty [now Article 205(2) EC] in the case of decisions which the Council is required to adopt on a proposal from the
         Commission.  The votes of the representatives of the Member States within the Committee shall be weighted in the manner set
         out in that Article.  The Chairman shall not vote. 
      
3.      The Commission shall adopt the measures envisaged if they are in accordance with the opinion of the Committee. 
4.      If the measures envisaged are not in accordance with the opinion of the Committee, or if no opinion is delivered, the Commission
         shall, without delay, submit to the Council a proposal relating to the measures to be taken. 
      
The Council shall act by a qualified majority. 
If, on the expiry of a period of days from the date of referral to the Council, the Council has not acted, the Commission
         shall adopt the proposed measures, save where the Council has decided against the said measures by a simple majority.’
      
In its judgment, the Hoge Raad cites the original version of the text of Article 17, prior to the corrigendum made in 1990.
         The original version of Article 17(2) provided as follows: ‘The Committee shall deliver its opinion on the draft within a
         time-limit which the Chairman may lay down according to the urgency of the matter’.
      
Commission Decision 96/449/EC of July on the approval of alternative heat treatment systems for processing animal
         waste with a view to the inactivation of spongiform encephalopathy agents (OJ L 184, p. 43) prohibited the processing
         of mammalian animal waste with the exception of processing carried out in accordance with a specified process, in particular
         heat treatment.  In order to allow undertakings to adapt or replace equipment, the date for the entry into force of Decision
         96/was fixed for April 1997.
      
 National legislation
The judgment making the reference states that, for the purpose of obtaining the authorisation of the Commission provided for
         under Article 1(2) of Decision 94/381, and after consultation between the traders concerned and the competent authorities,
         the inter-professional public-law Product Board for Livestock Feed (Productschap voor veevoeder) (‘the Productschap’) established,
         in a ‘protein separation’ protocol annexed to the Order regulating the incorporation of animal products into animal feeds
         of November (Verordening Vvr regeling verwerking dierlijke produkten in diervoeders 1994) (‘the Order’), a production
         and control system under which proteins from ruminant species could be distinguished from those of non-ruminant species, such
         as pigs.
      
By letter of November 1994, the Netherlands Government sought authorisation from the Commission, pursuant to the procedure
         under Article of Directive 90/425, in accordance with Decision 94/381, to apply the protein separation protocol.
      
Pending receipt of authorisation from the Commission, the competent Minister did not approve the Order.  Ten Kate adapted
         its production process to comply with the protein separation protocol.  The National Meat and Livestock Inspectorate (Rijksdienst
         voor de keuring van Vee en Vlees) (‘the RVV’) authorised it to carry out its activity in that manner.
      
By letter of December 1995, the Netherlands Government urged the Commission to initiate the authorisation procedure.  It
         renewed that request by letter of June 1997, in which it stressed the importance of giving a definitive answer in order
         to enable the Netherlands to provide undertakings with clear replies in that connection.
      
Following the adoption of Decision 96/449, the Netherlands legislation was amended by the Regulation of March on heat
         treatment systems and end products (Regeling warmtebehandelingssystemen en eindprodukten, Staatscourant  1997, No 61), which entered into force on July 1997.  In view of the significant investments necessitated by the heat treatment
         provided for under the new legislation, and in view of the fact that there was not yet any indication that Commission authorisation
         would be granted pursuant to Decision 94/381, Ten Kate suspended its production of proteins derived from pig fat.
      
By letter of March 1998, the Minister requested the Productschap to bring the Order into line with Decision 94/in view of the fact that the European Community authorities were not expected to take a decision in the short term on the
         protein separation protocol.  On June the Chairman of the Productschap adopted a new decree prohibiting the manufacture
         of meat-and-bone meal in accordance with the protocol.
      
On February the State Secretary for Agriculture, Nature Management and Fisheries adopted the Regulation banning meat-and-bone
         meal in animal feedstuffs (Regeling verbod diermelen in diervoeders, Staatscourant  1999, No 37), which came into force on March 1999.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for preliminary ruling
On February Ten Kate and Others brought an action before the Rechtbank te ’s-Gravenhage (District Court, The Hague)
         in which they sought an order requiring the Netherlands State to compensate them for the harm which they had suffered by reason
         of the fact that they were no longer manufacturing proteins derived from pig fat since July and that the stocks established
         prior to July could no longer be sold after that date.  In support of this action, they argued that the State erred
         in regard to the measures which had to be taken in order to ensure that the Commission would grant the authorisation requested.
         They submitted in particular that the State ought to have brought proceedings against the Commission under Article of
         the EC Treaty (now Article EC) on grounds of failure to act.
      
The first instance court dismissed the application.  The Gerechtshof te ’s‑Gravenhage (Regional Court of Appeal, The Hague)
         allowed the appeal brought against that decision.
      
It is common ground among the parties to the main proceedings that Ten Kate and Others were unable themselves to bring an
         action against the Commission for failure to act as they were not individually concerned.  Moreover, an action for compensation
         under Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC) would not have enabled Ten Kate and others to continue their production
         activity.
      
The Hoge Raad der Nederlanden (Supreme Court of the Netherlands) is unsure as to the degree of latitude which a State has
         in deciding whether or not to bring an action for failure to act.  It notes that, in circumstances touching on policy in regard
         to international relations, the State enjoys a broad discretion.  The Hoge Raad takes the view that, in order to assess State
         liability, it is first of all necessary to determine whether the rules of Netherlands law or those of Community law fall to
         be applied.  Support for the application of Community law rules may be found in the fact that a decision based on rules of
         national law could give rise to legal inequality as between citizens in different Member States in situations in which the
         matter at issue concerns precisely the rights and claims of the Member States – and indirectly those of their citizens – vis-à-vis
         the authorities of the European Community.
      
The Hoge Raad is also unsure as to whether the Commission enjoys an exclusive right of initiative to submit draft measures
         for adoption to the Standing Veterinary Committee under the procedure set out in Article of Directive 90/in conjunction
         with Article of Directive 89/662.  The existence of such a right would indeed mean that the Commission could not be required
         to act and that an action for failure to act could not be successful.
      
In those circumstances, the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.       Must the question whether, in a case such as this, the State has an obligation towards a citizen who has an interest in it,
         such as Ten Kate, to make use of the legal remedies available to it under Article of the EC Treaty … or Article of
         the EC Treaty (now Article EC) and, in the event of failure to comply with such an obligation, to pay compensation for
         the damage sustained as a consequence by the citizen concerned, be answered by reference to rules of Netherlands national
         law or by reference to rules of Community law?
      
2.       If Question must be answered wholly or partly by reference to rules of Community law:
(a)      Are there circumstances in which Community law can entail an obligation and liability as referred to in that question?
(b)      If the answer to Question 2(a) is in the affirmative, which rules of Community law must be used as the criterion when answering
         Question in a specific case such as this?
      
3.      Must Article 1(2) of Decision 94/381/EC, read as far as necessary in conjunction with the provisions of Article of Directive
         90/425/EEC and Article of Directive 89/662/EEC, be interpreted as giving rise to an obligation for the Commission or the
         Council to grant an authorisation as referred to therein if the system which the requesting Member State applies or intends
         to apply is in fact suitable for distinguishing between protein from ruminant and non-ruminant species?
      
4.      To what extent does the answer to Question entail a restriction of the State’s right, or of its obligation referred to in
         Question 1, to challenge a failure to grant an authorisation such as that at issue in this case under Article of the EC
         Treaty …, or to challenge a refusal to grant such an authorisation under Article of the EC Treaty …?’
      
The Hoge Raad points out that Question is relevant whether or not Question is to be answered according to Netherlands
         national law or according to Community law, in the latter case unless the answer to Question 2(a) is in the negative. Question
         4, it states, is relevant only in the light of an answer to Question 2(b).
      
 The questions referred for preliminary ruling
 The first two questions
By the first two questions, which it is appropriate to examine together, the Hoge Raad seeks essentially to ascertain which
         law is applicable for the purpose of determining whether a Member State is under an obligation towards one of its citizens
         to bring an action for annulment under Article EC or an action under Article EC for failure to act, and whether that
         Member State may incur liability by reason of not having done so.  The Hoge Raad also asks whether Community law imposes an
         obligation of that kind and whether it may give rise to such liability.
      
It should be noted that, in accordance with Article EC, the Community is required to act within the limits of the powers
         conferred upon it by the Treaty and of the objectives assigned to it therein.
      
Furthermore, Article EC provides that the Court of Justice has jurisdiction to give preliminary rulings on the interpretation
         of the EC Treaty, of acts of the institutions of the Community and of the ECB, and of the statutes of bodies established by
         an act of the Council, where those statutes so provide.
      
It follows that the Court of Justice does not have jurisdiction to interpret the internal law of a Member State (order in
         Case C-307/Max Mara [1995] ECR I‑5083, paragraph 5; judgment in Case C-58/Corsten [2000] ECR I-7919, paragraph 24; and order in Case C-391/Colapietro, not published in the ECR, paragraphs and 9).
      
The Court cannot therefore reply to the questions whether, under the rules of Netherlands law, the State may be under an obligation
         towards one of its citizens to bring an action for annulment or an action for failure to act and whether it may incur liability
         by reason of not having done so.
      
So far as the interpretation of Community law is concerned, it must first of all be stated that neither the wording of Article
         EC nor that of Article EC imposes any obligation on a Member State to bring an action.  On the contrary, Article EC
         indicates that Member States ‘may’ bring an action before the Court of Justice in order to have the latter establish an infringement
         of the Treaty consisting in the failure by one of the institutions referred to in the first paragraph of Article EC to
         act.
      
Nor can any such obligation be inferred from Article EC, on which the respondents in the main proceedings rely in support
         of their contention.  The principle to which Article EC gives expression imposes on Member States and on the institutions
         mutual duties of sincere cooperation (Case 230/Luxembourg v Parliament [1983] ECR 255, paragraph 37; order in Case C-2/Imm. Zwartveld and Others [1990] ECR I-3365, paragraph 17), but it cannot be construed as meaning that a Member State may be obliged, vis-à-vis one
         of its citizens, to bring an action for annulment or an action in respect of a failure to act. 
      
By contrast, taking into consideration the conditions set out in the Treaties governing admissibility of actions and the right
         to effective judicial protection, the Court has interpreted that principle of sincere cooperation as meaning that national
         courts are required, so far as possible, to interpret and apply national procedural rules governing the exercise of rights
         of action in a way that enables natural and legal persons to challenge before the courts the legality of any decision or other
         national measure relative to the application to them of a Community act of general application, by pleading the invalidity
         of such an act (Case C-50/P Unión de Pequeños Agricultores  v Council [2002] ECR I-6677, paragraph 42).  The same holds true where a natural or legal person invokes a failure to take a decision,
         within the meaning of Article EC, which it considers to be contrary to Community law.
      
While Community law does not impose any obligation on a Member State to bring an action for annulment or failure to act for
         the benefit of one of its citizens, it is none the less necessary, in order to provide the Hoge Raad with a useful answer,
         to ascertain whether Community law precludes a national law which contains such an obligation or which provides that liability
         may be imposed on a Member State for not having acted in that regard.
      
It is in this connection not apparent how Community law could be infringed if national law contained such an obligation or
         provided that the Member State would be liable in such a case.  A Member State could, however, breach the obligation of sincere
         cooperation laid down in Article EC if it did not retain a degree of discretion as to the appropriateness of bringing an
         action, thereby giving rise to a risk that the Community Courts might be inundated with actions, some of which would be patently
         unfounded, thus jeopardising the proper functioning of the Court of Justice.
      
In the light of these factors, the answer to the first two questions must be that Community law does not impose any obligation
         on a Member State to bring an action for annulment or failure to act for the benefit of one of its citizens.  Community law
         does not, however, in principle preclude national law from containing such an obligation or providing for liability to be
         imposed on the Member State for not having acted in such a way.
      
 The third question
By its third question, the Hoge Raad asks whether Article 1(2) of Decision 94/381, read in conjunction, so far as is necessary,
         with Article of Directive 90/and Article of Directive 89/662, is to be construed as giving rise to an obligation
         on the part of the Commission or the Council to grant the authorisation in question if the system which the requesting Member
         State applies or will apply is indeed appropriate for distinguishing between protein of ruminant and that of non-ruminant
         species.
      
 Observations submitted to the Court
Ten Kate and Others lay stress on the term ‘shall be authorised’ in Article 1(2) of Decision 94/381, which in their view leaves
         no scope for discretion on the Commission’s part.  This interpretation, they contend, is reinforced by the mandatory terms
         of the sixth recital in the preamble to that decision, which provides that ‘where a Member State can enforce a system allowing
         it to distinguish between protein from ruminants and that of non-ruminant species it shall be authorised by the Commission
         …’.
      
By contrast, the Netherlands Government and the Commission take the view that, having regard to the circumstances of the case,
         the Commission was not obliged to grant such authorisation.  They point out that, contrary to what the Hoge Raad suggests,
         the matter was put before the Standing Veterinary Committee during its meeting on and March 1995.  The Committee did not,
         however, adopt a position.  Nor did the Commission submit a proposal to the Council.  They set out the developments in the
         understanding of BSE, which, they argue, justify the fact that no decision was taken. The Netherlands Government also cites
         the judgments in Case C-151/P Pharos v Commission [1999] ECR I‑8157, paragraph 25, and in Case C-352/P Bergaderm and Goupil v Commission [2000] ECR I‑5291, paragraph 66, and contends that, while ordering the Commission to act quickly, the Community legislature
         left the Commission with some degree of latitude and that the expression ‘shall, without delay, submit to the Council’ depends
         on the specific circumstances.
      
The Commission also points out that, even before it received the application of November from the Netherlands seeking
         authorisation, it had, by letter of November 1994, put a number of questions to the Netherlands authorities concerning
         the implementation of Decision 94/381.  It repeated those questions in letters dated March and June 1995, but did not
         receive any satisfactory reply.  Moreover, following the announcement on March of the possible existence of a link
         between BSE and Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease by the United Kingdom’s Spongiform Encephalopathy Advisory Committee, an inspection
         programme was implemented in the Member States.  An inspection was conducted in the Netherlands from to December 1996.
         This established that the controls relating to the application of Decision 94/were inadequate in that Member State, in
         particular on the ground that they did not include laboratory tests on the finished products.  On July the Commission,
         by the dispatch of a letter of formal notice, instituted Treaty-infringement proceedings against the Netherlands.  Those proceedings
         were terminated after an exchange of information which continued into and 1999.
      
 Reply of the Court
Decision 94/381, which prohibits the use of protein derived from mammalian tissue in the feed of ruminant species, is a measure
         adopted in the context of the fight against BSE, which was considered at that time to be a disease affecting only animals.
         Article 1(2) of Decision 94/provides that, by way of exception to that prohibition, Member States which enforce a system
         making it possible to distinguish between animal protein from ruminant and from non-ruminant species are authorised by the
         Commission, under the procedure provided for by Article of Directive 90/425, which refers to Article of Directive 89/662,
         to permit ruminants to be fed with protein from species other than ruminants.
      
Article of Directive 89/provides for referral to the Standing Veterinary Committee, the submission by the Commission
         of a draft of measures to be taken, the opinion of the Committee, the decision of the Commission, when it is in accordance
         with the opinion, or referral of the matter by the Commission to the Council in the case where the measures envisaged are
         not in accordance with the opinion of the Committee, or where no opinion has been delivered.
      
It appears from the observations of the Netherlands Government and the Commission, and from the documents submitted to the
         Court, that, contrary to what the Hoge Raad assumed, the requests for authorisation were referred to the Standing Veterinary
         Committee, which discussed them during its meeting of and March but did not take a position on them.
      
Regard being had to that fact, it is necessary to recast the question as seeking to ascertain whether, if the Standing Veterinary
         Committee has not taken a position, the Commission is none the less under an obligation to submit to the Council a proposal
         relating to the measures to be taken.
      
The Court has in this connection already ruled, with regard to a legislative procedure comparable to that provided for by
         Decision 94/381, that the Commission must be given a discretion which is sufficient to allow it to determine, on a fully informed
         basis, the measures that are necessary and appropriate for the protection of public health (Case C-198/P Commission v CEVA Santé animale [2005] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 80).
      
If, as in the facts of the main proceedings in the present case, the material available to the Commission does not make it
         possible to establish that the controls carried out within the framework of a system allowing a distinction to be drawn between
         animal protein of ruminant origin and that of non-ruminant origin, submitted for its appraisal with a view to authorisation
         by a Member State, offer adequate guarantees in regard to the protection of public health, and if the matter has been referred
         to the Standing Veterinary Committee at the request of a Member State but that Committee has not taken a position, particularly
         by reason of new information altering the perception of the risk to public health, it must be held that the Commission is
         not obliged to submit to the Council a proposal relating to the measures to be taken (see, in this regard, Pharos, cited above, paragraphs and 24).  The Council can take a decision only when a proposal has been referred to it by the
         Commission.
      
The answer to the third question must therefore be that Article 1(2) of Decision 94/381, read in conjunction with Article
         of Directive 90/and with Article of Directive 89/662, must be construed as meaning that, if the material available
         to the Commission does not enable it to establish that the controls carried out within the framework of a system which makes
         it possible to distinguish between animal protein of ruminant origin and that of non-ruminant origin, submitted for its appraisal
         by a Member State with a view to obtaining authorisation, offer adequate guarantees in regard to the protection of public
         health, and if the matter has been referred to the Standing Veterinary Committee at the request of a Member State but that
         Committee has not taken a position, particularly by reason of new information altering the perception of the risk to public
         health, the Commission is not obliged to submit to the Council a proposal relating to the measures to be taken.
      
 The fourth question
By its fourth question, the Hoge Raad asks to what extent the reply to the third question entails a restriction of the right
         or the obligation of the State referred to in the first question to challenge a refusal to grant authorisation such as that
         in the present case or to challenge a failure to grant such authorisation.
      
In the light of the answers to the first three questions, it is unnecessary to reply to the fourth question in so far as the
         interpretation of Community law is concerned.  Furthermore, as has been pointed out in paragraph of this judgment, the
         Court does not have jurisdiction to reply to that question in so far as it concerns the interpretation of national law.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court.  Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the
         costs of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Community law does not impose any obligation on a Member State to bring an action for annulment, pursuant to Article EC,
            or for failure to act, pursuant to Article EC, for the benefit of one of its citizens.  Community law does not, however,
            in principle preclude national law from containing such an obligation or providing for liability to be imposed on the Member
            State for not having acted in such a way.
2.      Article 1(2) of Commission Decision 94/381/EC of June concerning certain protection measures with regard to bovine
            spongiform encephalopathy and the feeding of mammalian derived protein, read in conjunction with Article of Council Directive
            90/425/EEC of June concerning veterinary and zootechnical checks applicable in intra-Community trade in certain live
            animals and products with a view to the completion of the internal market  and with Article of Council Directive 89/662/EEC
            of December concerning veterinary checks in intra-Community trade with a view to the completion of the internal market,
            must be construed as meaning that, if the material available to the Commission does not enable it to establish that the controls
            carried out within the framework of a system which makes it possible to distinguish between animal protein of ruminant origin
            and that of non-ruminant origin, submitted for its appraisal by a Member State with a view to obtaining authorisation, offer
            adequate guarantees in regard to the protection of public health, and if the matter has been referred to the Standing Veterinary
            Committee at the request of a Member State but that Committee has not taken a position, particularly by reason of new information
            altering the perception of the risk to public health, the Commission is not obliged to submit to the Council a proposal relating
            to the measures to be taken.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Dutch.
      
Top  
 