
Case C-394/Marco Gambazzi
v
DaimlerChrysler Canada Inc.
and
CIBC Mellon Trust Company
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Corte d’appello di Milano)
(Brussels Convention – Recognition and enforcement of judgments – Grounds for refusal – Infringement of public policy in the State in which enforcement is sought – Exclusion of the defendant from the proceedings before the court of the State of origin because of failure to comply with
         a court order)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Convention on jurisdiction and the enforcement of judgments – Recognition and enforcement – Definition of ‘judgment’ – Judgments
            by default – Included – Conditions 
(Convention of September 1968, Art. 25)
2.        Convention on jurisdiction and the enforcement of judgments – Recognition and enforcement of judgments – Grounds for refusal
            – Infringement of public policy in the State in which enforcement is sought – Assessment by the court of the State in which
            enforcement is sought
(Convention of September 1968, Art. 27(1))
1.        Article of the Convention of September on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial
         Matters, as amended by the Conventions on Accession of 1978, 1982, and 1996, refers, without distinction, to all judgments
         given by a court or tribunal of a Contracting State. For such decisions to fall within the scope of the Convention, it is
         sufficient if, before their recognition and enforcement are sought in a State other than the State of origin, they have been,
         or have been capable of being, the subject in that State of origin and under various procedures, of an inquiry in adversarial
         proceedings. Where the decisions of the national court took the form of a judgment and an order given in default of appearance
         in civil proceedings which, as a rule, adhere to the adversarial principle, the fact that the court entered judgment as if
         the defendant, who had entered appearance, was in default, cannot suffice to call into question the categorisation of those
         decisions as judgments.
      
(see paras 22-23, 25)
2.        Article 27(1) of the Convention of September on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial
         Matters, as amended by the Conventions on Accession of 1978, 1982, and 1996,  must be interpreted as meaning that the
         court of the State in which enforcement is sought may take into account, with regard to the public policy clause referred
         to in that article, the fact that the court of the State of origin ruled on the applicant’s claims without hearing the defendant,
         who entered appearance before it but who was excluded from the proceedings by order on the ground that he had not complied
         with the obligations imposed by an order made earlier in the same proceedings, if, following a comprehensive assessment of
         the proceedings and in the light of all the circumstances, it appears to it that that exclusion measure constituted a manifest
         and disproportionate infringement of the defendant’s right to be heard. Review by the national court must relate not only
         to the circumstances in which the decisions – the enforcement of which is sought – were taken, but also to the circumstances
         in which, at an earlier stage, the injunctive orders were adopted, and in particular to verifying, first, the legal remedies
         made available to the defendant and, second, that the abovementioned decisions offered the defendant the possibility of being
         heard, in compliance with the adversarial principle and the full exercise of the rights of defence.
      
(see paras 41, 46, 48, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
April (*)
      
(Brussels Convention – Recognition and enforcement of judgments – Grounds for refusal – Infringement of public policy in the State in which enforcement is sought – Exclusion of the defendant from the proceedings before the court of the State of origin because of failure to comply with
         a court order)
      
In Case C‑394/07,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under the Protocol of June on the interpretation by the Court of Justice of the
         Convention of September on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters, from the
         Corte d’appello di Milano (Italy), made by decision of June 2007, received at the Court on August 2007, in the proceedings
      
Marco Gambazzi
v
DaimlerChrysler Canada Inc.,
CIBC Mellon Trust Company,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of P. Jann (Rapporteur), President of Chamber, M. Ilešič, A. Tizzano, A. Borg Barthet and J.-J. Kasel, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: M.‑A. Gaudissart, head of unit,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on October 2008,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Mr Gambazzi, by B. Nascimbene and M. Condinanzi, avvocati,
–        DaimlerChrysler Canada Inc. and CIBC Mellon Trust Company, by F. Alvino, S. Pravettoni and A. Anglani, avvocati,
–        the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, assisted by W. Ferrante, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Greek Government, by T. Papadopoulou and O. Patsopoulou, acting as Agents,
–        the United Kingdom Government, by Z. Bryanston-Cross and I. Rao, acting as Agents, and by M. Gray, Barrister,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by A.‑M. Rouchaud-Joët, E. Montaguti and N. Bambara, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on December 2008,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling relates to the interpretation of Article 27(1) of the Convention of September on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters (OJ L 304, p. 36), as amended by the
         Convention of October on the Accession of the Kingdom of Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
         Northern Ireland (OJ L 304, p. 1, and – amended version – p. 77), by the Convention of October on the Accession
         of the Hellenic Republic (OJ L 388, p. 1), by the Convention of May on the Accession of the Kingdom of Spain
         and the Portuguese Republic (OJ L 285, p. 1), and by the Convention of November on the Accession of the Republic
         of Austria, the Republic of Finland and the Kingdom of Sweden (OJ C 15, p. 1) (‘the Brussels Convention’).
      
The reference was made in proceedings between Mr Gambazzi, domiciled in Lugano (Switzerland), and the companies DaimlerChrysler
         Canada Inc. (‘DaimlerChrysler’) and CIBC Mellon Trust Company (‘CIBC’), which have their registered offices in Canada, in
         relation to the enforcement in Italy of a judgment given and an order made in the United Kingdom.
      
 Legal context
 The Brussels Convention
The conditions under which judgments given in one Contracting State are recognised and enforced in another Contracting State
         are governed by Articles to of the Brussels Convention, which appear in Title III (‘Recognition and Enforcement’).
      
Article of the Convention provides:
      
‘For the purposes of this Convention, ‘judgment’ means any judgment given by a court or tribunal of a Contracting State, whatever
         the judgment may be called, including a decree, order, decision or writ of execution, as well as the determination of costs
         or expenses by an officer of the court.’
      
Article 27(1) and (2) of the Convention provide:
      
‘A judgment shall not be recognised:
(1)      if such recognition is contrary to public policy in the State in which recognition is sought;
(2)      where it was given in default of appearance, if the defendant was not duly served with the document which instituted the proceedings
         or with an equivalent document in sufficient time to enable him to arrange for his defence’.
      
Article of the Brussels Convention, which concerns the recognition of judgments, and the third paragraph of Article of the Convention, which concerns their enforcement, provide that:
      
‘Under no circumstances may a [‘the’] foreign judgment be reviewed as to its substance.’
 The Lugano Convention
The Convention on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters signed at Lugano on September
         (OJ L 319, p. 9; ‘the Lugano Convention’) derives from the creation of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA)
         and the establishment, between the contracting EFTA States and the Member States of the European Communities of a system similar
         to that of the Brussels Convention.
      
Article 27(1) of the Lugano Convention provides:
      
‘A judgment shall not be recognised:
(1)      if such recognition is contrary to public policy in the State in which recognition is sought’.
According to the declaration by the representatives of the Governments of the States signatories to the Lugano Convention
         which are members of the European Communities, it is ‘appropriate that the Court of Justice of the European Communities, when
         interpreting the Brussels Convention, pay due account to the rulings contained in the case-law of the Lugano Convention’.
         
      
Also, Article of Protocol on the uniform interpretation of the Lugano Convention imposes on each contracting State the
         obligation to ‘pay due account to the principles laid down by any relevant decision delivered by courts of the other Contracting
         States’.
      
 The main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
According to the order for reference and the observations submitted to the Court, in the context of a claim for damages with
         interest brought by DaimlerChrysler and CIBC against Mr Gambazzi, the High Court of Justice (England & Wales), Chancery Division,
         on February 1997, on application by DaimlerChrysler and CIBC, made an order which, on the one hand, restrained Mr Gambazzi
         on a temporary basis from dealing with some of his assets (‘freezing order’) and, on the other hand, instructed him to disclose
         details of his assets and certain documents in his possession concerning the principal claim (‘disclosure order’). On March
         that order was served by the Swiss authorities on Mr Gambazzi, who entered an appearance in the proceedings before the
         High Court.
      
Mr Gambazzi did not comply, or at least did not fully comply, with the disclosure order. The High Court then, on application
         by DaimlerChrysler and CIBC, made on July an order which barred Mr Gambazzi from taking any further part in the proceedings
         unless he complied, within the prescribed time-limit, with the obligations regarding disclosure of the information and documents
         requested (‘unless order’).
      
Mr Gambazzi made several appeals against the freezing order, the disclosure order and the unless order. All those appeals
         were dismissed.
      
On October 1998, the High Court made a new ‘unless order’. 
      
Since Mr Gambazzi did not, within the prescribed time-limit, completely fulfil the obligations laid down in the new order,
         he was held to be in contempt of court and was excluded from the proceedings (‘debarment’).
      
By judgment of December 1998, supplemented by an order of March (‘the High Court judgments’), the High Court entered
         judgment as if Mr Gambazzi was in default and allowed the applications of DaimlerChrysler and CIBC, ordering Mr Gambazzi to
         pay them damages of CAD and CAD and USD 770, with interest and incidental expenses.
      
On application by DaimlerChrysler and CIBC, the Corte d’appello di Milano (Court of Appeal, Milan, Italy), by order of December 2004, declared the High Court judgments to be enforceable in Italy.
      
Mr Gambazzi appealed against that order. He claims that the High Court judgments cannot be recognised in Italy, on the ground
         that they are contrary to public policy within the meaning of Article 27(1) of the Brussels Convention, because they were
         made in breach of the rights of the defence and of the adversarial principle.
      
It was in those circumstances that the Corte d’appello di Milano, before which the appeal was brought, decided to stay the
         proceedings and to refer to the Court of Justice the following question for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘On the basis of the public policy clause in Article 27(1) of the Brussels Convention, may the court of the State requested
         to enforce a judgment take account of the fact that the court of the State which handed down that judgment denied the unsuccessful
         party which had entered an appearance the opportunity to present any form of defence following the issue of a debarring order
         as described [in the grounds of the present Order]? Or does the interpretation of that provision in conjunction with the principles
         to be inferred from Article et seq. of the Convention, concerning the mutual recognition and enforcement of judgments within
         the Community, preclude the national court from finding that civil proceedings in which a party has been prevented from exercising
         the rights of the defence, on grounds of a debarring order made by the court because of that party’s failure to comply with
         a court injunction, are contrary to public policy within the meaning of Article 27(1)?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
By this question, the national court asks essentially if, with regard to the public policy clause in Article 27(1) of the
         Brussels Convention, the court of the State in which enforcement is sought may take into account the fact that the court of
         the State of origin ruled on the plaintiff’s claims without hearing the defendant, who entered appearance before it but was
         excluded from the proceedings by an order, on the ground that he had not complied with the obligations imposed by an order
         adopted at an earlier stage.
      
 Categorisation of the High Court decisions with regard to Article of the Brussels Convention
As a preliminary point, it must be examined whether the High Court’s decisions are judgments within the meaning of Article
         of the Brussels Convention or if, as Mr Gambazzi maintains, they do not fall within that definition because they were adopted
         in infringement of the adversarial principle and the right to a fair trial.
      
In that regard, it should be noted that Article of the Brussels Convention refers, without distinction, to all judgments
         given by a court or tribunal of a Contracting State.
      
The Court has indeed made clear that all the provisions of the Brussels Convention, both those contained in Title II on jurisdiction
         and those contained in Title III on recognition and enforcement, express the intention to ensure that, within the scope of
         the objectives of the Convention, proceedings leading to the delivery of judicial decisions take place in such a way that
         the rights of the defence are observed. However, it considered that, for such decisions to fall within the scope of the Convention,
         it is sufficient if they are judicial decisions which, before their recognition and enforcement are sought in a State other
         than the State of origin, have been, or have been capable of being, the subject in that State of origin and under various
         procedures, of an inquiry in adversarial proceedings (Case 125/Denilauler [1980] ECR 1553, paragraph 13).
      
Thus, for example, judgments by default fall within the scope of the Brussels Convention, as follows from Article 27(2) of
         the Convention, which refers expressly to default of appearance by the defendant. 
      
As the Advocate General noted in point of her Opinion, the High Court decisions took the form of a judgment and an order
         given in default of appearance in civil proceedings which, as a rule, adhere to the adversarial principle. The fact that the
         court entered judgment as if the defendant, who had entered appearance, was in default, cannot suffice to call into question
         the categorisation of those decisions as judgments. That fact can be taken into consideration only with regard to the compatibility
         of those decisions with the public policy of the State in which enforcement is sought.
      
 Consideration to be taken of the defendant’s exclusion (debarment) from the proceedings with regard to Article 27(1) of the
            Brussels Convention
In Case C-7/Krombach [2000] ECR I-1935, paragraph 23, the Court of Justice held that, while it is not for the Court to define the content of the
         public policy of a Contracting State, it is none the less required to review the limits within which the courts of a Contracting
         State may have recourse to that concept for the purpose of refusing recognition to a judgment emanating from a court in another
         Contracting State.
      
In that regard, the Court explained that recourse to a public policy clause can be envisaged only where recognition or enforcement
         of the judgment delivered in another Contracting State would be at variance to an unacceptable degree with the legal order
         of the State in which enforcement is sought inasmuch as it infringes a fundamental principle. The infringement would have
         to constitute a manifest breach of a rule of law regarded as essential in the legal order of the State in which enforcement
         is sought or of a right recognised as being fundamental within that legal order (Krombach, paragraph 37).
      
With regard to the exercise of the rights of the defence, to which the question submitted for a preliminary ruling refers,
         the Court has pointed out that this occupies a prominent position in the organisation and conduct of a fair trial and is one
         of the fundamental rights deriving from the constitutional traditions common to the Member States and from the international
         treaties for the protection of human rights on which the Member States have collaborated or of which they are signatories,
         among which the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, signed in Rome on November
         1950, is of particular importance (see, to that effect, Krombach, paragraphs and 39).
      
It should, however, be borne in mind that fundamental rights, such as respect for the rights of the defence, do not constitute
         unfettered prerogatives and may be subject to restrictions. However, such restrictions must in fact correspond to the objectives
         of public interest pursued by the measure in question and must not constitute, with regard to the aim pursued, a manifest
         or disproportionate breach of the rights thus guaranteed. 
      
The Government of the United Kingdom explained that the aim of the ‘freezing’, ‘disclosure’ and ‘unless’ orders is to ensure
         the fair and efficient administration of justice.
      
It must be conceded that such an objective is capable of justifying a restriction on the rights of the defence. As observed
         by the Italian and Greek Governments, the legal systems of most of the Member States provide for the imposition of sanctions
         on persons who, in civil proceedings, adopt delaying tactics which would ultimately lead to a denial of justice.
      
Such sanctions may not, however, be manifestly disproportionate to the aim pursued, which is to ensure the efficient conduct
         of proceedings in the interests of the sound administration of justice.
      
With regard to the sanction adopted in the main proceedings, the exclusion of Mr Gambazzi from any participation in the proceedings,
         that is, as the Advocate General stated in point of her Opinion, the most serious restriction possible on the rights of
         the defence. Consequently, such a restriction must satisfy very exacting requirements if it is not to be regarded as a manifest
         and disproportionate infringement of those rights.
      
It is for the national court to assess, in the light of the specific circumstances of these proceedings, if that is the case.
         
      
In that context, the parties to the main proceedings refer to a judgment of November of the Tribunal fédéral (Federal
         Supreme Court) (Switzerland) (Case 4P082/2004). By that judgment, that court dismissed an appeal brought by CIBC and DaimlerChrysler
         against a decision of the Tribunale d’appello del cantone Ticino (Court of Appeal of the Canton of Ticino, Switzerland) which
         refused to recognise and enforce in Switzerland the High Court judgments against Mr Gambazzi on the basis of Article 27(1)
         of the Lugano Convention. The Tribunal fédéral held that Mr Gambazzi’s exclusion from the High Court proceedings was not contrary
         to Swiss public policy, but considered that other circumstances, to which the national court did not refer in the present
         proceedings, nevertheless justified the application of the public policy clause.
      
In accordance with the declaration by the representatives of the Governments of the States signatories to the Lugano Convention
         which are members of the European Communities, it is appropriate that the Court pay due account to the principles contained
         in that Tribunal fédéral judgment and, in application of Article of Protocol on the uniform interpretation of that convention,
         the national court is to pay due account to those principles. 
      
In that regard, it must be pointed out that the Tribunal fédéral refers, to give substance to the public policy clause, to
         the right to a fair trial and the right to be heard, principles to which the Court itself referred in Krombach, and to which it has drawn attention in paragraphs and of this judgment.
      
With regard to the specific assessment of the conflict with Swiss public policy carried out in the present case by the Tribunal
         fédéral in its abovementioned judgment, it should be noted that that assessment cannot formally bind the national court. That
         is especially true in this case because the latter court must carry out its assessment with regard to Italian public policy.
      
In order to fulfil its task of interpretation described in paragraph of the present judgment, it is however for the Court
         to explain the principles which it has defined by indicating the general criteria with regard to which the national court
         must carry out its assessment.
      
To that end, it must be stated that the question of the compatibility of the exclusion measure adopted by the court of the
         State of origin with public policy in the State in which enforcement is sought must be assessed having regard to the proceedings
         as a whole in the light of all the circumstances (see, in that regard, Case C-341/Eurofood IFSC [2006] ECR I‑3813, paragraph 68).
      
That means taking into account, in the present case, not only the circumstances in which, at the conclusion of the High Court
         proceedings, the decisions of that court – the enforcement of which is sought – were taken, but also the circumstances in
         which, at an earlier stage, the disclosure order and the unless order were adopted.
      
With regard, first, to the disclosure order, it is for the national court to examine whether, and if so to what extent, Mr
         Gambazzi had the opportunity to be heard as to its subject-matter and scope, before it was made. It is also for it to examine
         what legal remedies were available to Mr. Gambazzi, after the disclosure order was made, in order to request its amendment
         or revocation. In that regard, it must be established whether he had the opportunity to raise all the factual and legal issues
         which, in his view, could support his application and whether those issues were examined as to the merits, in full accordance
         with the adversarial principle, or whether on the contrary, he was able to ask only limited questions.
      
With regard to Mr Gambazzi’s failure to comply with the disclosure order, it is for the national court to ascertain whether
         the reasons advanced by Mr Gambazzi, in particular the fact that disclosure of the information requested would have led him
         to infringe the principle of protection of legal confidentiality by which he is bound as a lawyer and therefore to commit
         a criminal offence, could have been raised in adversarial court proceedings.
      
Concerning, second, the making of the unless order, the national court must examine whether Mr Gambazzi could avail himself
         of procedural guarantees which gave him a genuine possibility of challenging the adopted measure. 
      
Finally, with regard to the High Court judgments in which the High Court ruled on the applicants’ claims as if the defendant
         was in default, it is for the national court to investigate the question whether the well-foundedness of those claims was
         examined, at that stage or at an earlier stage, and whether Mr Gambazzi had, at that stage or at an earlier stage, the possibility
         of expressing his opinion on that subject and a right of appeal. 
      
It must be underlined that verifying those points, to the extent that the sole purpose is to identify any manifest and disproportionate
         infringement of the right to be heard, does not mean reviewing the High Court’s assessment of the merits, which would constitute
         a review as to the substance of the judgment expressly prohibited by Article and the third paragraph of Article of the
         Brussels Convention. The referring court must confine itself to identifying the legal remedies which were available to Mr.
         Gambazzi and to verifying that they offered him the possibility of being heard, in compliance with the adversarial principle
         and the full exercise of the rights of defence.
      
Following completion of such verification, it is for the national court to carry out a balancing exercise with regard to those
         various factors in order to assess whether, in the light of the objective of the efficient administration of justice pursued
         by the High Court, the exclusion of Mr Gambazzi from the proceedings appears to be a manifest and disproportionate infringement
         of his right to be heard.
      
Consequently, the answer to the question referred is that Article 27(1) of the Brussels Convention is to be interpreted as
         meaning that the court of the State in which enforcement is sought may take into account, with regard to the public policy
         clause referred to in that article, the fact that the court of the State of origin ruled on the applicant’s claims without
         hearing the defendant, who entered appearance before it but who was excluded from the proceedings by order on the ground that
         he had not complied with the obligations imposed by an order made earlier in the same proceedings, if, following a comprehensive
         assessment of the proceedings and in the light of all the circumstances, it appears to it that that exclusion measure constituted
         a manifest and disproportionate infringement of the defendant’s right to be heard.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
Article 27(1) of the Convention of September on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial
            Matters, as amended by the Convention of October on the Accession of the Kingdom of Denmark, Ireland and the United
            Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, by the Convention of October on the Accession of the Hellenic Republic,
            by the Convention of May on the Accession of the Kingdom of Spain and the Portuguese Republic, and by the Convention
            of November on the Accession of the Republic of Austria, the Republic of Finland and the Kingdom of Sweden, is to
            be interpreted as follows:
the court of the State in which enforcement is sought may take into account, with regard to the public policy clause referred
            to in that article, the fact that the court of the State of origin ruled on the applicant’s claims without hearing the defendant,
            who entered appearance before it but who was excluded from the proceedings by order on the ground that he had not complied
            with the obligations imposed by an order made earlier in the same proceedings, if, following a comprehensive assessment of
            the proceedings and in the light of all the circumstances, it appears to it that that exclusion measure constituted a manifest
            and disproportionate infringement of the defendant’s right to be heard.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
