
Case C-138/DP grup EOOD
v
Direktor na Agentsia "Mitnitsi"
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Administrativen sad Sofia-grad)
(Customs union – Customs declaration – Acceptance by the customs authorities of that declaration – Invalidation of a customs declaration which has already been accepted – Consequences for penal measures)
Summary of the Judgment
Customs union – Customs declarations – Subsequent verification
(Council Regulation No 2913/92, Art. 66, as amended by Council Regulation No 1791/2006)
The provisions of European Union law in customs matters must be interpreted as meaning that a declarant cannot request a court
         to annul a customs declaration made by it when that declaration has been accepted by the customs authorities. By contrast,
         under the conditions laid down in Article of Regulation No 2913/establishing the Community Customs Code, as amended
         by Regulation No 1791/2006, that declarant may request those authorities to invalidate that declaration, even after they have
         released the goods. Their assessment concluded, the customs authorities must, subject to the possibility of a court action,
         either reject the declarant’s application by reasoned decision or proceed with the invalidation requested.
      
(see para. 48, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
September (*)
      
(Customs union – Customs declaration – Acceptance by the customs authorities of that declaration – Invalidation of a customs declaration which has already been accepted – Consequences for penal measures)
In Case C‑138/10,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the Administrativen sad Sofia‑grad (Bulgaria), made by decision
         of March 2010, received at the Court on March 2010, in the proceedings
      
DP grup EOOD
v
Direktor na Agentsia ‘Mitnitsi’,
      
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of A. Tizzano, President of the Chamber, J.-J. Kasel, A. Borg Barthet, M. Ilešič (Rapporteur) and M. Berger, Judges,
Advocate General: P. Cruz Villalón,
Registrar: C. Strömholm, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on March 2011,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Direktor na Agentsia ‘Mitnitsi’, by V. Tanov, S. Valkova, N. Yotsova and S. Yordanova, acting as Agents,
–        the Bulgarian Government, by E. Petranova and T. Ivanov, acting as Agents,
–        the Czech Government, by M. Smolek and V. Štencel, acting as Agents,
–        the Spanish Government, by M. Muñoz Pérez, acting as Agent,
–        the Netherlands Government, by C. Wissels and M. Noort, acting as Agents,
–        the European Commission, by P. Mihaylova and B.-R. Killmann, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on June 2011,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles 4(5), 8(1), first indent, 62, and of
         Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/of October establishing the Community Customs Code (OJ L 302, p. 1), as amended
         by Council Regulation (EC) No 1791/of November (OJ L 363, p. 1) (‘the Customs Code’).
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between DP grup EOOD (‘DP grup’) and Direktor na Agentsia ‘Mitnitsi’ (Director
         of the Customs Agency) concerning an action by DP grup seeking annulment of a customs declaration made on its behalf.
      
 Legal context
 The Customs Code
The sixth recital in the preamble to the Customs Code is worded as follows:
      
‘… in view of the paramount importance of external trade for the Community, customs formalities and controls should be abolished
         or at least kept to a minimum’. 
      
Article of the Customs Code states:
      
‘For the purposes of this Code, the following definitions shall apply:
…
(5)      “Decision” means any official act by the customs authorities pertaining to customs rules giving a ruling on a particular case,
         such act having legal effects on one or more specific or identifiable persons; this term covers, inter alia, binding information
         within the meaning of Article 12;
      
…
(17)      “Customs declaration” means the act whereby a person indicates in the prescribed form and manner a wish to place goods under
         a given customs procedure;
      
…’
Article 59(1) of the Customs Code provides:
      
‘All goods intended to be placed under a customs procedure shall be covered by a declaration for that customs procedure.’
Article of the Code provides:
      
‘1.      Declarations in writing shall be made on a form corresponding to the official specimen prescribed for that purpose. They shall
         be signed and contain all the particulars necessary for implementation of the provisions governing the customs procedure for
         which the goods are declared.
      
2.      The declaration shall be accompanied by all the documents required for implementation of the provisions governing the customs
         procedure for which the goods are declared.’
      
Under Article of the Customs Code:
      
‘Declarations which comply with the conditions laid down in Article shall be accepted by the customs authorities immediately,
         provided that the goods to which they refer are presented to customs.’
      
Article of that Code reads as follows:
      
‘1.      The customs authorities shall, at the request of the declarant, invalidate a declaration already accepted where the declarant
         furnishes proof that goods were declared in error for the customs procedure covered by that declaration or that, as a result
         of special circumstances, the placing of the goods under the customs procedure for which they were declared is no longer justified.
      
Nevertheless, where the customs authorities have informed the declarant of their intention to examine the goods, a request
         for invalidation of the declaration shall not be accepted until after the examination has taken place.
      
2.      The declaration shall not be invalidated after the goods have been released, except in cases defined in accordance with the
         committee procedure.
      
3.      Invalidation of the declaration shall be without prejudice to the application of the penal provisions in force.’
Article of the Customs Code provides:
      
‘For the verification of declarations which they have accepted, the customs authorities may:
(a)      examine the documents covering the declaration and the documents accompanying it. The customs authorities may require the
         declarant to present other documents for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of the particulars contained in the declaration;
      
(b)      examine the goods and take samples for analysis or for detailed examination.’
Article of the Code provides: 
      
‘1.      The results of verifying the declaration shall be used for the purposes of applying the provisions governing the customs procedure
         under which the goods are placed.
      
2.      Where the declaration is not verified, the provisions referred to in paragraph shall be applied on the basis of the particulars
         contained in the declaration.’
      
 The Implementing Regulation
Article 199(1) of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2454/of July laying down provisions for the implementation of Council
         Regulation No 2913/establishing the Community Customs Code (OJ L 253, p. 1), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC)
         No 214/of February (OJ L 62, p. 6), (‘the Implementing Regulation’) provides:
      
‘Without prejudice to the possible application of penal provisions, the lodging with a customs office of a declaration signed
         by the declarant or his representative shall render him responsible under the provisions in force for:
      
–        the accuracy of the information given in the declaration,
–        the authenticity of the documents attached,
and
–        compliance with all the obligations relating to the entry of the goods in question under the procedure concerned.’
Article of that Regulation provides:
      
‘By way of derogation from Article 66(2) of the [Customs] Code, a customs declaration may be invalidated after the goods have
         been released, as provided below:
      
…’
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
On March 2007, DP grup, through an agent, lodged, at the Mitnichesko byuro Kremikovtsi (Kremikovtsi Customs Office) in
         Sofia (Bulgaria), a customs declaration for the importation from Brazil of ‘frozen and boneless turkey leg, prepared with
         white pepper’, in order to release those goods for free circulation.
      
That customs declaration was accepted by the customs authorities on the same day. A customs officer signed it and entered
         the following information on the reverse of the document:
      
‘Documentary examination in respect of box in accordance with Article of the [Implementing Regulation] carried out.
         Tariff heading in box No corresponds to the description of the goods in box No and to the [Integrated Tariff of the
         European Communities, established by Article of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/of July on the tariff and statistical
         nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff (OJ L 256, p. 1)]. Customs value determined in accordance with Article
         of the Customs Code. Not a product covered by a preferential system. The requirements for being placed under the “end-use”
         procedure are satisfied. Record of a detailed customs examination at Sofia Airport (No 120/13.03.2007). Owing to suspicion
         of an incorrect tariff classification, samples were taken for a laboratory examination by the Central Chemical Laboratory…’
      
The record of goods examination No 120/13.03.states in item that the goods presented correspond, in view of their
         nature and quantity, to those declared in the customs declaration and that samples were taken for a laboratory examination.
      
The amount of import duties calculated on the basis of the tariff heading declared by DP grup, namely BGN 646.88, was entered
         in the relevant box of the customs declaration.
      
On March 2007, the customs authorities released the imported goods.
      
On the basis of the results of the expert report, the customs authorities, by letter of April 2007, informed DP grup that,
         in their view, the tariff classification of those goods was incorrect and that this constituted a breach of customs legislation.
      
Consequently, the customs authorities fixed additional outstanding amounts, BGN 754.in respect of customs duties and
         BGN 293.in respect of value added tax, as well as default interest thereon, and called on DP grup to pay those amounts.
      
DP grup brought proceedings before the Administrativen sad Sofia‑grad (Administrative Court, Sofia), by which it sought the
         annulment of the customs declaration of March on the ground that the import duties totalling BGN 646.88, stated
         therein, had been calculated incorrectly. 
      
It is apparent from the order for reference that DP grup claimed before that court that the customs declaration at issue in
         the main proceedings is an administrative act which may be challenged before a court. That company, while acknowledging that
         it had incorrectly stated the tariff heading, takes the view that, insofar as that heading was accepted by the customs authorities,
         by the signature of the agent confirming acceptance of that declaration, the heading was ‘confirmed’ by those authorities.
         Accordingly, the customs declaration, it argues, constitutes an express manifestation of intention by the customs authorities
         and gives rise to rights as well as obligations for the declarant, which confers on it the nature of a challengeable act.
      
In support of its action, DP grup submitted that the incorrect tariff heading stated in the customs declaration at issue in
         the main proceedings renders it void. It also claimed that the customs duties calculated on the basis of the illegal declaration
         were inconsistent with the objectives of the Bulgarian customs rules and as a result caused it loss.
      
The Administrativen sad Sofia‑grad, on July 2008, made an order declaring the action inadmissible by reason of the lack
         of a challengeable administrative act, the customs declaration which was completed by the declarant and accepted by the customs
         authorities not being, in its view, an administrative act which could be challenged before a court.
      
DP grup appealed against that order to the Varhoven adminstrativen sad (Supreme Administrative Court), which held that, even
         if it had been completed by the declarant itself, the customs declaration at issue in the main proceedings was, for the reasons
         set out in paragraph of the present judgment, an individual administrative act which indisputably affects the declarant’s
         interests. The Varhoven adminstrativen sad, the guidance of which on the interpretation and application of legislation are,
         according to Bulgarian law, binding during further examination of the case, referred the case back to the same chamber of
         the Adminstrativen sad Sofia‑grad for resumption of the proceedings.
      
The referring court takes the view that the outcome of the main proceedings depends on the interpretation of the applicable
         provisions of European Union customs law and that the case raises, in particular, the question of the scope and content of
         the examination of the conformity of customs declarations with the requirements laid down by Article of the Customs Code
         and, more specifically, the question whether, as part of that examination, the customs authorities are required to verify
         whether the tariff heading stated by a declarant is correct.
      
It points out, in addition, that, where the heading indicated is incorrect and has not subsequently been amended in accordance
         with Article of the Customs Code, the customs authorities are entitled to impose fines on the declarant for committing
         a customs offence, and in particular may seize the goods and dispose of them pursuant to the procedure provided for that purpose
         under national law. According to that court, by the claim brought before it, DP grup is evidently seeking to avoid incurring
         detrimental legal consequences such as those mentioned above.
      
In those circumstances, the Administrativen sad Sofia‑grad decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      In the circumstances of the main proceedings, is Article of [the Customs Code] to be interpreted as requiring the customs
         authority to carry out only an examination of the conformity of the customs declaration with the requirements of Article of that [Code] by merely undertaking an examination of documents to the extent specified in Article of the [Code], and
         to take a decision concerning acceptance of the customs declaration solely on the basis of the documents presented, where
         a doubt has arisen as to the correctness of the tariff code of the goods and an expert report is necessary in order to determine
         that code?
      
2.      In the circumstances of the main proceedings, is the decision of the customs authority concerning immediate acceptance of
         the customs declaration pursuant to Article of [the Customs Code] to be regarded as a decision of a customs authority in
         accordance with Article 4(5), in conjunction with Article 8(1), first indent, of [that Code], and this in respect of the entire
         content of the customs declaration made, when at the same time the following circumstances are present:
      
(a)      the customs authority’s decision concerning acceptance of the customs declaration was taken solely on the basis of the documents
         presented together with the customs declaration;
      
(b)      when the required examinations were being carried out prior to acceptance of the customs declaration, the suspicion existed
         that the tariff code declared for the goods was not correct;
      
(c)      when the required examinations were being carried out prior to acceptance of the customs declaration, the information on the
         content of the goods declared, which is relevant for the purposes of correct determination of the tariff code, was incomplete:
      
(d)      during the examination prior to acceptance of the declaration, a sample was taken in order that an expert report could be
         drawn up for the purpose of correct determination of the tariff code of the goods?
      
3.      In the circumstances of the main proceedings, is Article of [the Customs Code] to be interpreted as meaning that:
(a)      it allows the lawfulness of acceptance of the customs declaration to be contested before a court after release of the goods,
         or that
      
(b)      acceptance of the customs declaration is not contestable, because it merely records the declaration of the goods to the customs
         authorities and determines the date on which the customs debt on importation is incurred and does not constitute a decision
         by the customs authority as to the correct tariff classification and the amount of duties due on the basis of that declaration?’
      
 Consideration of the questions referred
It should be recalled that, in proceedings under Article TFEU, it is solely for the national court before which the dispute
         has been brought, and which must assume responsibility for the subsequent judicial decision, to determine, in the light of
         the particular circumstances of the case, both the need for a preliminary ruling in order to enable it to deliver judgment
         and the relevance of the questions which it submits to the Court (see, inter alia, Case C‑459/Elshani [2009] ECR I‑2759, paragraph 40, and Case C‑339/Skoma-Lux [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 21). 
      
However, it is for the Court, as part of those proceedings, to provide the national court with an answer which will be of
         use to it and enable it to determine the case before it. To that end, the Court may have to reformulate the questions referred
         to it. Moreover, the Court has a duty to interpret all provisions of European Union law which national courts require in order
         to decide the actions pending before them, even if those provisions are not expressly indicated in the questions referred
         to the Court of Justice by those courts (see, to that effect, inter alia, Case C‑45/Campina [2007] ECR I‑2089, paragraphs and 31; Joined Cases C‑329/and C‑343/Wiedemann and Funk [2008] ECR I‑4635, paragraph 45; and Case C‑243/Fuß [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 39).
      
In that regard, first, it is apparent from the decision of the referring court that the action before it seeks the annulment
         of the customs declaration at issue in the main proceedings, and not the annulment of the acceptance of that declaration as
         such. Secondly, it is apparent from the case-file that DP grup sought the annulment of that declaration after the goods at
         issue in the main proceedings had been released by the customs authorities.
      
In those circumstances, by the questions submitted, the referring court is seeking to ascertain whether the provisions of
         European Union Law in customs matters must be interpreted as meaning that a declarant can, after the goods have been released
         by the customs authorities, ask a court to annul the customs declaration which relates to those goods.
      
In order to answer the questions thus reformulated, it is necessary to consider the nature and scope of the customs declaration.
      
As is clear from Article 59(1) of the Customs Code, European Union customs law establishes the principle whereby all goods
         intended to be placed under a customs procedure must be covered by a declaration. 
      
The information necessary for the application of customs rules to goods is thus determined, not on the basis of the customs
         authorities’ findings, but on the basis of the information provided by the declarant.
      
The customs declaration is, therefore, as is clear from Article 4(17) of the Customs Code, the act whereby the declarant indicates,
         in the prescribed form and manner, a wish to place goods under a given customs procedure. As a result, that declaration, which
         by its nature is a unilateral act, is not a ‘decision’ within the meaning of Article 4(5) of that Code.
      
With respect to customs declarations made in writing, Article of that Code gives customs authorities the power to verify
         the information provided by the declarant. 
      
With the aim, expressed in the sixth recital in the preamble to the Customs Code, of keeping customs formalities and controls
         to a minimum, that Code does not require customs authorities to systematically carry out such verifications. Thus, under Article
         71(2) of the Customs Code, where the customs declaration is not verified, the provisions governing the customs procedure under
         which the goods are placed are to be applied on the basis of the particulars contained in that declaration.
      
The system described above, which does not provide for systematic verification of customs declarations, assumes that the declarant
         will provide the customs authorities with complete and accurate information. Indeed, Article 199(1), first indent, of the
         Implementing Regulation provides that the lodging with a customs office of a declaration signed by the declarant or its representative
         renders that declarant responsible under the provisions in force for the accuracy of the information given in the declaration.
      
In that regard, it is important to point out that, as the Advocate General stated at point of his Opinion and contrary
         to the arguments of DP grup before the referring court, where the customs authorities accept a customs declaration signed
         by the declarant or its representative, Article of the Customs Code requires that they confine themselves to monitoring
         compliance with the requirements laid down in Article of that Code. Consequently, when a customs declaration is accepted,
         those authorities do not take a decision on the accuracy of the information provided by the declarant, for which the latter
         assumes responsibility. Indeed, it follows from the wording of Article of the Customs Code that acceptance of the declaration
         does not prevent those authorities from subsequently verifying the accuracy of the information, where necessary even after
         the goods have been released.
      
The obligation on the declarant to provide accurate information also extends to the determination of the correct subheading
         at the time of the tariff classification of the goods (see, by analogy, Case 378/Top Hit Holzvertrieb v Commission [1989] ECR 1359, paragraph 26), the declarant being able, if there is any doubt, to request in advance from the customs authorities
         a binding tariff information, pursuant to Article of the Customs Code.
      
The aforementioned obligation has as its corollary the principle of the irrevocability of the customs declaration once it
         has been accepted, a principle the exceptions to which are strictly defined by the relevant European Union legislation.
      
Thus, while the Customs Code does not make provision for the declarant to obtain the annulment of a customs declaration made
         by it, the first subparagraph of Article 66(1) of that Code allows the declarant to request the customs authorities to invalidate
         a declaration that they have already accepted, on condition that it furnishes proof that the goods were declared in error
         for the customs procedure covered by that declaration or that, as a result of special circumstances, the placing of the goods
         under the customs procedure for which they were declared is no longer justified.
      
Article 66(2) of the Customs Code provides that the declaration may not be invalidated after the goods have been released,
         except in certain cases. Those cases are defined in Article of the Implementing Regulation.
      
It follows from the wording of Article that where the declarant, on its own initiative, seeks the invalidation of the customs
         declaration, its request must be addressed to the customs authorities and not to the courts.
      
At the conclusion of their assessment, those authorities must thus, subject to the possibility of a subsequent court action,
         either reject the declarant’s application by reasoned decision or proceed with the invalidation requested (see, by analogy,
         Case C‑468/Overland Footwear [2005] ECR I‑8937, paragraph 50).
      
As for the fact that, in the view of the referring court, the action brought before it by DP grup is designed to avoid possible
         sanctions being imposed on that company in respect of the infringement relating to the incorrect tariff classification of
         the imported goods made when the customs declaration at issue in the main proceedings was drawn up, suffice it to note that,
         under Article 66(3) of the Customs Code, invalidation of the declaration is without prejudice to the application of the penal
         provisions in force. 
      
As regards, moreover, the instructions given to the referring court by the Varhoven administrativen sad, it should be recalled
         that European Union law precludes a national court which is called upon to decide a case referred back to it by a higher court
         hearing an appeal from being bound, in accordance with national procedural law, by legal rulings of that higher court, if
         it takes the view, having regard to the interpretation which it has sought from the Court, that those rulings are inconsistent
         with European Union law (Case C‑173/Elchinov [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 32).
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the questions referred is that the provisions of European Union law in customs
         matters must be interpreted as meaning that a declarant cannot request a court to annul a customs declaration made by it when
         that declaration has been accepted by the customs authorities. By contrast, under the conditions laid down in Article of
         the Customs Code, that declarant may request those authorities to invalidate that declaration, even after they have released
         the goods. At the conclusion of their assessment, the customs authorities must, subject to the possibility of a court action,
         either reject the declarant’s application by reasoned decision or proceed with the invalidation requested.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
The provisions of European Union law in customs matters must be interpreted as meaning that a declarant cannot request a court
            to annul a customs declaration made by it when that declaration has been accepted by the customs authorities. By contrast,
            under the conditions laid down in Article of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/of October establishing the Community
            Customs Code, as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 1791/of November 2006, that declarant may request those authorities
            to invalidate that declaration, even after they have released the goods. At the conclusion of their assessment, the customs
            authorities must, subject to the possibility of a court action, either reject the declarant’s application by reasoned decision
            or proceed with the invalidation requested. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Bulgarian.
      
Top  
 