
Case C-144/P
K-Swiss Inc.
v
Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM)
(Appeal – Community trade mark – Regulation (EC) No 2868/– Time-limit for instituting proceedings before the Court of First Instance – OHIM decision – Notification by express courier – Calculation of the time‑limit for bringing an action)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Community trade mark – Procedural provisions – Notification
(Commission Regulation No 2868/95, Art. 1, Rules 61(2) and 62(1))
2.        Community trade mark – Procedural provisions – Notification
(Commission Regulation No 2868/95, Art. 1, Rule 68)
1.        Notification by express courier does not constitute notification by registered letter with advice of delivery within the meaning
         of Rule 62(1) of Regulation No 2868/implementing Regulation No 40/on the Community trade mark.
      
(see paras 20-22)
2.        Where the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) is unable to prove that a document has
         been duly notified, or if provisions relating to its notification have not been observed, but that document has reached the
         addressee, it follows from Rule of Regulation No 2868/implementing Regulation No 40/on the Community trade mark that
         the Office may produce proof of the date of receipt and that the document is deemed to have been notified on that date. 
      
(see para. 23)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Appeal – Community trade mark – Regulation (EC) No 2868/– Time-limit for instituting proceedings before the Court of First Instance – OHIM decision – Notification by express courier – Calculation of the time‑limit for bringing an action)
In Case C‑144/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, lodged on March 2007,
K-Swiss Inc., established in West Lake Village (United States), represented by H.E. Hübner, advocate,
      
appellant,
the other party to the proceedings being:
Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM), represented by O. Mondéjar Ortuño, acting as Agent,
      
defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, L. Bay Larsen, K. Schiemann, J. Makarczyk (Rapporteur) and P. Kūris,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: Y. Bot,
Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on April 2008,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on May 2008,
gives the following
Judgment
In this appeal, K-Swiss Inc. (‘K-Swiss’) asks the Court of Justice to set aside the order of the Court of First Instance of
         the European Communities of December in Case T-14/K-Swiss v OHIM(Parallel stripes on a shoe) (‘the order under appeal’), by which that Court dismissed as inadmissible its action against the decision of the Office for
         Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM) of September (Case R 1109/2004-1; ‘the disputed
         decision’) concerning registration of a trade mark in the form of five parallel stripes placed on the side of a representation
         of a shoe.
      
 Legal context
Article 63(5) of Council Regulation (EC) No 40/of December on the Community trade mark (OJ L 11, p. 1) provides
         that actions against decisions of the Boards of Appeal of OHIM must be brought before the Court of First Instance within two
         months of the date of notification of the decision of the Board of Appeal.
      
In accordance with Article 102(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance, the prescribed time-limits are
         to be extended on account of distance by a single period of days.
      
Rule 61(1) and (2) of Commission Regulation (EC) No 2868/of December implementing Council Regulation No 40/(OJ
         L 303, p. 1), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1041/of June (OJ L 172, p. 4), (‘Regulation
         No 2868/95’) provides:
      
‘1.      In proceedings before [OHIM], notifications to be made by [OHIM] shall take the form of transmitting the original document,
         an uncertified copy thereof or a computer print-out in accordance with Rule 55, or, as concerns documents emanating from the
         parties themselves, duplicates or uncertified copies.
      
2.       Notifications shall be made:
(a)       by post in accordance with Rule 62;
(b)       by hand delivery in accordance with Rule 63;
(c)       by deposit in a post box at [OHIM] in accordance with Rule 64;
(d)       by telecopier and other technical means in accordance with Rule 65;
(e)       by public notification in accordance with Rule 66.’
Paragraphs and of Rule of Regulation No 2868/provide:
      
‘1.       Decisions subject to a time-limit for appeal, summonses and other documents as determined by the President of [OHIM] shall
         be notified by registered letter with advice of delivery. All other notifications shall be by ordinary mail. 
      
…
3.      Where notification is effected by registered letter, whether or not with advice of delivery, this shall be deemed to be delivered
         to the addressee on the 10th day following that of its posting, unless the letter has failed to reach the addressee or has
         reached him at a later date. In the event of any dispute, it shall be for [OHIM] to establish that the letter has reached
         its destination or to establish the date on which it was delivered to the addressee, as the case may be.’
      
Finally, Rule of Regulation No 2868/provides:
      
‘Where a document has reached the addressee, if [OHIM] is unable to prove that it has been duly notified, or if provisions
         relating to its notification have not been observed, the document shall be deemed to have been notified on the date established
         by [OHIM] as the date of receipt.’
      
 The action before the Court of First Instance and the order under appeal
By application lodged at the Registry of the Court of First Instance on January 2006, K-Swiss brought an action against
         the disputed decision.
      
By separate document lodged at the Registry of the Court of First Instance on April 2006, OHIM raised an objection of inadmissibility,
         in accordance with Article 114(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance. 
      
Considering that it had sufficient information from the documents in the file, the Court of First Instance, by the order under
         appeal, gave a decision on that objection without taking further steps in the proceedings and dismissed the action brought
         by K‑Swiss as inadmissible.
      
In paragraphs to of the order, the Court of First Instance explained its decision as follows:
      
‘The Court notes that, as the applicant submits, the delivery of the [disputed] decision by an express courier service, such
         as DHL, is not included in the means of notification provided for in Rule 61(2) of Regulation No 2868/95. Moreover, it must
         be held that neither OHIM nor the applicant, which indeed expressly submits that delivery by DHL does not constitute notification
         by post, claims that the DHL delivery to the applicant on October was sent in the form of a registered letter or,
         moreover, that DHL is able to send such letters in Germany or, finally, that the contested decision was notified to the applicant
         by one of the other means provided for in Rule 61(2) of Regulation No 2868/and in Rules to of that regulation. In
         that respect, it is important, moreover, to point out that the covering letter attached to the DHL delivery to the applicant
         does not in any way indicate that it is a registered letter, but states that that delivery is “[n]otified by DHL only”.
      
It follows from the foregoing that the [disputed] decision was not notified to the applicant in accordance with the requirements
         of Rules and of Regulation No 2868/95.
      
Contrary to the applicant’s assertions, however, that fact is not capable of leading to the conclusion that the present action
         was brought within the prescribed period.
      
It must be borne in mind that, in accordance with Rule of Regulation No 2868/95, entitled “Irregularities in notification”,
         “[w]here a document has reached the addressee, if [OHIM] is unable to prove that it has been duly notified, or if provisions
         relating to its notification have not been observed, the document shall be deemed to have been notified on the date established
         by [OHIM] as the date of receipt”.
      
That provision, taken as a whole, must be construed as affording to OHIM the possibility of establishing the date on which
         a document reached its addressee, if it is not possible to prove due notification or the provisions relating to its notification
         have not been observed; OHIM must be entitled therefore to attach to that proof the legal effects of due notification (Joined
         Cases T‑380/and T‑128/Success-Marketing  v OHIM  – Chipita (PAN & CO)  [2005] ECR II‑1233, paragraph 64).
      
In the present case, it is common ground that the applicant received the DHL [courier] on October 2005, as is attested,
         moreover, by the monitoring document [track report] held by the Registry of the Boards of Appeal.
      
Pursuant to Rule of Regulation No 2868/95, the [disputed] decision is therefore deemed to have been notified to the applicant
         on October 2005, with the result that the presumption laid down in Rule 62(3) of Regulation No 2868/does not apply in
         the present case. This is also in compliance with Rule 70(2) of Regulation No 2868/95, which provides “[w]here that procedural
         step is a notification, the event considered [to set time running] shall be the receipt of the document notified, unless otherwise
         provided”. Similarly, according to settled case-law concerning the fifth paragraph of Article EC, in the event that the
         contested measure has been notified to its addressee, the period within which proceedings must be brought begins to run on
         the day of receipt by that addressee (see, to that effect, Case T-12/Bayer v Commission [1991] ECR II-219, paragraph 19, confirmed on appeal in Case C-195/P Bayer v Commission [1994] ECR I‑5619).
      
Under those circumstances, and given that, in accordance with Article 63(5) of Regulation No 40/94, an action must be brought
         before the Court within two months of the date of notification of the decision of the Board of Appeal, extended on account
         of distance by a single period of days, pursuant to Article 102(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the period within which proceedings
         against the [disputed] decision had to be brought expired on January 2006.
      
The present action, which was brought on January 2006, is therefore out of time and must be dismissed as inadmissible.’
 Forms of order sought
By its appeal, the applicant claims that the Court should:
      
–        set aside the order under appeal;
–        order OHIM to pay the costs.
OHIM contends that the Court should:
      
–        dismiss the appeal as unfounded;
–        order K-Swiss to pay the costs.
 The appeal
In support of its appeal, the appellant puts forward a single plea alleging infringement of Rules 61, and of Regulation
         No 2868/95.
      
 Arguments of the parties
Even though K-Swiss acknowledges that the disputed decision was delivered to it by express courier dispatched by DHL on October 2005, it nevertheless submits that it has to be established whether that delivery must be treated as having been effected
         by registered letter with advice of delivery within the meaning of Rule 62(1) of Regulation No 2868/95.
      
In this respect, the appellant states that, in functional terms, proof of delivery furnished by an express courier service
         provider, such as DHL, is identical to the proof of posting provided in relation to a registered letter with advice of delivery,
         the only difference being that the DHL service does not provide for an advice of delivery to be returned to the sender. 
      
K-Swiss also states that OHIM has changed its practice regarding notification of the decisions of its Boards of Appeal, and
         that it is apparent from the instructions given by the Presidium of the Boards of Appeal to the Registry of OHIM on May
         that, where notification of such decisions is effected by post, that notification is to be made either by registered
         letter or by courier service. It cannot be envisaged that OHIM would have deliberately adopted a method of notification intended
         to bring about a form of notification that was irregular for the purposes of Rule of Regulation No 2868/95. 
      
Although it contends that the appeal should be dismissed, OHIM argues that the Court of First Instance could not apply Rule
         of Regulation No 2868/95, on the ground that notification by express courier does not constitute an irregularity in notification.
         It submits that notification of decisions of the Boards of Appeal by express courier must be treated as notification by post,
         in accordance with the provisions of Rule of Regulation No 2868/95.
      
By contrast, OHIM submits that the presumption which is laid down in paragraph of that Rule, according to which notification
         by post is deemed to be delivered to the addressee on the 10th day following that of its posting, may be waived when there
         is evidence of the actual date of delivery of the notification. Consequently, OHIM states that, in this case, the period within
         which proceedings against the disputed decision had to be brought expired on January 2006. Therefore, the Court of First
         Instance came to the right solution by dismissing the action as inadmissible, but did so by wrongly applying the relevant
         provisions of Regulation No 2868/95.
      
 Findings of the Court
Rule of Regulation No 2868/95, headed ‘General provisions on notifications’, gives an exhaustive list of the means by which
         OHIM is to notify, inter alia, its decisions. Thus, paragraph of that rule states that notifications are to be made by post,
         by hand delivery, by deposit in a post box at OHIM, by telecopier or other technical means or by public notification. 
      
In addition, where notification is by post, Rule 62(1) of that regulation provides that decisions subject to a time-limit
         for appeal, such as the disputed decision, are to be notified by registered letter with advice of delivery.
      
In paragraph of the order under appeal, the Court of First Instance noted that the parties did not claim that the express
         DHL delivery to the appellant had been sent in the form of a registered letter or that DHL was able to send registered letters
         in Germany, and that the covering letter attached to that delivery did not indicate that it was a registered letter, but stated
         that that delivery was ‘[n]otified by DHL only’.
      
Consequently, the Court of First Instance rightly concluded that such notification did not constitute notification ‘by registered
         letter with advice of delivery’ within the meaning of Rule 62(1) of Regulation No 2868/95.
      
However, contrary to OHIM’s contention, where OHIM is unable to prove that a document has been duly notified, or if provisions
         relating to its notification have not been observed, but that document has reached the addressee, it follows from Rule of Regulation No 2868/95, which the Court of First Instance was right to apply, that OHIM may produce proof of the date of
         receipt and that the document is deemed to have been notified on that date.
      
Thus, the Court of First Instance correctly held that the action brought by K-Swiss on January was out of time and
         should be dismissed as inadmissible.
      
After observing, in paragraph of the order under appeal, that it was common ground that the appellant had received the
         express DHL delivery on October 2005, the Court of First Instance held, in paragraph of that order, that, having regard
         to the provisions of its Rules of Procedure and Article 63(5) of Regulation No 40/94, the period within which proceedings
         against the disputed decision had to be brought had expired on January 2006.
      
It follows from all the foregoing considerations that the appeal must be dismissed as unfounded.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, applicable in appeal proceedings by virtue of Article thereof, the unsuccessful
         party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since OHIM has
         applied for costs and the appellant has been unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
1.      Dismisses the appeal;
2.      Orders K‑Swiss, Inc. to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 