
Case C-64/Criminal proceedings
against
Ernst Engelmann
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Landesgericht Linz (Austria))
(Freedom to provide services – Freedom of establishment – National rules establishing a system of concessions for the operation of games of chance in casinos – Concessions obtainable solely by public limited companies established in national territory – All concessions granted without any competitive procedure)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Freedom of establishment – Restrictions
(Ars. EC and EC)
2.        Freedom to provide services – Freedom of establishment – National legislation on concessions to operate gaming establishments
(Arts EC and EC)
1.        Article EC must be interpreted as precluding legislation of a Member State under which games of chance may be operated
         in gaming establishments only by operators whose seat is in the territory of that Member State. The obligation for persons
         holding concessions to operate gaming establishments to have their seat in national territory constitutes a restriction of
         freedom of establishment within the meaning of that provision inasmuch as it discriminates against companies which have their
         seat in another Member State and prevents those companies from operating gaming establishments in the territory of the Member
         State concerned by way of an agency, branch or subsidiary.
      
Without it being necessary to determine whether the objective of permitting effective control of operators in the gaming sector
         with a view to preventing those activities from being carried out for criminal or fraudulent purposes can fall within the
         definition of public policy, so as to render the restriction in question compatible with European Union law, it need merely
         be pointed out that the categorical exclusion of operators whose seat is in another Member State appears disproportionate,
         as it goes beyond what is necessary to combat crime. There are indeed various measures available to monitor the activities
         and accounts of such operators, such as, the possibility of requiring separate accounts audited by an external accountant
         to be kept for each gaming establishment of the same operator, the possibility of being systematically informed of the decisions
         adopted by the organs of the concession holders and the possibility of gathering information concerning their managers and
         principal shareholders. In addition, any undertaking established in a Member State can be supervised and have sanctions imposed
         on it, regardless of the place of residence of its managers.
      
(see paras 32, 34-38, 40, operative part 1)
2.        The obligation of transparency flowing from Articles EC and EC and from the principle of equal treatment and the prohibition
         of discrimination on grounds of nationality precludes the grant without any competitive procedure of all the concessions to
         operate gaming establishments in the territory of a Member State.
      
On the one hand, even though, as European Union law now stands, service concessions are not governed by any of the directives
         by which the European Union legislature has regulated public procurement, the public authorities which grant such concessions
         are nonetheless bound to comply with the fundamental rules of the Treaties, in particular Articles EC and EC, as well
         as the obligation of transparency which flows therefrom. Without necessarily implying an obligation to call for tenders, that
         obligation of transparency, which applies when the service concession in question may be of interest to an undertaking located
         in a Member State other than that in which the concession is granted, requires the concession-granting authority to ensure,
         for the benefit of any potential tenderer, a degree of publicity sufficient to enable the service concession to be opened
         up to competition and the impartiality of the award procedures to be reviewed.
      
On the other hand, the fact that the issue of licences to operate gaming establishments may not be the same as a service concession
         contract does not, in itself, justify any failure to have regard to the requirements arising from Article EC, in particular
         the principle of equal treatment and the obligation of transparency.  The obligation of transparency thus amounts to a condition
         that must be met before a Member State can exercise its right to award licences to operate gaming establishments, irrespective
         of the method of selecting operators, because the effects of the award of such licences on undertakings which are established
         in other Member States and potentially interested in engaging in that activity are the same as those of a service concession
         contract.
      
(see paras 49-50, 52-53, 58, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
September (*)
      
(Freedom to provide services – Freedom of establishment – National rules establishing a system of concessions for the operation of games of chance in casinos – Concessions obtainable solely by public limited companies established in national territory – All concessions granted without any competitive procedure)
In Case C‑64/08,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Landesgericht Linz (Austria), made by decision of January
         2008, received at the Court on February 2008, in the criminal proceedings against
      
Ernst Engelmann,
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of J.‑C. Bonichot, President of the Chamber, C. Toader, K. Schiemann (Rapporteur), P. Kūris and L. Bay Larsen, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Mazák,
Registrar: K. Malacek, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on January 2010,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Mr Engelmann, by P. Ruth and T. Talos, Rechtsanwälte, and by A. Stadler,
–        the Austrian Government, by C. Pesendorfer, acting as Agent,
–        the Belgian Government, by L. Van den Broeck, acting as Agent, assisted by P. Vlaemminck and A. Hubert, advocaten,
–        the Greek Government, by A. Samoni‑Rantou, M. Tassopoulou, O. Patsopoulou and E.‑M. Mamouna, acting as Agents,
–        the Spanish Government, by F. Díez Moreno, acting as Agent,
–        the Portuguese Government, by L. Inez Fernandes, P. Mateus Calado and A. Barros, acting as Agents,
–        the European Commission, by P. Dejmek, and subsequently by E. Traversa and H. Krämer, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on February 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling relates to the interpretation of Articles EC and EC.
      
The reference has been made in the context of criminal proceedings against Mr Engelmann for failure to comply with the Austrian
         legislation concerning the operation of gaming establishments.
      
 Legal context
In Austria, games of chance are regulated by the Federal Law on Games of Chance (Glücksspielgesetz), in the version published
         in the Bundesgesetzblatt für die Republik Österreich 620/(‘the GSpG’).
      
According to the preparatory documents for the GSpG, this Law, first, is designed to regulate games of chance and, secondly,
         pursues a fiscal objective.
      
With regard to the goal of regulating games of chance, the general part of the explanatory notes to the GSpG states that,
         ideally, a total prohibition on gaming would be the most judicious form of regulation but given that, as is well known, a
         passion for gambling seems inherent in the human condition, it is far wiser for that passion to be channelled in the interests
         of the individual and society. It is stated that two goals are thus achieved: first, gaming is prevented from entering the
         realm of illegality, as may be observed to happen in States which prohibit games of chance entirely; at the same time, the
         State is enabled to retain the possibility of supervising games of chance operated lawfully, the main objective of such supervision
         having to be to protect the gambler.
      
As to the fiscal objective, the explanatory notes identify an interest on the part of the federal State in being able to derive
         the maximum possible revenue from the gaming monopoly and, therefore, when adopting rules on gaming, the federal government
         must, whilst observing and protecting the goal of regulating gaming, ensure that games of chance are operated in such a way
         that the monopoly produces the maximum possible revenue for it.
      
Paragraph of the GSpG establishes a ‘State monopoly’ over games of chance and provides that the right to organise and operate
         games of chance is in principle reserved to the State unless otherwise stated in that Law.
      
Pursuant to Paragraph 21(1) of the GSpG, the Federal Minister for Finance may grant the right to organise and operate games
         of chance by issuing concessions to operate gaming establishments. The number of concessions which may be granted is limited
         to a total of and only one concession may be issued for each municipal territory.
      
Paragraph 21(2) of the GSpG sets out the conditions for granting such concessions. It states that concessionaires must be
         public limited companies having their seat in Austria and with a share capital of at least EUR million; in the light of
         the circumstances the concessionaire must also offer the local public authorities the best prospects of maximising tax revenue,
         whilst observing the rules laid down in the GSpG on the protection of gamblers.
      
Paragraph of the GSpG provides that concessions are to be for a maximum period of years.
      
Under Paragraph 31(1) of the GSpG, the Federal Finance Ministry has a general right of supervision over the concessionaire.
         In that connection, it may inspect the concessionaire’s accounts and its agents may, for the purpose of exercising the right
         of supervision, gain access to the concessionaire’s business premises. Pursuant to Paragraph 31(2), the Ministry also appoints
         a State commissioner to the concessionaire undertaking. In accordance with Paragraph 31(3), audited annual accounts must be
         submitted to the Federal Minister for Finance within six months of the end of the financial year.
      
The organisation of games of chance by a person who does not hold an operating concession and commercial participation in
         games so organised may give rise to criminal proceedings. Under Paragraph of the Austrian Criminal Code (Strafgesetzbuch;
         ‘the StGB’), ‘any person who organises a game which is expressly prohibited or in which the chances of winning depend exclusively
         or predominantly on luck, or who promotes a meeting organised with a view to such a game taking place, with the intention
         of making a personal financial gain from such organisation or meeting or of obtaining a financial gain for a third party’,
         commits an offence.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
The operating concessions for gaming establishments provided for in Paragraph of the GSpG are currently held by Casinos
         Austria AG.
      
The concessions were initially granted to that company by administrative order of December for a maximum period of
         years.
      
The concessions to operate the six gaming establishments in Bregenz, Graz, Innsbruck, Linz, Salzburg and Vienna were renewed
         early, for years, from January 1998, with the result that they expire on December 2012. Similarly, the concessions
         for the six gaming establishments in Baden, Bad Gastein, Kitzbühel, Kleinwalsertal, Seefeld and Velden were renewed, for years, from January 2001, with the result that they expire on December 2015.
      
In reply to a question put by the Court, the Austrian Government confirmed that there had been no public call for tenders
         before the grant of any of those concessions.
      
Mr Engelmann, a German national, operated gaming establishments in Austria, from the beginning of to July in
         Linz and from April to April in Schärding. In those establishments, he offered his customers, inter alia, a game
         called ‘observation roulette’ and the card games ‘Poker’ and ‘Two Aces’. He had not sought a concession to organise games
         of chance, nor was he the holder of a lawful authorisation in another Member State.
      
By judgment of March 2007, the Bezirksgericht Linz (District Court, Linz) found Mr Engelmann guilty of organising games
         of chance on Austrian territory in order to obtain a pecuniary advantage. It thus found him guilty of the offence of unlawfully
         organising games of chance contrary to Paragraph 168(1) of the StGB. It therefore ordered him to pay a fine of EUR 000.
      
Mr Engelmann appealed against that judgment to the Landesgericht Linz (Regional Court, Linz). That court had doubts as to
         the compatibility of the provisions of the StGB, read in conjunction with the Austrian provisions on games of chance, with
         European Union law, more specifically with Articles EC and EC.
      
Those doubts are founded first of all on the fact that, to the best of the national court’s knowledge, the adoption of the
         applicable provisions of the GSpG was not preceded by an analysis of the dangers of gambling addiction or of the possibilities
         of preventing it either de jure or de facto. According to the Landesgericht Linz, those provisions run counter to the Court’s
         case-law that the reasons which may be invoked by a Member State by way of justification for a restriction on the freedom
         to provide services must be accompanied by an analysis of the appropriateness and proportionality of the restrictive measure
         adopted by that State.
      
Secondly, the Landesgericht Linz harbours doubts as to whether Austrian policy in the sector of games of chance allowed under
         concessions is consistent and systematic. In its view there can be a consistent and systematic restriction on activity related
         to games of chance and wagers only where the legislature appraises all areas and sectors of games of chance and then intervenes
         according to the potential level of risk or dependency for each type of game. It states that this is not the case in Austria.
         The Austrian monopoly on games of chance permits substantial amounts of advertising in this sector and, to that extent, even
         active encouragement to participate in games of chance and betting is accepted.
      
Thirdly, the Landesgericht Linz doubts whether it is compatible with the requirements of appropriateness, necessity and proportionality
         to grant concessions only to public limited companies whose seat is in national territory in order to combat financial crime,
         money laundering or gambling addiction.
      
Fourthly, the Landesgericht Linz refers to the active pursuit, by the national authorities, of tax revenue from the sums paid
         by the gaming establishments. That situation conflicts with the Court’s case-law that restriction of the fundamental freedoms
         in the domain of games of chance must genuinely be intended to limit gambling opportunities and not to create a new source
         of finance.
      
According to the Landesgericht Linz, if the provisions of European Union law permit Mr Engelmann to be granted authorisation
         to operate a gaming establishment without being required to set up or acquire a public limited company with its seat in Austria,
         he could in principle apply for a concession. If he were granted such authorisation, there would no longer be an offence of
         unlawfully organising a game of chance for the purposes of Article of the StGB.
      
In those circumstances the Landesgericht Linz decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court
         for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Is Article EC … to be interpreted as precluding a provision which lays down that only public limited companies established
         in the territory of a particular Member State may there operate games of chance in casinos, thereby necessitating the establishment
         or acquisition of a company limited by shares in that Member State?
      
(2)      Are Articles EC and EC to be interpreted as precluding a national monopoly on certain types of gaming, such as games
         of chance in casinos, if there is no consistent and systematic policy whatsoever in the Member State concerned to limit gaming,
         inasmuch as the organisers holding a national concession encourage participation in gaming – such as public sports betting
         and lotteries – and advertise such gaming (on television and in newspapers and magazines) in a manner which goes as far as
         offering a cash payment for a lottery ticket shortly before the lottery draw is made (‘TOI TOI TOI – Believe in luck!’)?
      
(3)      Are Articles EC and EC to be interpreted as precluding a provision under which all concessions provided for under national
         gaming law granting the right to operate games of chance and casinos are issued for a period of years on the basis of a
         scheme under which Community competitors (not belonging to that Member State) are excluded from the tendering procedure?’
      
 Consideration of the questions referred
Mr Engelmann, who does not deny that he did not seek a concession to operate a gaming establishment in Austria, could not,
         in any event, obtain a concession since, first, he did not fulfil the conditions laid down by the national legislation at
         issue, namely he had not established a public limited company with its seat in Austria, and, secondly, all the concessions
         provided for by national legislation had already been granted to an Austrian company. According to the national court, the
         question whether facts satisfying the definition of the offence with which Mr Engelmann has been charged are present is linked
         to the issue of the lawfulness of that exclusion. The first and third questions should consequently be considered first.
      
 The first question
By its first question, the national court asks, in essence, whether Article EC prohibits two of the conditions imposed
         by the national legislation on holders of concessions to operate gaming establishments, namely, the obligation to adopt the
         legal form of a public limited company and the obligation to have their seat in national territory.
      
 The obligation on concessionaires to adopt the legal form of a public limited company
The condition that persons wishing to operate gaming establishments must adopt the legal form of a public limited company
         is a restriction on freedom of establishment within the meaning of Article EC. Such a condition prevents, inter alia, operators
         who are natural persons and undertakings which, in the country in which they are established, have chosen another corporate
         form from setting up a secondary establishment in Austria (see, to that effect, Case 107/Klopp [1984] ECR 2971, paragraph 19; Case 143/Stanton and L’Étoile [1988] ECR 3877, paragraph 11; and Case C‑171/Commission v Portugal [2004] ECR I‑5645, paragraph 42).
      
It is necessary to consider to what extent that restriction may nevertheless be allowed as a derogation expressly provided
         for by the EC Treaty, or justified, in accordance with the case-law of the Court, by overriding reasons in the public interest.
         Article 46(1) EC allows restrictions justified on grounds of public policy, public security or public health. A certain number
         of overriding reasons in the public interest which may also justify such restrictions have been recognised by the case-law
         of the Court, including, in particular, the objectives of consumer protection and the prevention of both fraud and incitement
         to squander money on gambling, as well as the general need to preserve public order.
      
As the European Commission has pointed out in its observations, and the Advocate General has stated in point of his Opinion,
         certain objectives might justify requiring operators to adopt a particular legal form. The obligations binding public limited
         companies in regard, in particular, to their internal organisation, the keeping of their accounts, the scrutiny to which they
         may be subject and relations with third parties could justify such a requirement, having regard to the specific characteristics
         of the gaming sector and the dangers connected with it.
      
The assessment to be made of whether such objectives are, in the present case, in fact being pursued by the requirement that
         the operator adopt the legal form of a public limited company and whether they are capable of constituting a justification,
         by way of a derogation expressly provided for by the Treaty or by way of an overriding reason in the public interest recognised
         by the Court’s case-law, and, as the case may be, whether that requirement respects the principle of proportionality cannot
         be carried out in the absence of additional information. In such circumstances, it is for the national courts to carry out
         that assessment.
      
 The obligation on persons holding concessions to operate gaming establishments to have their seat in national territory
As the Advocate General has observed, in essence, in points and of his Opinion, the obligation on persons holding concessions
         to operate gaming establishments to have their seat in national territory constitutes a restriction on freedom of establishment
         within the meaning of Article EC inasmuch as it discriminates against companies which have their seat in another Member
         State and prevents those companies from operating gaming establishments in Austria by way of an agency, branch or subsidiary.
      
Doubt is not in any way cast on that finding by the fact, raised by the Austrian Government, that the obligation in question
         is imposed on operators only from the time that they are selected and for the duration of the concession. As the Advocate
         General has stated in point of his Opinion, such an obligation may deter companies established in other Member States from
         applying, owing to the establishment and installation costs in Austria that they would have to incur if their application
         were successful. Nor can that system avoid a company whose seat is located in another Member State being prevented from operating
         gaming establishments in Austria through an agency, a branch or a subsidiary.
      
It is apparent from the Court’s case-law that, to the extent that a restriction, such as that which has been found to exist
         in the present case, is discriminatory, it is compatible with European Union law only if it is covered by an express derogating
         provision, such as Article EC, namely public policy, public security or public health (Case C‑388/Commission v Italy [2003] ECR I‑721, paragraph 19, and Case C‑153/Commission v Spain [2009] ECR I‑9735, paragraph 37).
      
Moreover, such a restriction must satisfy the conditions which flow from the Court’s case-law in regard to proportionality
         and may be regarded as appropriate for ensuring attainment of the objective relied upon only if it genuinely reflects a concern
         to attain it in a consistent and systematic manner (see, to that effect, Case C‑42/Liga Portuguesa de Futebol Profissional and Bwin International [2009] ECR I‑7633, paragraphs to 61).
      
The Austrian Government claims that the purpose of the obligation imposed on holders of concessions to operate gaming establishments
         to have their seat in national territory is to permit effective control of operators in the gaming sector with a view to preventing
         those activities from being carried out for criminal or fraudulent purposes. In its submission, that obligation permits, in
         particular, a degree of control to be exercised over the decisions taken by the company’s organs by reason of the presence
         of representatives of the State in organs such as the supervisory board.
      
Without it being necessary to determine whether that objective can fall within the definition of public policy, it need merely
         be pointed out in this respect that the categorical exclusion of operators whose seat is in another Member State appears disproportionate,
         as it goes beyond what is necessary to combat crime. There are indeed various measures available to monitor the activities
         and accounts of such operators (see, to that effect, Case C‑243/Gambelli and Others [2003] ECR I‑13031, paragraph 74; Joined Cases C‑338/04, C‑359/and C‑360/Placanica and Others [2007] ECR I‑1891, paragraph 62; and Commission v Spain, paragraph 39).
      
Inter alia, the possibility of requiring separate accounts audited by an external accountant to be kept for each gaming establishment
         of the same operator, the possibility of being systematically informed of the decisions adopted by the organs of the concession
         holders and the possibility of gathering information concerning their managers and principal shareholders may be mentioned.
         In addition, as the Advocate General has stated in point of his Opinion, any undertaking established in a Member State
         can be supervised and have sanctions imposed on it, regardless of the place of residence of its managers.
      
Moreover, having regard to the activity at issue, namely the operation of gaming establishments located in Austrian territory,
         there is nothing to prevent supervision being carried out on the premises of those establishments in order, in particular,
         to prevent any fraud being committed by the operators against consumers.
      
The answer to the first question is therefore that Article EC must be interpreted as precluding legislation of a Member
         State under which games of chance may be operated in gaming establishments only by operators whose seat is in the territory
         of that Member State.
      
 The third question 
Although the wording of the third question refers to the discriminatory conditions applicable under national legislation to
         the tendering procedure for the grant of concessions to operate gaming establishments in Austria, it is common ground, in
         the light of the information supplied by the Austrian Government, that no tendering procedure was organised and that there
         was no transparency in regard to the grant to Casinos Austria AG, with effect from January and January respectively,
         of the concessions which existed at the material time. Furthermore, those concessions were the only ones provided for
         by the national legislation.
      
The third question should therefore be understood as seeking a ruling as to whether Articles EC and EC preclude the
         grant without any competitive procedure of all the concessions to operate gaming establishments in the territory of a Member
         State for years.
      
Three distinct restrictions can be identified in this context, namely, first, the limitation of the number of concessions
         to operate gaming establishments, secondly, the grant of those concessions for years and, thirdly, the fact that they have
         been granted in the absence of any transparency. Those restrictions must be examined in turn in order to determine in each
         case in particular whether the restriction is suitable for achieving the objective or objectives invoked by the Member State
         concerned and whether it goes beyond what is necessary in order to achieve those objectives (Placanica and Others, paragraph 49, and Case C‑46/Carmen Media Group [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 60).
      
With regard, first, to the fact that the number of concessions to operate gaming establishments is limited, it is clear that
         such a limitation involves obstacles to the freedom of establishment and the freedom to provide services (Placanica and Others, paragraphs and 51).
      
It none the less appears, subject to verification by the national court, that, in the sector concerned, a limit of on the
         number of concessions and, therefore, of gaming establishments, which, according to information provided by the Austrian Government,
         represents one establishment for inhabitants, of its very nature makes it possible to limit opportunities for gambling
         and thus to attain an objective in the public interest recognised by European Union law (see, to that effect, Gambelli and Others, paragraphs and 67; Placanica and Others, paragraph 53; and Carmen Media Group, paragraph 84). Since consumers must travel to the premises of an establishment in order to be able to take part in the games
         of chance in question, the consequence of a limitation on the number of such establishments is to reinforce the barriers to
         taking part in such games.
      
With regard, secondly, to the duration of the concessions, it is clear from the Court’s case-law that the grant of concessions
         for a duration of up to years is liable to impede or even prohibit the exercise of the freedoms guaranteed by Articles
         EC and EC by operators in other Member States and therefore constitutes a restriction on the exercise of those freedoms
         (see, to that effect, Case C‑323/Commission v Spain [2006] ECR I‑2161, paragraph 44).
      
As regards the determination of whether that restriction is compatible with European Union law, it must be pointed out that
         freedom of establishment and the freedom to provide services, as fundamental principles of the Treaty, may be restricted only
         by rules which are justified by overriding reasons in the public interest and are applicable to all persons and undertakings
         pursuing an activity in the territory of the host Member State. Furthermore, in order to be so justified, the national legislation
         in question must be suitable for securing the attainment of the objective which it pursues and must not go beyond what is
         necessary in order to attain it (Case C‑323/Commission v Spain, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
That appears to be so in the present case, since the grant of concessions for a duration of up to years appears, subject
         to verification by the national court, to be justified having regard, in particular, to the concessionaire’s need to have
         a sufficient length of time to recoup the investments required by the setting up of a gaming establishment.
      
With regard, thirdly, to the procedure for the grant of the concessions at issue in the main proceedings, it must first be
         recalled that although, as European Union law now stands, service concessions are not governed by any of the directives by
         which the European Union legislature has regulated public procurement, the public authorities which grant such concessions
         are none the less bound to comply with the fundamental rules of the Treaties, in particular Articles EC and EC, and
         with the consequent obligation of transparency (see, to that effect, Case C‑324/Telaustria and Telefonadress [2000] ECR I‑10745, paragraphs and 61; Case C‑231/Coname [2005] ECR I‑7287, paragraphs to 19; Case C‑458/Parking Brixen [2005] ECR I‑8585, paragraphs to 48; Case C‑91/Wall [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 33; and Case C‑203/Sporting Exchange [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 39).
      
Without necessarily implying an obligation to call for tenders, that obligation of transparency, which applies when the service
         concession in question may be of interest to an undertaking located in a Member State other than that in which the concession
         is granted, requires the concession-granting authority to ensure, for the benefit of any potential tenderer, a degree of publicity
         sufficient to enable the service concession to be opened up to competition and the impartiality of the award procedures to
         be reviewed (Sporting Exchange, paragraphs and and the case-law cited).
      
The grant of a concession, in the absence of any transparency, to an operator located in the Member State of the awarding
         authority constitutes a difference in treatment to the detriment of operators located in other Member States, who have no
         real possibility of manifesting their interest in obtaining the concession in question. Such a difference in treatment is
         contrary to the principle of equal treatment and the prohibition of discrimination on grounds of nationality, and constitutes
         indirect discrimination on grounds of nationality prohibited by Articles EC and EC, unless it is justified by objective
         circumstances (see, to that effect, Coname, paragraph 19; Parking Brixen, paragraph 50; and Case C‑347/ASM Brescia [2008] ECR I‑5641, paragraphs and 60).
      
The fact that the issue of licences to operate gaming establishments may not be the same as a service concession contract
         does not, in itself, justify any failure to have regard to the requirements arising from Article EC, in particular the
         principle of equal treatment and the obligation of transparency (see, to that effect, Sporting Exchange, paragraph 46).
      
Indeed, the obligation of transparency amounts to a condition which must be met before a Member State can exercise its right
         to award licences to operate gaming establishments, irrespective of the method of selecting operators, because the effects
         of the award of such licences on undertakings which are established in other Member States and potentially interested in engaging
         in that activity are the same as those of a service concession contract.
      
Furthermore, it must be recalled that, when a licensing system pursuing legitimate objectives recognised by the case-law is
         introduced in a Member State, such a licensing system cannot render legitimate discretionary conduct on the part of the national
         authorities which is liable to negate the effectiveness of provisions of European Union law, in particular those relating
         to the fundamental freedoms such as those at issue in the main proceedings (see, in particular, Sporting Exchange, paragraph 49, and Carmen Media Group, paragraph 86).
      
It has consistently been held that if a prior administrative authorisation scheme is to be justified even though it derogates
         from such fundamental freedoms, it must be based on objective, non-discriminatory criteria known in advance, in such a way
         as to circumscribe the exercise of the national authorities’ discretion so that it is not used arbitrarily. Furthermore, any
         person affected by a restrictive measure based on such a derogation must have an effective judicial remedy available to him
         (see Sporting Exchange, paragraph 50, and Carmen Media Group, paragraph 87).
      
In the main proceedings, the total absence of transparency for the purposes of the grant of the concessions to operate the
         gaming establishments with effect from January and January does not comply with Articles EC and EC.
      
The Austrian Government has merely pointed out in that regard that the procedure for the grant of the concessions was in accordance
         with national law as it then stood and has argued that no obligation of transparency could have been deduced, at that time,
         from the Court’s case-law. The Austrian Government has also argued that operators who fulfilled the conditions laid down by
         the applicable legislation could have spontaneously lodged an application for a concession. However, none of those circumstances
         constitutes a justification in the form of a derogation expressly provided for by the Treaty or of an overriding reason in
         the public interest recognised by the Court’s case-law which can justify the grant of the concessions at issue in the main
         proceedings in the complete absence of transparency.
      
In the light of all of those considerations, the answer to the third question is that the obligation of transparency flowing
         from Articles EC and EC and from the principle of equal treatment and the prohibition of discrimination on grounds of
         nationality precludes the grant without any competitive procedure of all the concessions to operate gaming establishments
         in the territory of a Member State.
      
 The second question
In view of the answers given to the first and third questions and of the fact that the national court, as pointed out in paragraph
         of the present judgment, has established a link between the facts satisfying the definition of the offence with which Mr
         Engelmann has been charged and the question whether he was lawfully excluded from the possibility of obtaining a concession,
         it is not necessary to answer the second question.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article EC must be interpreted as precluding legislation of a Member State under which games of chance may be operated
            in gaming establishments only by operators whose seat is in the territory of that Member State.
2.      The obligation of transparency flowing from Articles EC and EC and from the principle of equal treatment and the prohibition
            of discrimination on grounds of nationality precludes the grant without any competitive procedure of all the concessions to
            operate gaming establishments in the territory of a Member State.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 