
Case C-260/Commission of the European Communities
v
Italian Republic
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Freedom of establishment and freedom to provide services – Public service concessions – Renewal of horse-race betting licences without inviting competing bids – Requirements of publication and transparency)
Opinion of Advocate General Sharpston delivered on March Judgment of the Court (Fourth Chamber), September Summary of the Judgment
Community law – Principles – Equal treatment – Discrimination on grounds of nationality 
(Arts EC and EC)
Public authorities concluding public service concession contracts are bound to comply with the fundamental rules of the EC
         Treaty, especially Articles and EC, and the prohibition of discrimination on grounds of nationality in particular, as
         being a specific expression of the general principle of equal treatment. The principles of equal treatment and non-discrimination
         on grounds of nationality imply, in particular, a duty of transparency which consists in ensuring, for the benefit of any
         potential tenderer, a degree of advertising sufficient to enable the service concession to be opened up to competition and
         the impartiality of procurement procedures to be reviewed.
      
It follows that a Member State which renews licences for horse-race betting operations without inviting any competing bids
         fails to fulfil its obligations under Articles and EC and, in particular, infringes the general principle of transparency
         and the obligation to ensure a sufficient degree of advertising.
      
The renewal of such licences without putting them out to tender cannot be justified by the need to discourage the development
         of clandestine activities for collecting and allocating bets, since it is not an appropriate means of attaining that objective
         and goes beyond what is necessary in order to preclude operators in the horse-race betting sector from engaging in criminal
         or fraudulent activities.
      
In addition, grounds of an economic nature, such as the need to ensure continuity, financial stability and a proper return
         on past investments for licence holders, cannot be accepted as overriding reasons in the general interest justifying a restriction
         of a fundamental freedom guaranteed by the Treaty.
      
(see paras 22-24, 31, 34-35, 38, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
September (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Freedom of establishment and freedom to provide services – Public service concessions – Renewal of horse-race betting licences without inviting competing bids – Requirements of publication and transparency)
In Case C‑260/04,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on June 2004,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by K. Wiedner, C. Cattabriga and L. Visaggio, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Italian Republic, represented by I. M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, and G. De Bellis, avvocato dello Stato, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant,
supported by:
Kingdom of Denmark, represented by J. Molde, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
Kingdom of Spain, represented by F. Díez Moreno, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
interveners,
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of Chamber, E. Juhász, R. Silva de Lapuerta, G. Arestis (Rapporteur) and J. Malenovský,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: E. Sharpston,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities seeks a declaration by the Court that, by renewing licences
         for horse-race betting operations without inviting any competing bids, the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations
         under the EC Treaty and has, in particular, infringed the general principle of transparency and the publication requirement
         resulting from Articles and EC.
      
 Legal context
 National legislation
In Italy, horse-race betting and gaming operations were originally run exclusively by the Unione Nazionale per l'Incremento
         delle Razze Equine (National Union for the Improvement of Horse Breeding, 'UNIRE'), which had the option of operating the
         services of collecting and taking bets directly or delegating them to third parties. The UNIRE entrusted the operation of
         those services to bookmakers.
      
Law No of December (ordinary supplement to the GURI No 303, of December 1996) subsequently assigned responsibility
         for the organisation and management of horse-race betting and gaming to the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Agriculture,
         Food and Forestry Resources, which were authorised either to operate the activity directly or through public bodies, companies
         or bookmakers appointed by them. Paragraph of Article of Law No states that there is to be a reorganisation, by way
         of regulation, of the organisational, functional, fiscal and penal aspects of horse-race betting and gaming, as well as the
         sharing out of revenue from such betting.
      
In implementation of Article of Law No 662, the Italian Government adopted Presidential Decree No of April (GURI
         No of June 1998, 'Decree No 169/1998'), which provided in Article that the Ministry of Finance, in agreement with
         the Ministry of Agricultural and Forestry Policy, was to award licences for horse-race betting operations to natural persons
         or companies fulfilling the relevant conditions by means of calls for tender organised in accordance with Community rules.
         As a transitional measure, Article of Decree No 169/provided for an extension of the period of validity of the licences
         granted by UNIRE until December 1998, or, if it proved impossible to organise calls for tender by that date, the end of
         1999.
      
A Ministerial Decree of April (GURI No of April 1999) subsequently approved the plan to reinforce the network
         of outlets collecting and taking bets on horse-races with a view to increasing the number of betting shops across the whole
         of Italy from to 000. Whereas new licences were put out to tender, the directive of the Ministry of Finance of December provided for the renewal of UNIRE's 'old licences'. In implementation of that directive, the decision of
         the Ministry of Finance of December (GURI No of December 1999, 'the contested decision') renewed the said licences
         for a period of six years starting January 2000.
      
Decree-Law No of December (GURI No of December 2001), converted after amendment into Law No of February
         (GURI No of February 2002), subsequently provided that the 'old licences' were to be reallocated in accordance
         with Decree No 169/1998, that is, by way of a Community call for tenders, and that they would remain valid until that reallocation
         had been finalised.
      
Finally, Decree-Law No of June extending time-limits and emergency provisions in budgetary matters (GURI No of June 2003), now Law No of August (GURI No of August 2003, 'Law No 200/2003'), provides in Article 8(1)
         that the financial status of each licence holder has to be assessed in order to resolve the problem of ‘the guaranteed minimum’,
         a levy which every licence holder had to pay to UNIRE irrespective of the actual amount of revenue generated during the year,
         which had proven to be excessive and had led to an economic crisis in the horse-race betting sector. In implementation of
         that law, the special commissioner appointed by UNIRE adopted decision No 107/of October 2003, which extended the
         period of validity of the licences that had already been granted until the deadline for the last payment, set for October
         2011, and, in any event, until the date on which the new licences are allocated by means of a call for tenders, in order to
         take the necessary steps to calculate the amounts to be paid by the licence holders.
      
 Facts and the pre-litigation procedure
Following a complaint lodged by a private operator in the horse-race betting sector, on July the Commission sent the
         Italian authorities a letter of formal notice pursuant to Article EC, drawing their attention to the incompatibility of
         the Italian system of granting licences for horse-race betting operations, and, in particular, the renewal by the contested
         decision of the old licences granted by UNIRE without a competitive tendering procedure, with the general principle of
         transparency and the requirement of publication resulting from Articles and EC. In response, the Italian Government
         announced, by letters dated November and January 2002, respectively, the bill for and the adoption of Law No of February Since the Commission was not satisfied with the implementation of the provisions of that law, it issued a reasoned opinion
         on October in which it asked the Italian Republic to adopt the necessary measures to comply with the reasoned opinion
         within two months of its receipt. By letter of December 2002, the Italian Government responded that it had to conduct a
         detailed assessment of the financial status of existing licence holders before issuing calls for tenders.
      
Since it received no further information concerning the completion of that assessment and the launching of a call for tenders
         for the purposes of reallocating the licences at issue, the Commission decided to bring the present action.
      
The Kingdom of Denmark and the Kingdom of Spain intervened in support of the Italian Republic.
 The action
The Commission puts forward a single ground in support of its action. It submits that, by renewing UNIRE's old licences
         for horse-race betting operations without inviting any competing bids, the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations
         under the Treaty and has, in particular, infringed the general principle of transparency and the publication requirement resulting
         from Articles and EC. 
      
The Commission states in its application that, under Community law, the award of licences for horse-race betting operations
         in Italy must be considered to be a public service concession. As such, it does not fall within the scope of Council Directive
         92/50/EEC of June relating to the coordination of procedures for the award of public service contracts (OJ L
         209, p. 1). However, it is clear from the case-law of the Court, and particularly the judgment in Telaustria and Telefonadress (Case C‑324/[2000] ECR I‑10745), that national authorities which award such licences must observe the principles of non-discrimination
         and transparency in order to ensure a degree of advertising sufficient to enable the services market to be opened up to competition
         and the impartiality of procurement procedures to be reviewed.
      
The Commission points out in this respect that the Italian Government failed to comply with those principles when it renewed
         UNIRE's existing licences without inviting competing bids. In the Commission's opinion, only the circumstances and reasons
         provided for in Articles and EC permit derogations from these principles. The justifications cited by the Italian Government
         are not among those expressly covered by Articles and EC and, in any event, the Italian Government has not shown the
         need for, and the proportionality of, the derogations in the light of the objectives pleaded.
      
In its defence, the Italian Government submits that Law No 200/and Decision No 107/are in conformity with the requirements
         of Community law concerning public service concessions. According to the Italian Government, the extension of UNIRE's old
         licences was justified by the need to ensure continuity, financial stability and a proper return on past investments for licence
         holders as well as the need to discourage recourse to clandestine activities, until the existing licences could be reallocated
         on the basis of tendering procedures. Such justifications constitute overriding requirements relating to the public interest
         which may justify derogations from the principles of the Treaty, including the obligation to open up the services market to
         competition. 
      
The Danish Government takes issue with the Commission's interpretation of the Court's judgment in Teleaustria and Telefonadress, cited above, as regards the scope of the requirement of transparency in circumstances such as those of the present case.
         The Spanish Government puts forward considerations relating to the specific features of the authorisation and organisation
         of gambling activities which, it asserts, the Commission has failed to take into account.
      
It should be noted at the outset that the Italian Government does not deny that Law No 200/and Decision No 107/took
         effect after expiry of the time-limit laid down in the reasoned opinion. 
      
In that regard it must be remembered that, according to settled case-law, the question whether a Member State has failed to
         fulfil its obligations must be determined by reference to the situation prevailing in the Member State at the end of the period
         laid down in the reasoned opinion and that the Court cannot take account of any subsequent changes (see, in particular, Case
         C-282/Commission  v Ireland [2005] ECR I‑4653, paragraph 40, and Case C-514/Commission v Spain [2006] ECR I‑963, paragraph 44).
      
Therefore, the provisions of Law No 200/and Decision No 107/cannot be of relevance for the purposes of determining
         whether the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations. It follows that the present action is concerned solely
         with a review of the contested decision. 
      
As the Commission rightly observed, the Italian Government has not denied, either during the pre-litigation procedure or in
         the course of these proceedings, that the award of licences for horse-race betting operations in Italy constitutes a public
         service concession. That classification was accepted by the Court in Placanica and Others (C‑338/04, C‑359/and C‑360/[2007] ECR I-0000), in which it interprets Articles and EC in relation to the same
         national legislation. 
      
It is common ground that public service concessions are excluded from the scope of Directive 92/(see Case C-458/Parking Brixen [2005] ECR I-8585, paragraph 42).
      
The Court has held that, notwithstanding the fact that public service concession contracts are, as Community law stands at
         present, excluded from the scope of Directive 92/50, the public authorities concluding them are, none the less, bound to comply
         with the fundamental rules of the EC Treaty, in general, and the principle of non-discrimination on the grounds of nationality,
         in particular (see, to that effect, Telaustria and Telefonadress, cited above, paragraph 60; Case C‑231/Coname [2005] ECR I-7287, paragraph 16; and Parking Brixen, cited above, paragraph 46).
      
The Court then stated that the provisions of the Treaty applying to public service concessions, in particular Articles and EC, and the prohibition of discrimination on grounds of nationality are specific expressions of the principle of equal
         treatment (see, to that effect, Parking Brixen, cited above, paragraph 48). 
      
In that regard, the principles of equal treatment and non-discrimination on grounds of nationality imply, in particular, a
         duty of transparency which enables the concession-granting public authority to ensure that those principles are complied with.
         That obligation of transparency which is imposed on the public authority consists in ensuring, for the benefit of any potential
         tenderer, a degree of advertising sufficient to enable the service concession to be opened up to competition and the impartiality
         of procurement procedures to be reviewed (see, to that effect, Telaustria and Telefonadress, paragraphs and 62, as well as Parking Brixen, paragraph 49, both cited above).
      
In the present case, it must be observed that the complete failure to invite competing bids for the purposes of granting licences
         for horse-race betting operations does not accord with Articles and EC, and, in particular, infringes the general principle
         of transparency and the obligation to ensure a sufficient degree of advertising. The renewal of the old licences without
         a call for tenders precludes the opening up to competition of the licences and review of the impartiality of the procurement
         procedures.
      
In those circumstances, it is necessary to consider whether the renewal may be recognised as an exceptional measure, as expressly
         provided for in Articles EC and EC, or justified, in accordance with the case-law of the Court, for reasons of overriding
         general interest (see, to that effect, Case C-243/Gambelli and Others [2003] ECR I-13031, paragraph 60, and Placanica and Others, cited above, paragraph 45). 
      
On that point, a certain number of reasons of overriding general interest have been recognised by the case-law, such as the
         objectives of consumer protection and the prevention of both fraud and incitement to squander on gaming, as well as the general
         need to preserve public order (Placanica and Others, cited above, paragraph 46).
      
Although the Member States are free to set the objectives of their policy on betting and gaming and, where appropriate, to
         define in detail the level of protection sought, the restrictive measures that they impose must nevertheless satisfy the conditions
         laid down in the case-law of the Court as regards their proportionality (Placanica and Others, cited above, paragraph 48).
      
It should therefore be examined whether the renewal of the licences without inviting any competing bids is suitable for achieving
         the objective pursued by the Italian Republic and does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve that objective.
         In any case, the renewal must be applied without discrimination (see, to that effect, Gambelli and Others, paragraphs and 65, and Placanica and Others, paragraphs 49). 
      
It is common ground that the Italian Government approved the plan to reinforce the network of outlets collecting and taking
         bets on horse-races with a view to increasing the number of betting shops across the whole of Italy from to 000. To
         carry out that plan, new licences were awarded on completion of a tendering procedure, but the existing old licences
         were renewed without competing bids having being invited. 
      
In that connection, the Italian Government has not relied on any derogation, such as the ones expressly provided in Article
         and EC. By contrast, the Italian Government justifies its renewal of the licences without a tendering procedure by the
         need, in particular, to discourage the development of clandestine activities for collecting and allocating bets.
      
However, the Italian Government has not explained in its defence the basis on which it was necessary not to invite competing
         bids and has not submitted arguments to dispute the infringement alleged by the Commission. In particular, the Italian Government
         has not explained how the renewal of the existing licences without inviting any competing bids could prevent the development
         of clandestine activities in the horse-race betting sector, and has simply submitted that Law No 200/and Decision No
         107/are in conformity with the requirements of Community law concerning public service concessions.
      
In that regard it is for the competent national authorities to show, first, that their legislation addresses an essential
         interest within the meaning of Articles and EC or an overriding requirement relating to the general interest as laid
         down in the case-law and, second, that that legislation conforms to the principle of proportionality (see, to that effect,
         Case C‑41/Commission v Netherlands  [2004] ECR I‑11375, paragraph 47; Case C‑38/Commission v Belgium [2005], not published in the ECR, paragraph 20, and Case C‑255/Commission v France  [2006] ECR I‑5251, paragraph 29).
      
Accordingly, it must be stated that the renewal of UNIRE's old licences without putting them out to tender was not an appropriate
         means of attaining the objective pursued by the Italian Republic, going beyond what was necessary in order to preclude operators
         in the horse-race betting sector from engaging in criminal or fraudulent activities.
      
In addition, as regards the grounds of an economic nature put forward by the Italian Government, such as the need to ensure
         continuity, financial stability and a proper return on past investments for licence holders, suffice it to point out that
         those cannot be accepted as overriding reasons in the general interest justifying a restriction of a fundamental freedom guaranteed
         by the Treaty (see, to that effect, Case C‑35/Verkooijen [2000] ECR I‑4071, paragraph 48, and Case C‑388/Commission v Italie [2003] ECR I‑721, paragraph 22).
      
It follows that none of the overriding reasons in the general interest pleaded by the Italian Government to justify the renewal
         of the old licences without any competing bids being invited can be accepted. 
      
Therefore, the Commission's application is well founded.
It follows from the above that, by renewing licences for horse-race betting operations without inviting any competing
         bids, the Italian Republic failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles and EC and, in particular, infringed the
         general principle of transparency and the obligation to ensure a sufficient degree of advertising. 
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission applied for costs and the Italian Republic has been
         unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, by renewing licences for horse-race betting operations without inviting any competing bids, the Italian
            Republic failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles and EC and, in particular, infringed the general principle
            of transparency and the obligation to ensure a sufficient degree of advertising.
2.      Orders the Italian Republic to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 