
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-15/Paranova Läkemedel AB and OthersvLäkemedelsverket(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Regeringsrätten)
         
«(Interpretation of Article EC and Article EC – Medicinal products – Withdrawal of parallel import licence in consequence of waiver of the marketing authorisation for the medicinal product of
               reference)»
            
Opinion of Advocate General Jacobs delivered on December I - Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber), May I - Summary of the Judgment
Free movement of goods – Quantitative restrictions – Measures having equivalent effect – Medicinal products – Withdrawal of a parallel import licence solely because of the withdrawal of the reference marketing authorisation at the request
                     of the holder – Not permissible – Justification – Protection of public health – Risk to the health of humans as a result of the continued existence of the medicinal product on the market of the Member State
                     concerned  
                  (Arts EC and EC)Article EC and Article EC preclude national legislation under which the withdrawal, at the request of its holder, of
         the marketing authorisation of reference of itself entails the withdrawal of the parallel import licence granted for the medicinal
         product in question.However, those provisions do not preclude restrictions on parallel imports of the medicinal product in question if there is
         in fact a risk to the health of humans as a result of the continued existence of that medicinal product on the market of the
         importing Member State.see para. 33, operative part
      
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)May (1)
((Interpretation of Article EC and Article EC – Medicinal products – Withdrawal of parallel import licence in consequence of waiver of the marketing authorisation for the medicinal product of
                  reference by the holder of that authorisation))
               
In Case C-15/01, 
            REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Regeringsträtten (Sweden) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings pending
            before that court between 
            
 Paranova Läkemedel AB, Farmagon A/S, Medartuum AB, Net Pharma KG AB, Orifarm AB, Trans Euro Medical AB, Cross Pharma AB, MedImport Scandinavia AB
and
 Läkemedelsverket,
on the interpretation of Article EC and Article EC,
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
composed of: J.-P. Puissochet, President of the Chamber, C. Gulmann (Rapporteur), F. Macken, N. Colneric and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: F.G. Jacobs, Registrar: H.A. Rühl, Principal Administrator, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
Paranova Läkemedel AB, Farmagon A/S, Medartuum AB, Net Pharma KG AB, Orifarm AB, Trans Euro Medical AB, Cross Pharma AB and
               MedImport Scandinavia AB, by U. Rutgersson Langenius, advokat, 
               
─
the Läkemedelsverket, by A. Åslundh-Nilsson and B. Lindström, acting as Agents, 
               
─
the Swedish Government, by A. Kruse, acting as Agent, 
               
─
the Danish Government, by J. Molde, acting as Agent, 
               
─
the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster, acting as Agent, 
               
─
the Norwegian Government, by T. Nordby, acting as Agent, 
               
─
the Commission of the European Communities, by L. Ström, acting as Agent, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of Paranova Läkemedel AB, Farmagon A/S, Medartuum AB, Net Pharma KG AB, Orifarm AB, Trans
               Euro Medical AB, Cross Pharma AB and MedImport Scandinavia AB, represented by C. Bus, advokat, of the Läkemedelsverket and
               of the Swedish Government, represented by A. Kruse, of the Danish Government, represented by J. Molde, of the Netherlands
               Government, represented by J. van Bakel, acting as Agent, of the Norwegian Government, represented by T. Nordby, and of the
               Commission, represented by L. Ström, at the hearing on October 2002,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on December 2002, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
By order of December 2000, received at the Court on January 2001, the Regeringsrätten (Supreme Administrative Court,
         Sweden) referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC two questions on the interpretation of Article
         EC and Article EC.  
         
            
Those questions were raised in proceedings brought by Paranova Läkemedel AB, Farmagon A/S, Medartuum AB, Net Pharma KG AB,
         Orifarm AB, Trans Euro Medical AB, Cross Pharma AB and MedImport Scandinavia AB (
         Paranova and Others) against the Läkemedelsverket (Swedish Medical Products Agency) concerning the consequences of the withdrawal of a marketing
         authorisation on the parallel import into Sweden by Paranova and Others of a medicinal product. 
         
Legal framework
Community law
         
            
Under Article EC quantitative restrictions on imports and all measures having equivalent effect are prohibited between
         Member States.  However, according to Article EC prohibitions or restrictions on import between Member States which are
         justified on the ground,  
          inter alia , of the protection of health of humans are authorised so long as they do not constitute a means of arbitrary discrimination
         or a disguised restriction on trade between Member States.  
         
            
According to Article of Directive 65/65/EEC of the Council of January on the approximation of provisions laid down
         by law, regulation or administrative action relating to proprietary medicinal products (OJ, English Special Edition 1965-(I), p. 17), as amended by Council Directive 93/39/EEC of June (OJ L 214, p. 22,  
         Directive 65/65), no medicinal product may be placed on the market in a Member State unless a marketing authorisation has been issued by
         the competent authority of that Member State. 
         
            
Article of Directive 65/defines the procedure, documents and information necessary for the issue of a marketing authorisation.
         
         
            
Article of Directive 65/states that the marketing authorisation is to be refused if after verification of the particulars
         and documents listed in Article it appears that the medicinal product is harmful in the normal conditions of use, or that
         its therapeutic efficacy is lacking or is insufficiently substantiated by the applicant, or that its qualitative and quantitative
         composition is not as declared.  
         
            
According to Chapter Va of the Second Council Directive 75/319/EEC of May on the approximation of provisions laid
         down by law, regulation or administrative action relating to proprietary medicinal products (OJ L 147, p. 13), as amended
         by Directive 93/39, the Member States are to set up a pharmacovigilance system which, amongst other things, imposes obligations
         on the holder of a marketing authorisation relating to the registration and notification of all adverse reactions to those
         medicinal products in humans.  To that end reports must be submitted to the competent authorities at regular intervals and
         must be accompanied by a scientific evaluation. 
         National law
         
            
The Läkemedelslagen (Swedish Medicinal Products Law) (1992:859), the Läkemedelsförordningen (Medicinal Products Order) (1992:1752)
         and the regulations drawn up by the Läkemedelsverket (1994:22) contain provisions implementing Directive 65/65. 
         
            
Under the regulations of the Läkemedelsverket a marketing authorisation from that agency is required in the case of parallel
         imports of medicinal products.  The Läkemedelsverket investigates in order to establish whether the directly imported medicinal
         product and the medicinal product to be imported as a parallel import are the same.  The withdrawal or suspension by the Swedish
         authorities or by those of the country of export of the marketing authorisation for the directly imported medicinal product
         entails the withdrawal or suspension of the authorisation for the parallel import into Sweden of the medicinal product.  However,
         on application the Läkemedelsverket can authorise the continued validity of that authorisation if the marketing authorisation
         is withdrawn or suspended for economic reasons and not for reasons relating to the effects or the safety of the medicinal
         product concerned. 
         The main proceedings and the questions referred
            
Hässle Läkemedel AB (
         Hässle) held the marketing authorisation in Sweden for the medicinal product known as  
         Losec enterokapslar (Losec enteric capsules, hereinafter the  
         capsules or  
         the old version of the product), while Paranova and Others held marketing authorisations for parallel imports (
         parallel import licences) of the capsules.  The product is used to treat conditions caused by stomach acid. 
         
            
The Läkemedelsverket decided, at Hässle's request, that the marketing authorisation granted to Hässle ceased to be valid on
         January 1999.  Hässle made its request for withdrawal of the marketing authorisation granted to it for the capsules because
         it intended to sell in Sweden a new variant of that product called  
         Losec MUPS enterotabletter (Losec MUPS enteric tablets, hereinafter the  
         tablets) in place of the capsules.  
         
            
The capsules continued to be sold in other Member States, under the marketing authorisations granted in those States. 
         
            
The two versions of Losec are therapeutic equivalents, that is to say that both versions contain the same dose of the active
         ingredient which is absorbed by the body at the same rate and to the same extent when taken orally. 
         
            
The active ingredient of the capsules contains omeprazole acid.  The tablets contain magnesium salt of omeprazole acid.  The
         salt dissolves more easily in water and is more stable.  It is thus easier to manufacture tablets than capsules.  
         
            
On September the Läkemedelsverket decided that the parallel import licences granted to Paranova and Others would expire
         on the same date as the marketing authorisation which Mr Hässle held.  On September the date on which those authorisations
         expired was, however, postponed until June 1999.  The Läkemedelsverket gave as the reason for its decision the fact that
         the capsules and the tablets had to be considered as two distinct medicinal products, both because the production methods
         differed and because the active ingredient, that is to say, omeprazole acid, of the capsules, had been replaced by another
         active ingredient in the tablets, that is to say, magnesium salt of omeprazole acid.  It pointed out that if the parallel
         import licence for the capsules did not expire, that product would be put on the market in Sweden without it being possible
         to meet the necessary safety requirements. 
         
            
Paranova and Others appealed to the Länsrätten i Uppsala Län (County Administrative Court for Uppsala, Sweden), against the
         decision of the Läkemedelsverket of September 1998.  The Länsrätten upheld that appeal by judgment of December 1998. 
         
            
The Läkemedelsverket appealed against that judgment to the Kammarrätten i Stockholm (Administrative Court of Appeal, Stockholm,
         Sweden), which, by judgment of February 1999, upheld that appeal, and held that the two medicinal products at issue were
         not sufficiently similar to be covered by the same marketing authorisation. 
         
            
Paranova and Others have appealed against that judgment to the Regeringsrätten, which, in the order for reference, pointed
         out that although the application was made in the form of a dispute as to whether a marketing authorisation granted for directly
         imported tablets can be the basis for a right to sell the capsules imported as parallel imports, it must first be decided
         whether the fact that the marketing authorisation held by Hässle for the capsules was withdrawn at its request must automatically
         entail the withdrawal of the authorisation granted to the parallel importers. 
         
            
It is against that background that the Regeringsrätten referred the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
         
         
1.
 Is it compatible with Articles EC and EC to revoke a marketing authorisation for a medicinal product imported as a parallel
         import on the ground that the marketing authorisation for the directly imported medicinal product has been revoked at the
         request of the holder of the authorisation for reasons unconnected with the safety of the medicinal product?  Does the answer
         depend on what specific reasons have given rise to that request or on whether the holder of the authorisation or companies
         belonging to the same group in other Member States continue to sell the medicinal product to which the parallel imports relate
         on the basis of marketing authorisations granted there? 
         
2.
 If the parallel importers rely on a new marketing authorisation for a directly imported medicinal product rather than on the
         old marketing authorisation, is authorisation for the continued marketing of the medicinal product imported as a parallel
         import precluded by the fact that that medicinal product and the directly imported medicinal product which is covered by the
         new marketing authorisation are different in the sense that the medicinal product imported as a parallel import is sold in
         the form of a capsule containing a certain acid (omeprazole) while the directly imported medicinal product is sold in the
         form of a tablet containing a magnesium salt of the acid?
         
The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
As a preliminary point it must be observed that:  ─ the parallel import licence for the capsules (the old version of the medicinal product) was issued by reference to the
         marketing authorisation granted by the national authorities for that same medicinal product;  ─ that marketing authorisation was withdrawn at the request of its holder for reasons unconnected with the safety of the
         product;  ─ that holder obtained a marketing authorisation for a new variant of that medicinal product, and  ─ the old version of the medicinal product is still marketed legally in other Member States under marketing authorisations
         which have not been revoked. 
         
            
In those circumstances, the question arises as to whether Article EC and Article EC preclude national legislation under
         which the withdrawal, at the request of its holder, of the marketing authorisation granted for the old version of a medicinal
         product of itself entails the withdrawal of the parallel import licence for that same product. 
         
            
It must be noted at the outset that the cessation of the validity of a parallel import licence following the withdrawal of
         the marketing authorisation of reference constitutes a restriction on the free movement of goods contrary to Article EC
         (Case C-172/Ferring  [2002] ECR I-6891, paragraph 33). 
         
            
However, such a restriction may be justified by reasons relating to the protection of public health, in accordance with the
         provisions of Article EC (
          Ferring , cited above, paragraph 33). 
         
            
It is for the national authorities responsible for the operation of the legislation governing the production and marketing
         of medicinal products ─ legislation which, as is made clear in the first recital of Directive 65/65, has as its primary objective
         the safeguarding of public health ─ to ensure that it is fully complied with.  Nevertheless, the principle of proportionality,
         which is the basis of the last sentence of Article EC, requires that the power of the Member States to prohibit imports
         of products from other Member States be restricted to what is necessary in order to achieve the aims concerning the protection
         of health that are legitimately pursued.  Thus, national legislation or practice cannot benefit from the derogation laid down
         in Article EC when the health and life of humans can be protected equally effectively by measures less restrictive of intra-Community
         trade (
          Ferring , paragraph 34). 
         
            
No reason has been put before the Court to justify why the mere fact that a marketing authorisation of reference was withdrawn
         at the request of its holder should entail the automatic withdrawal of the parallel import licence issued for the medicinal
         product in question (see, to that effect,  
          Ferring , paragraph 35). 
         
            
First, it must be observed that the withdrawal of a marketing authorisation of reference does not mean in itself that the
         quality, efficacity and non-toxicity of the old version is called into question.  In that respect it must be noted that that
         version continues to be lawfully marketed in the Member State of exportation under the marketing authorisation issued in that
         State (
          Ferring , paragraph 36). 
         
            
Next, although the competent authorities of the Member State of importation can, and indeed must, adopt the measures necessary
         for the purpose of verifying the quality, efficacity and non-toxicity of the old version of the medicinal product, it does
         not appear that that objective cannot be attained by other measures having a less restrictive effect on the import of medicinal
         products than the automatic cessation of the validity of the parallel import licence in consequence of the withdrawal of the
         marketing authorisation of reference (
          Ferring , paragraph 37). 
         
            
Although adequate monitoring of the old version of the medicinal product remains necessary and may in certain cases mean that
         information is requested from the importer, it must be pointed out that pharmacovigilance satisfying the relevant requirements
         of Directive 75/as amended can ordinarily be guaranteed for medicinal products that are the subject of parallel imports,
         such as those in question in the main proceedings, through cooperation with the national authorities of the other Member States
         by means of access to the documents and data produced by the manufacturer or other companies in the same group, relating to
         the old version in the Member States in which that version is still marketed on the basis of a marketing authorisation still
         in force (
          Ferring , paragraph 38). 
         
            
In that connection, it must be observed that the  
         Note for Guidance on Procedure for Competent Authorities on the Undertaking of Pharmacovigilance Activities (CPMP/PhVWP/175/95), published in June by the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products, requires, in
         its paragraph 3.1.4, that the terminologies used to code medicinal products, adverse reactions to them and diseases should
         ensure compatibility of reports between Member States and in particular ensure that reports entered into a database should
         be coded according to internationally approved terminologies or with mutually accepted terms allowing connections to be made
         with such terminologies. 
         
            
Finally, it must also be observed that, while it cannot be ruled out that there are reasons relating to the protection of
         public health which require a parallel import licence for medicinal products to be linked to a marketing authorisation of
         reference, no such reasons are apparent from the observations put before the Court. 
         
            
If there are no reasons of a general nature which could explain why the withdrawal of the marketing authorisation of reference
         should entail that of the parallel import licence, that does not preclude the existence, in specific circumstances, of reasons
         relating to the protection of public health which could justify the withdrawal of the parallel import licence. 
         
            
As the Court has held, such reasons could arise, for example, where there is in fact a risk to public health arising from
         the coexistence of two versions of the same medicinal product on the market of the importing Member State (
          Ferring , paragraph 43). 
         
            
In the light of those considerations the answer to the first part of the first question should be that Article EC and Article
         EC preclude national legislation under which the withdrawal, at the request of its holder, of the marketing authorisation
         of reference of itself entails the withdrawal of the parallel import licence granted for the medicinal product in question.
          However, those provisions do not preclude restrictions on parallel imports of the medicinal product in question if there
         is in fact a risk to the health of humans as a result of the continued existence of that medicinal product on the market of
         the importing Member State. 
         
            
In the light of that reply, there is no need to reply to the second part of the first question.  Similarly, it is not necessary
         to consider the second question in which the referring court essentially seeks to know whether the parallel import licence
         can be linked to the new marketing authorisation granted for the tablets. 
         
Costs
            
The costs incurred by the Swedish, Danish, Netherlands and Norwegian Governments and by the Commission, which have submitted
         observations to the Court, are not recoverable.  Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step
         in the action pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
in answer to the questions referred to it by the Regeringsträtten by order of December 2000, hereby rules: 
         
Puissochet
Gulmann 
Macken 
Colneric
Cunha Rodrigues 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on May 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
J.-P. Puissochet  
Registrar
President of the Sixth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: Swedish.
Top  
 