
ORDER OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
February (*)
      
(Appeal – Community trade mark – Regulation (EC) No 40/– Article 8(1)(b) – Invalidity proceedings – Community word mark CENTER SHOCK – Earlier national word mark CENTER – Examination of the likelihood of confusion)
In Case C‑353/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, brought on August 2009,
Perfetti Van Melle SpA, established in Lainate (Italy), represented by P. Perani and P. Pozzi, avvocati,
      
appellant,
the other parties to the proceedings being:
Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM), represented by J. Novais Gonçalves, acting as Agent,
      
defendant at first instance,
Cloetta AB, legal successor to Cloetta Fazer AB, established in Ljungsbro (Sweden), represented by M. Fammler, advocate, M. Treis, R. Niebel and E.M. Strobel, Rechtsanwälte,
      
intervener at first instance,
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
composed of J.-J. Kasel, President of Chamber, A. Borg Barthet and M. Berger (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
after hearing the Advocate General,
makes the following
Order
By its appeal, Perfetti Van Melle SpA (‘Perfetti’) seeks to have set aside the judgment of the Court of First Instance of
         the European Communities (now ‘the General Court’) of July in Case T-16/Perfetti van Melle v OHIM – Cloetta Fazer (CENTER SHOCK) (‘the judgment under appeal’), in which that court dismissed the action brought against the decision of the Fourth Board
         of Appeal of the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM) of November (Case
         R 149/2006-4), concerning invalidity proceedings between Cloetta Fazer AB (‘Cloetta Fazer’) and Perfetti (‘the contested decision’).
      
 Legal context
Council Regulation (EC) No 40/of December on the Community trade mark (OJ L 11, p. 1) was repealed by Council
         Regulation (EC) No 207/of February on the Community trade mark (OJ L 78, p. 1), which entered into force
         on April 2009. Nevertheless, the present dispute is governed, given the date of the facts, by Regulation No 40/94.
      
Article 8(1)(b) and (2)(a) of Regulation No 40/provided:
      
‘1.      Upon opposition by the proprietor of an earlier trade mark, the trade mark applied for shall not be registered:
...
(b)      if because of its identity with or similarity to the earlier trade mark and the identity or similarity of the goods or services
         covered by the trade marks there exists a likelihood of confusion on the part of the public in the territory in which the
         earlier trade mark is protected; the likelihood of confusion includes the likelihood of association with the earlier trade
         mark.
      
2.       For the purposes of paragraph 1, “Earlier trade marks” means:
(a)      trade marks of the following kinds with a date of application for registration which is earlier than the date of application
         for registration of the Community trade mark, taking account, where appropriate, of the priorities claimed in respect of those
         trade marks:
      
…
(ii)      trade marks registered in a Member State, or, in the case of Belgium, the Netherlands or Luxembourg, at the Benelux Trade
         Mark Office;
      
…’
Article 52(1)(a) of Regulation No 40/provided:
      
‘1.      A Community trade mark shall be declared invalid on application to the Office or on the basis of a counterclaim in infringement
         proceedings:
      
(a)      where there is an earlier trade mark as referred to in Article 8(2) and the conditions set out in paragraph or paragraph
         of that article are fulfilled’.
      
Article 56(2) and (3) of Regulation No 40/provided:
      
‘2.      If the proprietor of the Community trade mark so requests, the proprietor of an earlier Community trade mark, being a party
         to the invalidity proceedings, shall furnish proof that, during the period of five years preceding the date of the application
         for a declaration of invalidity, the earlier Community trade mark has been put to genuine use in the Community in connection
         with the goods or services in respect of which it is registered and which he cites as justification for his application, or
         that there are proper reasons for non-use, provided the earlier Community trade mark has at that date been registered for
         not less than five years. …
      
3.      Paragraph shall apply to earlier national trade marks referred to in Article 8(2)(a), by substituting use in the Member
         State in which the earlier national trade mark is protected for use in the Community.’ 
      
 Background to the dispute
On February 2000, Perfetti obtained from OHIM registration of the Community word mark CENTER SHOCK.
      
The goods in respect of which registration was granted fall within Class of the Nice Agreement of June concerning
         the international classification of goods and services for the purposes of the registration of marks, as revised and amended
         (‘the Nice Agreement’), and correspond to the following description: ‘Coffee, tea, cocoa, sugar, rice, tapioca, sago, artificial
         coffee; flour and preparations made from cereals, bread, pastry and confectionery, ices; honey, treacle; yeast, baking-powder;
         salt, mustard; vinegar, sauces (condiments); spices; ice; chewing gum’.
      
On July 2004, Cloetta Fazer filed an application for a declaration that the trade mark CENTER SHOCK was invalid on the basis
         of Article 8(1)(b), in conjunction with Article 52(1)(a) of Regulation No 40/94.
      
The earlier national marks relied on in support of the application for a declaration of invalidity were, inter alia: 
      
–      the word mark CENTER registered on October in Sweden in respect of the goods ‘caramels, cocoa, chocolate, confectionery,
         marmalade and other chocolate or sugar products, in the form of cakes, tablets, pralines, powder, and in any other form, liquorice,
         coffee, tea, yeast, baking-powder, biscuits, bread, honey, chewing gum, marzipan, sugar, treacle, glucose, salt and honey’
         falling within Class of the Nice Agreement; 
      
–      the word mark CENTER registered on August at the Benelux trade marks office in respect of the goods ‘coffee, tea,
         cocoa, sugar, rice, tapioca, sago, artificial coffee; chocolate, flour and preparations made from cereals, bread, biscuits,
         pastry and confectionery, ices; honey, treacle; yeast, baking‑powder; salt, mustard; pepper, vinegar, sauces (except for salad
         dressing); spices; ice’ falling within Class of the Nice Agreement. 
      
The application for a declaration of invalidity was directed against all the goods covered by the CENTER SHOCK trade mark.
      
By decision of November 2005, the OHIM Cancellation Division granted the application for a declaration that the CENTER
         SHOCK trade mark was invalid with regard to all the goods for which it had been registered.
      
On January 2006, Perfetti filed a notice of appeal at OHIM against the Cancellation Division’s decision.
      
By the contested decision, the Fourth Board of Appeal of OHIM dismissed the appeal. It held in essence that, having regard,
         first, to the identical nature of the goods designated by the CENTER and CENTER SHOCK trade marks and, secondly, to the visual,
         phonetic and conceptual similarities of those marks, a likelihood of confusion, within the meaning of Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation
         No 40/94, in Sweden and the Benelux countries had been established. 
      
 The proceedings before the General Court and the judgment under appeal 
By application lodged at the Registry of the General Court on January 2008, Perfetti brought an action against the contested
         decision.
      
Perfetti raised two pleas in law in support of its action. The first plea alleged that the evidence of the use and ownership
         of the earlier national word marks, relied on by the intervener in support of the application for a declaration of invalidity,
         was inadmissible. The second plea was that there was no likelihood of confusion, within the meaning of Article 8(1)(b) of
         Regulation No 40/94, between the marks at issue.
      
The General Court rejected both pleas as unfounded.
      
As regards the second plea, the General Court first defined, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the relevant public
         as consisting of ‘average consumers … who are reasonably well informed and reasonably observant and circumspect’ resident
         in Sweden and the Benelux countries.
      
With regard to the goods to be taken into consideration, the General Court then found, at paragraphs to of the judgment
         under appeal, that reliance must be placed, firstly, on the description of the goods covered by the earlier mark and not on
         the goods themselves and, secondly, on the list of goods as it appears in the registration document of the Community trade
         mark unless, following a request in accordance with Article 56(2) and (3) of Regulation No 40/94, proof of genuine use of
         the earlier mark has been furnished only in respect of some of the goods covered. At paragraph of that judgment, the Court
         thus held that ‘for the purposes of the comparison of the goods concerned, all the goods and services for which the Community
         trade mark and the earlier trade marks were registered and on which the application for a declaration of invalidity is based’
         had to be taken into account. At paragraph of that judgment, the Court noted that ‘the goods covered by the Community trade
         mark CENTER SHOCK … are identical to those covered by the earlier CENTER marks’.
      
Finally, with regard to the assessment of the likelihood of confusion, the General Court approved, at paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, the conclusion of the Board of Appeal according to which ‘the common element “center” gave the
         signs an overall phonetic, visual and conceptual similarity which is such that the relevant public, when faced with those
         trade marks in respect of identical goods, might believe that the trade marks have a common commercial origin’. In that regard,
         the Court held in paragraphs and of that judgment:
      
‘Although, visually and phonetically, the trade marks at issue are of a different length and consist of a different number
         of words, the overall impression produced by those trade marks leads to the finding that there is a certain visual and phonetic
         similarity between them owing to their common component.
      
Conceptually, the trade marks at issue, which refer, on account of their common component “center”, to the same idea, must
         be regarded as similar. …’ 
      
The General Court added, in paragraph 44, that ‘[t]he fact that the CENTER SHOCK trade mark is also composed of the word “shock”
         does not affect that finding’. Referring to Case C-120/Medion [2005] ECR I-8551, paragraphs and 37, it pointed out that, where a composite mark is composed by juxtaposing one component
         and another trade mark, that latter mark, even if it is not the dominant component in the composite mark, may still have an
         independent distinctive role in the composite mark. In such a case, the composite mark and that other mark may be considered
         to be similar.
      
In response to the various arguments raised by Perfetti, the General Court held, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal,
         that the word ‘center’ has ‘its own distinctive character’, whereas it found, at paragraph of that judgment, that ‘the
         word “shock” in the CENTER SHOCK trade mark does not have a strong semantic value which, combined with that of the word “center”,
         produces a whole that is conceptually different from the CENTER mark’.
      
By the judgment under appeal, the General Court dismissed the action in its entirety.
      
 Forms of order sought by the parties 
Perfetti requests the Court to set aside in its entirety the judgment under appeal, to annul the contested decision and to
         order OHIM and Cloetta Fazer to pay the costs of the proceedings before the Court of Justice and the General Court as well
         as those of the OHIM invalidity proceedings.
      
OHIM and Cloetta Fazer contend that the appeal should be dismissed and that Perfetti should be ordered to pay the costs. 
      
 The appeal 
Under Article of its Rules of Procedure, where an appeal is, in whole or in part, clearly inadmissible or clearly unfounded,
         the Court may at any time, acting on a report from the Judge-Rapporteur and after hearing the Advocate General, by reasoned
         order dismiss that appeal in whole or in part, without opening the oral procedure. 
      
In support of its appeal, Perfetti relies on a single plea in law, alleging that the General Court infringed Article 8(1)(b)
         of Regulation No 40/94, which is divided into two parts.
      
 The first part of the single plea
 Arguments of the parties
In support of this part, alleging the absence of a global assessment and failure to take into account the overall impression
         in the examination of the marks at issue, Perfetti claims that the General Court failed to have regard to established case-law
         according to which the assessment of the likelihood of confusion between two marks must be carried out in a comprehensive
         manner and be based on the overall impression created by them (see, inter alia, Case C-206/P Mülhens v OHIM [2006] ECR I‑2717, paragraph 19). The General Court, it is argued, based its finding of the existence of a similarity of
         the marks examined solely on the fact that they both include the element ‘center’. In so doing, the General Court failed to
         take into consideration the element ‘shock’ and to explain why the presence of that element was not sufficient to establish
         an overall impression of dissimilarity between the marks at issue.
      
OHIM and Cloetta Fazer submit that the General Court did carry out a full comparison of the trade marks in their entirety
         from the visual, phonetic and conceptual perspective. By criticising the General Court for having found that those marks were
         to be considered similar on those levels, in spite of the presence of the word ‘shock’, Perfetti is seeking to call into question
         the General Court’s findings of fact and its arguments are, accordingly, inadmissible.
      
 Findings of the Court
According to a line of settled case-law, referred to at paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, the risk that the
         public may believe that the goods or services in question come from the same undertaking or, as the case may be, from economically-linked
         undertakings constitutes a likelihood of confusion within the meaning of Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/(see, inter
         alia, Case C-334/P OHIM v Shaker [2007] ECR I-4529, paragraph 33, and Case C-51/P Becker v Harman International Industries [2010] ECR I-0000, paragraph and case-law cited).
      
The existence of a likelihood of confusion on the part of the public must be assessed globally, taking into account all factors
         relevant to the circumstances of the case (see, inter alia, OHIM v Shaker, paragraph 34, and Becker v Harman International Industries, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
According to that case-law, the global assessment of the likelihood of confusion must, as regards the visual, aural or conceptual
         similarity of the marks in question, be based on the overall impression created by them, bearing in mind, in particular, their
         distinctive and dominant components. The perception of the marks by the average consumer of the goods or services in question
         plays a decisive role in the global assessment of that likelihood of confusion. In that regard, the average consumer normally
         perceives a mark as a whole and does not proceed to analyse its various details (OHIM v Shaker, paragraph 35, and Becker v Harman International Industries, paragraph and the case-law cited). 
      
It is in the light of those principles that the first part of the plea put forward by Perfetti in support of its appeal should
         be examined.
      
In the present case, the General Court first of all observed, at paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the goods
         covered by the marks at issue are identical.
      
It is apparent from paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal that the General Court then found that, both visually
         and phonetically, and at the conceptual level, the marks at issue have a certain similarity on account of their common component
         ‘center’.
      
Finally, the General Court added that the presence of the word ‘shock’ did not affect that assessment. 
      
In that regard, the General Court recalled, rightly, that an earlier mark used by a third party in a composite sign can still
         have an independent distinctive role in the composite sign, even if it is not the dominant element of it (see Medion, paragraph 30).
      
In that context, the General Court held, at paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, that the word ‘center’ has
         its own distinctive character, whereas the word ‘shock’ does not have a strong semantic value which, combined with that of
         the word ‘center’, produces a whole that is conceptually different from the CENTER mark. 
      
It follows that, contrary to Perfetti’s assertions, the General Court did indeed carry out a global assessment, in accordance
         with the criteria defined by the case-law referred to in paragraphs to of this order, in the context of verifying the
         existence of a likelihood of confusion between the marks at issue. 
      
In so far as Perfetti is seeking to call into question the manner in which the relevant criteria were weighed up by the General
         Court, it should be noted that the analysis carried out by the General Court in that regard is factual in nature.
      
Under the second subparagraph of Article 256(1) TFEU and the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of
         Justice of the European Union, an appeal lies on points of law only. The General Court thus has exclusive jurisdiction to
         find and appraise the relevant facts and assess the evidence. The appraisal of those facts and evidence does not, therefore,
         save where they have been distorted, constitute a point of law which is subject, as such, to review by the Court of Justice
         on appeal (see, inter alia, Case C-498/P Aceites del Sur-Coosur v Koipe and OHIM [2009] ECR I-7371, paragraph 78, and Case C‑254/P Calvin Klein Trademark Trust v OHIM [2010] ECR I-0000, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
The first part of the single plea must therefore be rejected as clearly unfounded and, where appropriate, as clearly inadmissible.
      
 The second part of the single plea 
 Arguments of the parties
In support of this part, alleging that certain relevant factors were not taken into account, Perfetti claims that, in the
         assessment of the existence of a likelihood of confusion between the marks at issue, the General Court failed to take two
         relevant factors into consideration. The first factor concerns the goods covered by the marks at issue. In that regard, the
         General Court ignored the fact, which Perfetti claims to have proven, that the CENTER mark was only used by its proprietor
         for chocolate products, while the CENTER SHOCK sign was used by Perfetti only to designate chewing gums, that is, for different
         goods. The second factor relates to the degree of attention of the relevant public. By holding that an average consumer would
         fail to observe the visual, aural and conceptual differences between the marks at issue, the General Court applied the standard
         of a negligent consumer and not, as required by the case-law correctly cited moreover by the General Court, a reasonably well-informed
         and reasonably observant consumer.
      
In relation to the goods covered by the marks at issue, OHIM and Cloetta Fazer contend that, unless there are special circumstances,
         which have not been proven in this case, the marks must be compared on the basis of the goods for which they were registered,
         and not their alleged actual use. With regard to the degree of attention of the relevant public, they point out that the question
         is not whether that public will note or overlook the presence of the word ‘shock’ in the mark at issue, but whether it will
         be led to believe that the goods in question come from the same undertaking or from economically-linked undertakings.
      
 Findings of the Court
–       The goods to be taken into account in assessing the likelihood of confusion 
As indicated by the wording of Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94, the comparison of the earlier mark with the trade mark
         applied for, laid down in that provision, must relate to the goods that the two marks cover. However, in invalidity proceedings,
         Article 56(2) and (3) of Regulation No 40/enables the proprietor of the Community trade mark which is the subject of those
         proceedings to request that proof be furnished of the genuine use of the earlier mark in connection with the goods in respect
         of which that mark is registered and which are cited as justification for the application for a declaration of invalidity.
         
      
At paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the General Court found that Perfetti had not submitted in due time a request
         for proof of genuine use of the earlier marks.
      
In those circumstances, the General Court did not err in law by holding, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that,
         for the purposes of the comparison of the goods concerned, all the goods and services for which the Community trade mark and
         the earlier trade marks had been registered, and on which the application for a declaration of invalidity was based, should
         be taken into account.
      
Perfetti’s first argument must therefore be rejected as clearly unfounded.
      
–       The degree of attention of the relevant public 
According to settled case-law, for the purposes of the global  assessment of the likelihood of confusion, the average consumer
         of the category of goods concerned is deemed to be reasonably well-informed and reasonably observant and circumspect (see,
         regarding First Council Directive 89/104/EEC of December to approximate the laws of the Member States relating to
         trade marks (OJ L 40, p. 1), Case C-342/Lloyd Schuhfabrik Meyer [1999] ECR I‑3819, paragraph 26).
      
As Perfetti acknowledges, that was the criterion applied by the General Court in paragraph of the judgment under appeal.
      
Moreover, it should be recalled that, as indicated in paragraph of this order, the General Court has exclusive jurisdiction
         to find and appraise the relevant facts and that appraisal does not, save where the facts have been distorted, constitute
         a point of law which is subject, as such, to review by the Court of Justice on appeal.
      
With regard to the perception by the relevant public of the goods concerned, called into question by Perfetti, it must be
         stated that the analysis undertaken by the General Court in this regard is an assessment of a factual nature (see, to that
         effect, the order of February in Case C-17/P MPDV Mikrolab v OHIM, paragraph and case-law cited).
      
By claiming that, contrary to the finding of the General Court, a consumer who is reasonably well-informed and reasonably
         observant and circumspect should have observed the differences between the two marks at issue, Perfetti has not demonstrated
         any distortion of the facts and evidence by the General Court and does no more than request a re‑evaluation of the factual
         assessment made by that court. 
      
Accordingly, Perfetti’s second argument must be rejected as clearly inadmissible.
      
It follows that the second part of the single plea must be rejected as being in part clearly unfounded and in part clearly
         inadmissible.
      
In those circumstances the appeal must be dismissed in its entirety as being in part clearly unfounded and in part clearly
         inadmissible.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, which applies to appeal proceedings by virtue of Article thereof, the unsuccessful
         party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since OHIM and
         Cloetta Fazer have applied for costs and Perfetti has been unsuccessful, it must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fifth Chamber) hereby orders:
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
2.      Perfetti Van Melle SpA shall pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 