
Case C-455/Velvet & Steel Immobilien und Handels GmbH
v
Finanzamt Hamburg-Eimsbüttel
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Finanzgericht Hamburg)
(Sixth VAT Directive – Exemptions – Article 13B(d)(2) – Concept of assumption of obligations – Assumption of the obligation to renovate a property – Refusal of exemption)
Judgment of the Court (Third Chamber), April Summary of the Judgment
Tax provisions – Harmonisation of laws – Turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax – Exemptions provided for in the
            Sixth Directive 
(Council Directive 77/388, Art. 13B(d)(2))
Article 13B(d)(2) of the Sixth Directive 77/on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover
         taxes – Common system of value added tax: uniform basis of assessment must be interpreted as meaning that the concept of assumption
         of obligations excludes from the scope of that provision obligations which are non-pecuniary, such as the obligation to renovate
         a property.
      
A comparative analysis of the different language versions of that provision reveals terminological differences regarding the
         concept of assumption of obligations. In certain language versions, such as the German, French and Italian, that expression
         has a general meaning, whereas in others, such as English and Spanish, it clearly refers to pecuniary obligations.
      
The exemption provided for in Article 13B(d)(2) of the Sixth Directive concerns, in addition to the assumption of obligations,
         the negotiation and assumption of credit guarantees or any other security for money and the management of credit guarantees.
         It is common ground that all those transactions are, by their nature, financial services. The same conclusion is also valid
         for the other transactions set out in subparagraphs and to of Article 13B(d) of that directive. The assumption of the
         obligation to renovate a building is not, by its nature, a financial transaction within the meaning of Article 13B(d) of the
         Sixth Directive and therefore it does not come within the scope of that provision.
      
(see paras 18, 21-23, 26, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
April (*)
      
(Sixth VAT Directive – Exemptions – Article 13B(d)(2) – Concept of assumption of obligations – Assumption of the obligation to renovate a property – Refusal of exemption)
In Case C‑455/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Finanzgericht Hamburg (Germany), made by decision of December
         2005, received at the Court on December 2005, in the proceedings
      
Velvet & Steel Immobilien und Handels GmbH
v
Finanzamt Hamburg-Eimsbüttel,
      
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of A. Rosas, President of the Chamber, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, U. Lõhmus (Rapporteur), A. Ó Caoimh and P. Lindh, Judges,
Advocate General: M. Poiares Maduro,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       the German Government, by M. Lumma and U. Forsthoff, acting as Agents,
–       the Greek Government, by K. Georgiadis and Z. Chatzipavlou, acting as Agents,
–       the French Government, by G. de Bergues and J.‑C. Gracia, acting as Agents,
–       Ireland, by D. O’Hagan, acting as Agent, G. Clohessy SC and C. Ramsay BL,
–       the Italian Government, by I. M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, and S. Fiorentino, avvocato dello Stato,
–       the Cypriot Government, by D. Ergatoudi, acting as Agent,
–       the United Kingdom Government, by T. Harris and T. Ward, acting as Agents,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by D. Triantafyllou, acting as Agent,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 13B(d)(2) of Sixth Council Directive 77/388/EEC
         of May on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes – Common system of value added
         tax: uniform basis of assessment (OJ L 145, p. 1, ‘the Sixth Directive’).
      
The reference has been made in the context of proceedings between Velvet & Steel Immobilien und Handels GmbH (‘Velvet & Steel’)
         and Finanzamt (Tax Office) Hamburg-Eimsbüttel (‘the Finanzamt’) regarding the charging of value added tax (‘VAT’) on the assumption
         by Velvet & Steel of the obligation to renovate a building.
      
 Legal context
 Community law
Under Article 13B(d)(2) of the Sixth Directive:
‘Without prejudice to other Community provisions, Member States shall exempt the following under conditions which they shall
         lay down for the purpose of ensuring the correct and straightforward application of the exemptions and of preventing any possible
         evasion, avoidance or abuse: 
      
…
(d)      the following transactions:
…
2.      the negotiation of or any dealings in credit guarantees or any other security for money and the management of credit guarantees
         by the person who is granting the credit’.
      
 National law
According to Paragraph 1(1)(1) of the Law on Turnover Tax (Umsatzsteuergesetz, ‘the UStG’), in the version in force at the
         time of the events in the main proceedings, turnover tax is chargeable on supplies of goods and services which an operator,
         in the course of his business, makes for consideration within Germany.
      
Paragraph 4(8)(g) of the UStG provides that the following transactions falling under Paragraph 1(1)(1) to 1(1)(3) are to be
         exempt from turnover tax:
      
‘The assumption of obligations, guarantees and other securities and the negotiation of those transactions.’
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
In September 1998, Burmeister Immobilien GmbH (‘Burmeister’) sold a piece of land with a rented apartment building on it.
         In July 1999, two individuals executed a similar sale. In the two contracts of sale relating to those transactions, the vendors
         undertook to carry out the renovation work needed on the buildings concerned. The two individuals also assumed a rent guarantee.
      
Following the sales, the vendors concluded, on September and July respectively, contracts with Velvet & Steel
         entitled ‘assignment of a part of the purchase price in return for assumption of obligations’.
      
By those contracts, Velvet & Steel assumed responsibility for the vendors’ obligation to renovate the buildings as well as
         for the rent guarantee in return for a part of the purchase price of those buildings, namely DEM for the contract
         concluded with Burmeister and DEM for the contract concluded with the individuals. Under those contracts, Velvet &
         Steel undertook to indemnify the vendors against all costs and claims to which the purchasers of the buildings were entitled
         in respect of the renovation works and the rent guarantee.
      
The two purchasers of the buildings subsequently agreed to release Velvet & Steel from its obligations in return for payment
         to them of part of that fraction of the purchase price ceded to it. The profit resulting from that transaction, namely DEM and DEM respectively with regard to the contracts concluded with Burmeister and with the individuals concerned, was
         to remain with Velvet & Steel as ‘payment or lump‑sum compensation/indemnity in respect of any loss of profit’. Velvet & Steel
         declared that profit for VAT purposes.
      
Following an inspection, the Finanzamt deemed the assumption by Velvet & Steel of the obligation to renovate to be a provision
         of services and necessarily subject to VAT pursuant to the first sentence of Paragraph 1(1)(1) of the UStG. Velvet & Steel
         lodged a complaint against the decision by the Finanzamt to charge tax, which the latter dismissed on June 2003.
      
On July 2003, Velvet & Steel challenged that decision before the Finanzgericht (Finance Court) Hamburg (Germany). Basing
         itself on the argument that neither of the two obligations which it had assumed had actually been carried out, it maintained
         before that court that the transactions at issue should be classed as an ‘assumption of obligations’ within the meaning of
         Paragraph 4(8)(g) of the UStG, which is the transposition into national law of Article 13B(d)(2) of the Sixth Directive. The
         Finanzamt contended, conversely, that the provision of Community law relied on refers exclusively to the assumption of pecuniary
         obligations, whereas the assumption of the obligation to renovate a building comes within the category of service obligations.
      
The national court asks whether the assumption of the obligation to renovate property constitutes a transaction which is exempt
         from turnover tax pursuant to Paragraph 4(8)(g) of the UStG. It considers that the wording of that provision excludes any
         limitation of the exemption to pecuniary obligations. The court is uncertain, nevertheless, whether that interpretation is
         in conformity with Article 13B(d)(2) of the Sixth Directive since, unlike the German and French language versions, the English
         language version of that provision refers not to the assumption of obligations generally but solely to special forms of guarantees
         or securities. Against that background, the Finanzgericht Hamburg decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following
         question to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Is Article 13B(d)(2) of [the] Sixth … Directive ... to be interpreted, with respect to the concept of … assumption of obligations
         …, as meaning that only pecuniary obligations are to be subsumed under that concept or does that provision also include the
         assumption of other obligations, for example, service obligations?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
By its question, the referring court asks essentially whether Article 13B(d)(2) of the Sixth Directive must be interpreted
         as meaning that the concept of assumption of obligations excludes from the scope of that provision obligations which are non-pecuniary,
         such as the obligation to renovate a property.
      
As a preliminary point, it should be noted that the terms used to specify the exemptions provided for by Article of the
         Sixth Directive are to be interpreted strictly, since they constitute exceptions to the general principle that VAT is to be
         levied on all services supplied for consideration by a taxable person (see, inter alia, Case C-472/Arthur Andersen [2005] ECR I‑1719, paragraph 24; Case C‑415/Stichting Kinderopvang Enschede [2006] ECR I‑1385, paragraph 13; and Case C‑89/United Utilities [2006] ECR I-6813, paragraph 21).
      
It is also settled case‑law that those exemptions constitute independent concepts of Community law whose purpose is to avoid
         divergences in the application of the VAT system from one Member State to another (Case C‑8/Taksatorringen [2003] ECR I‑13711, paragraph 37, and Joined Cases C‑394/and C‑395/Ygeia [2005] ECR I‑10373, paragraph 15).
      
Community provisions must therefore be interpreted and applied uniformly in the light of the versions existing in all the
         Community languages (see Case C‑449/Rockfon [1995] ECR I‑4291, paragraph 28, and Case C‑280/Jyske Finans [2005] ECR I‑10683, paragraph 31).
      
In that respect, it must be noted that the Sixth Directive does not lay down any definition of the concept of assumption of
         obligations contained in Article 13B(d)(2).
      
A comparative analysis of the different language versions of that provision of the Sixth Directive reveals terminological
         differences regarding the concept of assumption of obligations. In certain language versions, such as the German, French and
         Italian, that expression has a general meaning, whereas in others, such as English and Spanish, it clearly refers to pecuniary
         obligations.
      
It is settled case-law that the wording used in one language version of a Community provision cannot serve as the sole basis
         for the interpretation of that provision, or be made to override the other language versions in that regard. Such an approach
         would be incompatible with the requirement of the uniform application of Community law (see Case C‑149/Institute of the Motor Industry [1998] ECR I‑7053, paragraph 16).
      
In view of the linguistic differences, the scope of the phrase in question cannot be determined on the basis of an interpretation
         which is exclusively textual. That expression must therefore be interpreted in the light of the context in which it is used
         and of the aims and scheme of the Sixth Directive (see, to that effect, Case C‑2/SDC [1997] ECR I‑3017, paragraph 22; Case C‑428/Fonden Marselisborg Lystbådehavn [2005] ECR I‑1527, paragraph 42; and Jyske Finans, paragraph 31).
      
Concerning the context in which the expression is used, it is clear that the exemption provided for in Article 13B(d)(2) of
         the Sixth Directive concerns, in addition to the assumption of obligations, the negotiation and assumption of credit guarantees
         or any other security for money and the management of credit guarantees. It is common ground that all those transactions are,
         by their nature, financial services.
      
The same conclusion is also valid for the other transactions set out in subparagraphs and to of Article 13B(d) of the
         Sixth Directive. Thus, subparagraph concerns credit; subparagraph 3, deposit and current accounts, payments, transfers,
         debts, cheques and other negotiable instruments; subparagraph 4, legal tender; subparagraph 5, shares and other securities,
         and subparagraph 6, management of special investment funds. Although those transactions, defined according to the nature of
         the services provided, do not necessarily have to be carried out by banks or other financial institutions (see, to that effect,
         SDC, paragraph 32; Case C‑305/MKG-Kraftfahrzeuge-Factoring [2003] ECR I‑6729, paragraph 64; and Case C‑169/Abbey National [2006] ECR I‑4027, paragraph 66), they relate, nevertheless, as a whole, to the sphere of financial transactions.
      
In the present case, the assumption of the obligation to renovate a building is not, by its nature, a financial transaction
         within the meaning of Article 13B(d) of the Sixth Directive and therefore it does not come within the scope of that provision.
      
That interpretation is, moreover, supported by the purpose of the exemption for financial transactions, which, as the Commission
         of the European Communities explains in its written observations, is to alleviate the difficulties connected with determining
         the tax base and the amount of VAT deductible and to avoid an increase in the cost of consumer credit. Since subjecting the
         assumption of an obligation to renovate a property to VAT does not present such difficulties, that transaction cannot be exempted.
      
Consequently, the conclusion that it was the intention of the Community legislature to exempt from VAT the assumption of non‑pecuniary
         obligations is not supported by the wording, context or purpose of Article 13B(d)(2) of the Sixth Directive. It follows that
         the assumption of such obligations is subject to VAT.
      
Therefore, the reply to the question submitted must be that Article 13B(d)(2) of the Sixth Directive must be interpreted as
         meaning that the concept of assumption of obligations excludes from the scope of that provision obligations which are non-pecuniary,
         such as the obligation to renovate a property.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
Article 13B(d)(2) of Sixth Council Directive 77/388/EEC of May on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States
            relating to turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax: uniform basis of assessment must be interpreted as meaning
            that the concept of assumption of obligations excludes from the scope of that provision obligations which are non-pecuniary,
            such as the obligation to renovate a property.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 