
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-332/Commission of the European CommunitiesvUnited Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
«(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Failure to transpose Directive 1999/13/EC)»
Judgment of the Court (Third Chamber), November Summary of the Judgment
Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Examination of the merits by the Court – Situation to be taken into consideration – Situation at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion(Art. EC)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)November (1)
((Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Failure to transpose Directive 1999/13/EC))
In Case C-332/02, 
 Commission of the European Communities,  represented by X. Lewis, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant, 
v
 United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,  represented initially by P. Ormond and subsequently by C. Jackson, acting as Agents, and M. Demetriou, barrister, with an
            address for service in Luxembourg,
            
defendant, 
 APPLICATION for a declaration that, by failing to adopt the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply
            with Council Directive 1999/13/EC of March on the limitation of emissions of volatile organic compounds due to the
            use of organic solvents in certain activities and installations (OJ L 85, p. 1) or, at least, by failing to inform the
            Commission of such measures, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations
            under Article of that directive,
            
THE COURT (Third Chamber),,
 composed of: A. Rosas (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, R. Schintgen and N. Colneric, Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed, Registrar: R. Grass, 
            
having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By application lodged at the Court Registry on September 2002, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action
         under Article EC for a declaration that, by failing to adopt the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary
         to comply with Council Directive 1999/13/EC of March on the limitation of emissions of volatile organic compounds
         due to the use of organic solvents in certain activities and installations (OJ L 85, p. 1) or, at least, by failing to
         inform the Commission of such measures, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland has failed to fulfil its
         obligations under Article of that directive. 
         
Legal background
            
 Article of Directive 1999/13, as corrected (OJ L 188, p. 54), provides that Member States were to bring into force
         the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with that directive not later than April and
         that they were forthwith to inform the Commission thereof. 
         Pre-litigation procedure
            
 Having received no information concerning any measures adopted by the United Kingdom in order to comply with Directive 1999/13,
         the Commission initiated the procedure provided for in Article EC. After sending the United Kingdom a letter of formal
         notice to submit its observations, the Commission, on December 2001, issued a reasoned opinion in which it found that the
         directive had not been transposed in its entirety in Great Britain and Northern Ireland and that there was no information
         to show that it had been transposed in Gibraltar. The United Kingdom was requested to adopt the measures necessary to comply
         with that opinion within a period of two months from the date of its notification. 
         
            
 By letter of April 2002, the United Kingdom Permanent Representation to the European Union communicated the formal directions
         adopted for the purpose of transposing Directive 1999/in England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. The United Kingdom
         authorities indicated that further measures were necessary in order to transpose that directive in its entirety and to regulate
         certain sectors of the industry which were not covered by the existing legisation and stated that transposition of the directive
         would be completed by the end of in relation to England and Wales. Scotland and Northern Ireland would follow a similar
         timetable for the work. As regards Gibraltar, a draft ordinance was being adopted. 
         
            
 Since it considered that the United Kingdom had not adopted, within the period prescribed by the reasoned opinion, the measures
         necessary to comply therewith, the Commission brought this action. 
         The action
            
 The Commission claims that it has not been informed of the adoption of the measures taken to comply with Directive 1999/in Great Britain, Northern Ireland and Gibraltar. Since it is in possession of no other information enabling it to conclude
         that the United Kingdom has adopted the necessary provisions, it assumes that the United Kingdom has not adopted them and
         has thus failed to fulfil its obligations under Directive 1999/13. 
         
            
 The United Kingdom states that, so far as Gibraltar is concerned, a Bill fully transposing Directive 1999/was adopted by
         the House of Assembly on November 2002. It entered into force as law on February 2003. 
         
            
 As regards England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, further legislation is needed in order fully to transpose Directive
         1999/13. The regulations are to enter into force during 2003. 
         
            
 The United Kingdom does not dispute that, at the expiry of the period prescribed in the reasoned opinion, the measures necessary
         to transpose fully the directive had not yet been adopted, but sets out the progress in the work of transposition. 
         
            
 It is, in that regard, settled case-law that the question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations must
         be determined by reference to the situation prevailing in the Member State at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned
         opinion and that the Court cannot take account of any subsequent changes (see, among others, Case C-63/Commission  v  
          United Kingdom  [2003] ECR I-821, paragraph 11). 
         
            
 In the present case, it has been established that, when the period prescribed in the reasoned opinion expired, no measures
         transposing Directive 1999/into national law had been adopted. 
         
            
 Therefore, the Commission's action must be considered well founded. 
         
            
 It must accordingly be held that, by failing to adopt the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply
         with Directive 1999/13, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under
         Article thereof. 
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party's pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the United Kingdom has been
         unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Third Chamber)
 hereby:  
         
1.
 Declares that, by failing to adopt the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Council Directive
            1999/13/EC of March on the limitation of emissions of volatile organic compounds due to the use of organic solvents
            in certain activities and installations, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland has failed to fulfil its
            obligations under Article of that directive; 
            
2.
 Orders the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to pay the costs. 
            
Rosas
Schintgen 
Colneric 
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on November 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
A. Rosas  
Registrar
President of the Third Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: English.
Top  
 