
Case C-302/Zino Davidoff SA
v
Bundesfinanzdirektion Südost
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Finanzgericht München)
(Trade marks – International registration – Protocol Relating to the Madrid Agreement – Regulation (EC) No 40/– Article – International registration and a Community trade mark having the same effects in the Community – Regulation (EC) No 1383/– Article 5(4) – Goods suspected of infringing a trade mark – Customs action – Proprietor of a Community trade mark – Right to secure action also in Member States other than the Member State in which the application is lodged – Extension to the holder of an international registration)
Summary of the Judgment
Common commercial policy – Measures to prevent counterfeit or pirated goods being placed on the market – Regulation No 1383/– Action by the customs authorities
(Council Regulations No 40/94, Art. 146, No 1383/2003, Art. 5(4), and No 1992/2003)
Article 5(4) of Regulation No 1383/concerning customs action against goods suspected of infringing certain intellectual
         property rights and the measures to be taken against goods found to have infringed such rights, read in the light of Article
         of Regulation No 40/on the Community trade mark, as amended by Regulation (No) 1992/2003, is to be interpreted as allowing
         the holder of an internationally registered trade mark to secure action by the customs authorities of one or more other Member
         States, besides that of the Member State in which it is lodged, just like the proprietor of a Community trade mark.
      
Article 146(2) of Regulation No 40/94, as inserted by Regulation No 1992/2003, provides that the international registration
         of a trade mark designating the European Community is to have the same effect as the registration of a mark as a Community
         trade mark. The Community legislature thus meant, so far as their practical effects are concerned, to treat internationally
         registered marks as Community trade marks. Following the assimilation into Community trade marks of internationally registered
         trade marks, it must necessarily be accepted that, in conformity with the Community legislature’s intention in adopting Regulation
         No 1992/2003, the application of Article 5(4) of Regulation No 1383/may also be requested by the holder of an internationally
         registered trade mark. 
      
(see paras 21-22, 25-26, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Trade marks – International registration – Protocol Relating to the Madrid Agreement – Regulation (EC) No 40/– Article – International registration and a Community trade mark having the same effects in the Community – Regulation (EC) No 1383/– Article 5(4) – Goods suspected of infringing a trade mark – Customs action – Proprietor of a Community trade mark – Right to secure action also in Member States other than the Member State in which the application is lodged – Extension to the holder of an international registration)
In Case C‑302/08,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Finanzgericht München (Germany), made by decision of June
         2008, received at the Court on July 2008, in the proceedings
      
Zino Davidoff SA
v
Bundesfinanzdirektion Südost,
      
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
composed of J.-C. Bonichot, President of the Chamber, J. Makarczyk and L. Bay Larsen (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Zino Davidoff SA, by U. Hildebrandt, Rechtsanwalt,
–        the Czech Government, by M. Smolek, acting as Agent,
–        the Italian Government, by I. Bruni, acting as Agent, assisted by G. Albenzio, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Portuguese Government, by L. Inez Fernandes and R. Solnado Cruz, acting as Agents,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by H. Krämer and B.-R. Killmann, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 5(4) of Council Regulation (EC) No 1383/of July concerning customs action against goods suspected of infringing certain intellectual property rights and the
         measures to be taken against goods found to have infringed such rights (OJ L 196, p. 7) and Article of Council Regulation
         (EC) No 40/of December on the Community trade mark (OJ L 11, p. 1), as amended by Council Regulation (EC)
         No 1992/of October (OJ L 296, p. 1; ‘Regulation No 40/94’).
      
The reference has been made in the course of proceedings between Zino Davidoff SA (‘Davidoff’) and the Bundesfinanzdirektion
         Südost (South Eastern Federal Revenue Office) concerning Davidoff’s application for border seizure in respect of internationally
         registered trade marks, of which it is the holder.
      
 Legal context
Article of Regulation No 1383/states:
      
‘1.      This Regulation sets out the conditions for action by the customs authorities when goods are suspected of infringing an intellectual
         property right in the following situations:
      
(a)      when they are entered for release for free circulation, export or re-export …;
(b)      when they are found during checks on goods entering or leaving the Community customs territory …, placed under a suspensive
         procedure … in the process of being re-exported subject to notification … or placed in a free zone or free warehouse … .
      
2.      This Regulation also fixes the measures to be taken by the competent authorities when the goods referred to in paragraph are found to infringe intellectual property rights.’
      
Article of the same regulation specifies:
      
‘1.      For the purposes of this Regulation, “goods infringing an intellectual property right” means:
(a)      counterfeit goods; namely:
(i)      goods, including packaging, bearing without authorisation a trade mark identical to the trade mark validly registered in respect
         of the same type of goods, or which cannot be distinguished in its essential aspects from such a trade mark, and which thereby
         infringes the trade mark-holder’s rights under Community law, as provided for by Council Regulation (EC) No 40/of December
         on the Community trade mark or the law of the Member State in which the application for action by the customs authorities
         is made;
      
…
…
2.      For the purposes of that Regulation, “right-holder” means;
(a)      the holder of a trade mark, copyright … 
...’
Article reads as follows:
      
‘1.      In each Member State a right-holder may apply in writing to the competent customs department for action by the customs authorities
         when goods are found in one of the situations referred to in Article 1(1) (application for action).
      
…
4.      Where the applicant is the right-holder of a Community trade mark …, an application may, in addition to requesting action
         by the customs authorities of the Member State in which it is lodged, request action by the customs authorities of one or
         more other Member States.
      
…’
The Community acceded with effect from October to the Protocol relating to the Madrid Agreement concerning the international
         registration of marks adopted at Madrid on June (‘the Protocol’) pursuant to Council Decision 2003/793/EC of October
         (OJ L 296, p. 20).
      
Article of the Protocol states:
      
‘Effects of international registration
(1)(a) From the date of the registration or recordal effected …, the protection of the mark in each of the contracting parties concerned
         shall be the same as if the mark had been deposited direct with the office of that contracting party. If no refusal has been
         notified to the International Bureau … or if a refusal notified … has been withdrawn subsequently, the protection of the mark
         in the contracting party concerned shall, as from the said date, be the same as if the mark had been registered by the office
         of that contracting party.
      
…’
Article of Regulation No 40/94, entitled ‘Effects of international registrations designating the European Community’,
         provides: 
      
‘1.      An international registration designating the European Community shall … have the same effect as an application for a Community
         trade mark.
      
2.      If no refusal has been notified … or if any such refusal has been withdrawn, the international registration of a mark designating
         the European Community shall … have the same effect as the registration of a mark as a Community trade mark.
      
…’
 The main proceedings and the question referred to the Court
On May 2007, on the basis of Article 5(4) of Regulation No 1383/2003, Davidoff lodged an application with the Oberfinanzdirektion
         Nürnberg, now the Bundesfinanzdirektion Südost, for border seizure of goods suspected of infringing internationally registered
         trade marks, of which it is holder.
      
That action was dismissed on August on the grounds that Article 5(4) of Regulation No 1383/concerns only ‘the
         right-holder of a Community trademark’ and that that regulation was not amended by the Community legislature despite the Community’s
         accession to the Protocol.
      
Davidoff brought an appeal against that decision before the Finanazgericht München.
      
The referring court takes the view that the Community provisions at issue pose interpretation problems.
      
For its part, it is of the view that, by its very wording, Article 5(4) of Regulation No 1383/also applies to the right-holder
         of an internationally registered trade mark, since such a trade mark is treated as a Community trade mark with regard to its
         effects in the Community.
      
In those circumstances, the Finanzgericht München decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following question to the
         Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘In the light of the accession of the Community to the [Protocol], is Article 5(4) of Regulation [No 1383/2003] to be interpreted
         as meaning that, despite the use of the term “Community trademark”, marks with international registrations within the meaning
         of Article et seq. of Regulation [No 40/94], are also covered?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
By its question, the national court asks, essentially, whether Article 5(4) of Regulation No 1383/2003, read in the light
         of Article of Regulation No 40/94, allows the holder of an internationally registered trade mark to secure action by the
         customs authorities of one or more other Member States, besides that of the Member State in which it is lodged, just like
         the proprietor of a Community trade mark.
      
In this respect, it must be held that Regulation No 1383/was adopted prior to the accession of the Community to the Protocol
         pursuant to Decision No 2003/793.
      
Pursuant to Article 4(1) of the Protocol, the protection of the mark in each of the Contracting Parties designated by the
         holder of that mark is to be the same as if the mark had been deposited direct with the Office of that Contracting Party.
      
Recital in the preamble to Regulation No 1992/states that the regulation contains the measures which are necessary
         to give effect to the accession of the Community to the Protocol.
      
Recital in the preamble to the same regulation points out in particular that it is necessary to allow holders of international
         registrations under the Protocol to apply for protection under the Community trade mark system.
      
Recital in the preamble specifies that uniform protection is given to Community trade marks and that they produce their
         effects throughout the entire area of the European Community.
      
In the light of those recitals, Article 146(2) of Regulation No 40/94, as inserted by Regulation No 1992/2003, provides that
         the international registration of a trade mark designating the European Community is to have the same effect as the registration
         of a mark as a Community trade mark.
      
As the referring court, the applicant in the main proceedings, all Member States submitting observations, and the Commission
         of the European Communities maintain, the Community legislature thus meant, so far as their practical effects are concerned,
         to treat internationally registered marks as Community trade marks. 
      
Article 5(4) of Regulation No 1383/relates specifically to a procedure for the implementation in the Community of the
         protection of a Community trade mark, as regards its effects.
      
According to its wording, it only allows ‘the right-holder of a Community trade mark’, in the context of an application to
         intervene, to secure, in addition to action by the customs authorities of the Member State in which it is lodged, action by
         the customs authorities of one or more other Member States.
      
However, following the assimilation into Community trade marks of internationally registered trade marks, it must necessarily
         be accepted that, in conformity with the Community legislature’s intention in adopting Regulation No 1992/2003, the application
         of Article 5(4) of Regulation No 1383/may also be requested by the holder of an internationally registered trade mark.
      
Therefore, the answer to the question referred for a preliminary ruling is that Article 5(4) of Regulation No 1383/2003, in
         conjunction with Article of Regulation No 40/94, is to be interpreted as allowing the holder of an internationally registered
         trade mark to secure action by the customs authorities of one or more other Member States, besides that of the Member State
         in which it is lodged, just like the proprietor of a Community trade mark.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Sixth Chamber) hereby rules:
Article 5(4) of Council Regulation (EC) No 1383/of July concerning customs action against goods suspected of
            infringing certain intellectual property rights and the measures to be taken against goods found to have infringed such rights,
            read in the light of Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 40/of December on the Community trade mark, as amended
            by Council Regulation (EC) No 1992/of October 2003, is to be interpreted as allowing the holder of an internationally
            registered trade mark to secure action by the customs authorities of one or more other Member States, besides that of the
            Member State in which it is lodged, just like the proprietor of a Community trade mark.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 