
Avis juridique important
|
61989JJudgment of the Court of December 1990.  -  Commission of the European Communities v Italian Republic.  -  Failure of a Member State to fulfil its obligations - Failure to transpose a directive.  -  Case C-240/89.  
European Court reports Page I-Summary
Parties
Grounds
Decision on costs
Operative part
Keywords
++++Member States - Obligations - Implementation of directives - Failure - Justification - Not acceptable  ( EEC Treaty, Art . )  
Summary
A Member State may not plead provisions, practices or circumstances existing in its internal legal system in order to justify a failure to comply with the obligations and time-limits laid down in Community directives . 
Parties
In Case C-240/89,  Commission of the European Communities, represented by Dimitrios Gouloussis and Giuliano Marenco, Legal Advisers, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of Guido Berardis, a member of its Legal Department, Wagner Centre, Kirchberg,  applicant,  v  Italian Republic, represented by Luigi Ferrari Bravo, Head of the Diplomatic Legal Service in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, acting as Agent, assisted by Pier Giorgio Ferri, avvocato dello Stato, and Ivo Braguglia, avvocato dello Stato, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the Italian Embassy, rue Marie-Adélaïde,  defendant,  APPLICATION for a declaration that by failing to adopt within the prescribed period the measures necessary to implement in national law Council Directive 83/477/EEC of September on the protection of workers from the risks relating to exposure to asbestos at work ( Official Journal L 263, p . ), other than measures relating to asbestos-mining activities, the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EEC Treaty,  THE COURT,  composed of : O . Due, President, G . F . Mancini, T . F . O' Higgins and J . C . Moitinho de Almeida ( Presidents of Chambers ), C . N . Kakouris, F . A . Schockweiler, F . Grévisse, M . Zuleeg and P . J . G . Kapteyn, Judges,  Advocate General : F . G . Jacobs  Registrar : J . A . Pompe, Deputy Registrar,  having regard to the Report for the Hearing,  after hearing argument from the parties at the hearing on November 1990,  after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General delivered at the sitting on November 1990,  gives the following  Judgment  
Grounds
By application lodged at the Court Registry on July 1989, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action under Article of the EEC Treaty for a declaration that by failing to adopt within the prescribed period the measures necessary to implement in national law Council Directive 83/477/EEC of September on the protection of workers from the risks relating to exposure to asbestos at work ( Official Journal L 263, p . ), other than measures relating to asbestos-mining activities, the Italian Republic had failed to fulfil its obligations under the EEC Treaty .  Under Article 18() of Directive 83/477, Member States are to adopt the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with the directive before January 1987, and they are forthwith to inform the Commission thereof . That paragraph also specifies that the date January is postponed to January in the case of asbestos-mining activities . Under Article 18(), Member States are to communicate to the Commission the provisions of national law which they adopt in the field covered by the directive .  Since the Commission had not received any communication from the Italian Republic within the prescribed period, on November it served formal notice on the Italian Republic requesting it to submit its observations on the subject within two months . As the Italian Republic' s answer dated February was not satisfactory, the Commission delivered a reasoned opinion on January . When no answer was received to that opinion, the Commission brought the present action .  Reference is made to the Report for the Hearing for a fuller account of the facts of the case, the procedure and the submissions and arguments of the parties, which are mentioned or discussed hereinafter only in so far as is necessary for the reasoning of the Court .  The Italian Republic, while essentially acknowledging that measures necessary to transpose the directive into national law have not yet been adopted, claims that Italian law already contains a number of general provisions aimed at safeguarding the health of workers and that it has also taken the specific step of applying to Parliament for a delegation of legislative powers in order to adopt, by a decree of the President of the Republic, the rules necessary to transpose the many directives concerning the health and protection of workers, including the directive in question . At the hearing it stated that, as a result, Law No was promulgated and published on July 1990, but points out that some time will be necessary in order to implement the directive in issue .  As the Court has consistently held, a Member State may not plead provisions, practices or circumstances existing in its internal legal system in order to justify a failure to comply with the obligations and time-limits laid down in directives .  It must therefore be found that by failing to adopt within the prescribed period measures to implement in national law Council Directive 83/of September on the protection of workers from the risks relating to exposure to asbestos at work, other than measures relating to asbestos-mining activities, the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EEC Treaty .  
Decision on costs
Costs  Under Article 69() of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been asked for in the successful party' s pleading . Since the Italian republic has failed in its submissions, it must be ordered to pay the costs .  
Operative part
On those grounds,  THE COURT  hereby :  ( ) Declares that by failing to adopt within the prescribed period measures to implement in national law Council Directive 83/477/EEC of September on the protection of workers from the risks relating to exposure to asbestos at work, other than measures relating to asbestos-mining activities, the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EEC Treaty;  ( ) Orders the Italian republic to pay the costs .  
Top  
 