
Avis juridique important
|
61988JJudgment of the Court (Second Chamber) of June 1989.  -  REWE-Handelsgesellschaft Nord mbH v Überwachungsstelle für Milcherzeugnisse und Handelsklassen.  -  Reference for a preliminary ruling: Bundesverwaltungsgericht - Germany.  -  Agriculture - Water content of frozen poultry - Conditions under which checks are conducted.  -  Case 88/88.  
European Court reports Page Pub.RJ Page Pub somm 
Summary
Parties
Operative part
Keywords
++++Agriculture - Common organization of the markets - Poultry meat - Marketing standards - Water content of frozen and deep-frozen chickens, hens and cocks - Conditions under which checks are conducted - Determination by the Member States - Temporary suspension of marketing - Permissibility - Limits  ( Council Regulation No 2967/76, Art . 3() )  
Summary
The second indent of the second subparagraph of Article 3() of Regulation No 2967/76, laying down common standards for the water content of frozen and deep-frozen chickens, hens and cocks, provides that the Member States are to adopt practical measures for checks on the water content of frozen poultry and states that the Member States are to ensure that those checks do not result in unjustified obstacles being placed in the way of the marketing of the poultry concerned . That provision does not preclude national legislation under which the marketing of any batch from which a sample has been taken must be prohibited until the inspection procedure has been completed . However, such suspension of marketing may not exceed the time needed for an effective inspection . 
Parties
In Case 88/REFERENCE to the Court under Article of the EEC Treaty by the Bundesverwaltungsgericht ( Federal Administrative Court ) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings pending before that court between  REWE-Handelsgesellschaft Nord mbH  and  UEberwachungsstelle fuer Milcherzeugnisse und Handelsklassen ( Supervisory Bureau for Dairy Products and Goods Classification )  on the interpretation of the second indent of the second subparagraph of Article 3() of Council Regulation No 2967/of November laying down common standards for the water content of frozen and deep-frozen chickens, hens and cocks ( Official Journal 1976, L 339, p . ),  THE COURT ( Second Chamber )  composed of : T . F . O' Higgins, President of the Chamber, G . F . Mancini and F . A . Schockweiler, Judges,  ( the grounds of the judgment are not reproduced )  in answer to the question referred to it by the Bundesverwaltungsgericht, by order of December 1987, hereby rules :  
Operative part
The second indent of the second subparagraph of Article 3() of Regulation No 2967/does not prohibit national rules under which any batch of goods from which a sample has been taken must be withheld from the market until the inspection procedure has been completed . Nevertheless, such a suspension of marketing may not exceed the time needed for an effective inspection . 
Top  
 