
Case C-12/Lecson Elektromobile GmbH
v
Hauptzollamt Dortmund
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Finanzgericht Düsseldorf)
(Common Customs Tariff – Tariff classification – Combined Nomenclature – Section XVII – Transport equipment – Chapter – ‘Vehicles other than railway or tramway rolling stock, and parts and accessories thereof’ – Headings and – Three or four-wheeled electric vehicles designed for the transport of one person, reaching a maximum speed of to km/h
         and having a separate, adjustable steering column, known as ‘electric mobility scooters’)
      
Summary of the Judgment
Common Customs Tariff – Tariff headings
(Council Regulation No 2658/87, Annex I; Commission Regulation No 1810/2004)
Heading of the Combined Nomenclature in Annex to Regulation No 2658/on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and
         on the Common Customs Tariff, as amended by Regulation No 1810/2004, must be interpreted as covering three or four-wheeled
         vehicles designed for the transport of one person who is not necessarily a disabled person, powered by a battery-operated
         electric motor, reaching a maximum speed of to km/h and equipped with a separate, adjustable steering column, known as
         ‘electric mobility scooters’.
      
The mere fact that those electric mobility scooters may be used, where appropriate, by disabled persons or even may be adapted
         for use by disabled persons does not affect the tariff classification of such vehicles, given that they are suitable for use
         for several other activities by persons who do not suffer from any disability, but who for one reason or another prefer to
         travel short distances other than on foot, like golfers or persons going shopping.
      
(see para. 25-26, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Seventh Chamber)
December (*)
      
(Common Customs Tariff – Tariff classification – Combined Nomenclature – Section XVII – Transport equipment – Chapter – ‘Vehicles other than railway or tramway rolling stock, and parts and accessories thereof’ – Headings and – Three or four-wheeled electric vehicles designed for the transport of one person, reaching a maximum speed of to km/h
         and having a separate, adjustable steering column, known as ‘electric mobility scooters’)
      
In Case C‑12/10,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the Finanzgericht Düsseldorf (Germany), made by decision of
         December 2009, received at the Court on January 2010, in the proceedings
      
Lecson Elektromobile GmbH
v
Hauptzollamt Dortmund,
THE COURT (Seventh Chamber),
composed of D. Šváby, President of the Chamber, E. Juhász and J. Malenovský (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: N. Jääskinen,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        the European Commission, by L. Bouyon and B.‑R. Killmann, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of headings and of the Combined Nomenclature
         of the Common Customs Tariff (‘the CN’) in Annex to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/of July on the tariff and
         statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff (OJ L 256, p. 1), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC)
         No 1810/of September (OJ L 327, p. 1).
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between Lecson Elektromobile GmbH (‘Lecson’) and Hauptzollamt Dortmund (Principal
         Customs Office, Dortmund; ‘the Hauptzollamt’) concerning the tariff classification of three or four-wheeled electric vehicles
         designed for the transport of one person, powered by a battery-operated electric motor and reaching a maximum speed of to
         km/h, known as ‘electric mobility scooters’.
      
 Legal context
The CN, established by Regulation No 2658/87, is based on the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System drawn up
         by the Customs Cooperation Council, now the World Customs Organisation, and established by the International Convention on
         the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System concluded at Brussels on June and the Protocol of Amendment
         thereto, which were approved on behalf of the European Community by Council Decision 87/369/EEC of April (OJ L
         198, p. 1). The CN takes the headings and six-digit subheadings from the harmonised system, only the seventh and eighth digits
         forming subdivisions specific to the CN.
      
Part One of the CN contains preliminary provisions. In Section I of Part One, which contains general rules, subsection A,
         entitled ‘General rules for the interpretation of the [CN]’, provides: 
      
‘Classification of goods in the [CN] shall be governed by the following principles:
1.      The titles of sections, chapters and sub-chapters are provided for ease of reference only; for legal purposes, classification
         shall be determined according to the terms of the headings and any relative section or chapter notes and, provided such headings
         or notes do not otherwise require, according to the following provisions.
      
…’
In Part Two of the CN, Section XVII, headed ‘Vehicles, aircraft, vessels and associated transport equipment’, contains Chapter
         87, which is headed ‘Vehicles other than railway or tramway rolling stock, and parts and accessories thereof’ and includes
         in particular the following tariff headings:
      
‘Motor cars and other motor vehicles principally designed for the transport of persons (other than those of heading 8702),
         including station wagons and racing cars.
      
− Vehicles specially designed for travelling on snow; golf cars and similar vehicles:
− − Vehicles specially designed for travelling on snow, with compression-ignition internal combustion piston engine
         (diesel or semi-diesel), or with spark-ignition internal combustion piston engine:
      
− − Other
…
Carriages for disabled persons, whether or not motorised or otherwise mechanically propelled:
− Not mechanically propelled
− Other’.
Under the second indent of Article 9(1)(a) and Article of Regulation No 2658/87, the European Commission adopts explanatory
         notes to the CN, which are published in the Official Journal of the European Union. 
      
On January 2005, the following text was inserted in the explanatory notes to the CN, with a view to the latter's uniform
         application (OJ C 1, p. 3):
      
‘Carriages for disabled persons, whether or not motorised or otherwise mechanically propelled 
Other
Motorised vehicles specifically designed for disabled persons are distinguishable from vehicles of heading mainly because
         they have:
      
–        a maximum speed of km per hour, i.e. a fast walking pace;
–        a maximum width of cm;
–        sets of wheels touching the ground;
–        special features to alleviate the disability (for example, footrests for stabilising the legs).
Such vehicles may have:
–        an additional set of wheels (anti-tips);
–        steering and other controls (for example, a joystick) that are easy to manipulate; such controls are usually attached to one
         of the armrests; they are never in the form of a separate, adjustable steering column.
      
This subheading includes electrically-driven vehicles similar to wheelchairs which are only for the transport of disabled
         people. They can have the following appearance:
      
However, motor-driven scooters (mobility scooters) fitted with a separate, adjustable steering column are excluded from this
         subheading. They can have the following appearance and are classified in heading 8703:
      
’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
Between July and October 2005, Lecson lodged seven customs declarations regarding various electric mobility scooters made
         in China and Taiwan. Those customs declarations describe the goods as ‘wheelchairs and other vehicles for the disabled, electric
         mobility scooters’ and classify them under subheading of the CN. The goods were released for free circulation in
         accordance with the applications, without customs duties being levied and with import turnover tax being charged at a reduced
         rate.
      
Following an audit of Lecson, carried out in 2008, the Hauptzollamt classified the goods under subheading of the
         CN as ‘other vehicles’ and by a decision of July applied tax adjustments to that company for customs duties and turnover
         tax relating to those goods. 
      
Lecson lodged an objection against that decision, which was rejected by decision of the Hauptzollamt of May 2009. The company
         then brought an action against the decision rejecting its objection before the Finanzgericht (‘Finance Court’) Düsseldorf.
      
The objection and the action both refer to judgments delivered by the Customs Chamber of the Amsterdam Court of Appeal on
         April 2008, according to which electric mobility scooters should be classified under subheading of the CN. The
         Hauptzollamt considered however that electric mobility scooters are not specially designed for the transport of disabled people
         and as a result fall within subheading of the CN. 
      
According to the wording of the order for reference, electric mobility scooters are three or four-wheeled motor vehicles designed
         for the transport of one person. Depending on the type, these vehicles reach a maximum speed of to km/h. They are between
         and cm long and between and cm wide. They are manufactured in such a way that they always have a platform on
         which the driver can place his feet. Some of the vehicles also have a small additional axle, intended to serve as an anti-tipping
         system. The vehicles are operated by an adjustable steering column to which the steering and other controls for driving and
         braking, and often a metal basket, are attached. 
      
The Finanzgericht Düsseldorf starts from the premiss that key elements support the classification of the electric mobility
         scooters at issue under subheading of the CN. The Finanzgericht also has doubts as to the contrary position adopted
         by the Amsterdam Court of Appeal in its decisions cited in paragraph of this judgment. 
      
However, in order to ensure uniformity in the application of European Union law, the Finanzgericht Düsseldorf decided to stay
         the proceedings and to refer the following question to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Do the electric mobility scooters which are described more precisely in the order [for reference] fall within heading or heading of the [CN], as amended by Regulation (EC) No 1810/2004...?’
      
 Consideration of the question referred
As a preliminary point, it should be borne in mind that, when the Court is requested to give a preliminary ruling on a matter
         of tariff classification, its task is to provide the national court with guidance on the criteria which will enable the latter
         to classify the products at issue correctly in the CN, rather than to effect that classification itself, in particular since
         the Court does not necessarily have available to it all the information which is essential in that regard. In any event, the
         national court is in a better position to do so (Joined Cases C‑260/to C‑263/Lohmann and Medi Bayreuth [2002] ECR I‑10045, paragraph 26, and Case C‑500/Proxxon [2006] ECR I‑1545, paragraph 23). However, in order to give the national court a useful answer, the Court may, in a spirit
         of cooperation with national courts, provide it with all the guidance that it deems necessary (see, in particular, Case C‑49/MOTOE [2008] ECR I‑4863, paragraph 30). 
      
It should also be recalled that it is settled case-law that, in the interests of legal certainty and ease of verification,
         the decisive criterion for the classification of goods for customs purposes is in general to be found in their objective characteristics
         and properties as defined in the wording of the relevant heading of the CN and of the section or chapter notes (see, in particular,
         Case C‑396/DFDS [2004] ECR I‑8439, paragraph 27; Case C‑495/Intermodal Transports [2005] ECR I‑8151, paragraph 47; and Case C‑183/RUMA [2007] ECR I‑1559, paragraph 27).
      
Finally, the explanatory notes to the CN drawn up by the Commission are an important aid to the interpretation of the scope
         of the various tariff headings but do not have legally binding force (Case C‑250/Turbon International [2006] ECR I‑10531, paragraph 16, and Case C‑370/Data I/O [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 30).
      
Here, it is apparent from the wording of headings and of the CN themselves that the difference between them results
         from the fact that the first covers means of transport for persons in general, whereas the second applies specifically to
         means of transport for disabled persons.
      
Furthermore, it is clear from the explanatory note to the CN relating to heading that the decisive criterion for classification
         under that heading is the special design of the vehicle to help disabled persons. Accordingly, that heading covers electrically-driven
         vehicles similar to ‘electric wheelchairs’ (‘Elektrorollstühle’), specifically designed for the transport of disabled persons
         and with characteristics such as, in particular, a maximum speed of km/h (which may correspond to a fast walking pace),
         special features to alleviate the disability (for example, footrests for stabilising the legs) and steering and other controls
         (such as a joystick) which are easy to reach and manipulate and therefore are usually attached to one of the armrests. 
      
That explanatory note states in the last paragraph that, conversely, motor-driven scooters (mobility scooters) fitted with
         a separate, adjustable steering column are excluded from this heading and come under heading of the CN.
      
The electric mobility scooters on the classification of which the referring court must rule all have a separate, adjustable
         steering column, to which the steering and other controls for driving and braking and, as the case may be, a metal basket
         are attached. 
      
Furthermore, those electric mobility scooters are equipped with a platform on which the driver can place his feet, but this
         does not constitute a support to stabilise the legs. The anti-tipping system of the electric mobility scooters also contributes
         to user comfort, but it does not include any specific feature which is aimed at aiding disabled persons’ use of the scooters.
      
Lastly, as the information supplied by the referring court shows, the electric mobility scooters at issue in the main proceedings
         can reach a speed exceeding km/h, being able to go at up to km/h.
      
Consequently, in view of those characteristics as a whole, the electric mobility scooters at issue must be considered to be
         means of transport of persons falling within heading of the CN, and not vehicles for disabled persons for the purposes
         of heading of the CN. 
      
Finally, it should be added that the mere fact that those electric mobility scooters may be used, where appropriate, by disabled
         persons or even may be adapted for use by disabled persons does not affect the tariff classification of such vehicles, since
         they are suitable for being used for a number of other activities by persons who do not suffer from any disability, but who
         for one reason or another prefer to travel short distances other than on foot, like, as the referring court indicates, golfers
         or persons going shopping.
      
Having regard to the foregoing considerations, the answer to the question referred is that heading of the CN must be
         interpreted as covering three or four-wheeled vehicles designed for the transport of one person who is not necessarily a disabled
         person, powered by a battery-operated electric motor, reaching a maximum speed of to km/h and equipped with a separate,
         adjustable steering column, known as ‘electric mobility scooters’, such as those at issue in the main proceedings. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Seventh Chamber) hereby rules:
Heading of the Combined Nomenclature in Annex to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/of July on the tariff
            and statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff, as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1810/of September must be interpreted as covering three or four-wheeled vehicles designed for the transport of one person who
            is not necessarily a disabled person, powered by a battery-operated electric motor, reaching a maximum speed of to km/h
            and equipped with a separate, adjustable steering column, known as ‘electric mobility scooters’, such as those at issue in
            the main proceedings. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 