
Case C-313/Franz Egenberger GmbH Molkerei und Trockenwerk
v
Bundesanstalt für Landwirtschaft und Ernährung
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Verwaltungsgericht Frankfurt am Main)
(Milk and milk products – Regulation (EC) No 2535/– New Zealand butter – Import licence procedures – Inward Monitoring Arrangement (IMA 1) certificate)
Opinion of Advocate General Geelhoed delivered on December Judgment of the Court (Grand Chamber), July Summary of the Judgment
Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Milk and milk products – Import arrangements and opening tariff quotas
Article 35(2) of Regulation No 2535/laying down detailed rules for applying Council Regulation No 1255/as regards
         the import arrangements for milk and milk products and opening tariff quotas is invalid inasmuch as it provides that applications
         for import licences for New Zealand butter at reduced duty may be lodged solely with the competent authorities of the United
         Kingdom. The position of the importers of New Zealand butter established in the United Kingdom is comparable to that of importers
         established in another Member State. By requiring the latter to lodge applications for import licences in a Member State other
         than that in which they are established, Article 35(2) of Regulation No 2535/leads to a difference in treatment between
         these potential importers and those established in the United Kingdom.  
      
Similarly, Articles and of Regulation No 2535/2001, read in conjunction with Annexes III, IV and XII to that regulation,
         are invalid since they permit discrimination in the issue of import licences for New Zealand butter at reduced duty. In that
         regard, by entrusting the New Zealand authorities with the issuing of IMA (Inward Monitoring Arrangement) certificates,
         necessary for the issue of import certificates, whilst the New Zealand law instituting an export monopoly was in force, the
         Commission failed to take the necessary steps to prevent discrimination in the issue of import licences, whereas such an obligation
         had been imposed on it pursuant to Article 29(2) of Regulation No 1255/on the common organisation of the market in milk
         and milk products. 
      
(see paras 34-35, 42, 57-58, operative part 1-2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Milk and milk products – Regulation (EC) No 2535/– New Zealand butter – Import licence procedures – Inward Monitoring Arrangement (IMA 1) certificate)
In Case C-313/04,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Verwaltungsgericht Frankfurt am Main (Germany), made by decision
         of June 2004, received at the Court on July 2004, in the proceedings
      
Franz Egenberger GmbH Molkerei und Trockenwerk
v
Bundesanstalt für Landwirtschaft und Ernährung,
intervening party:
Fonterra (Logistics) Ltd,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Rosas and J. Malenovský, Presidents of Chambers, J.-P. Puissochet,
         R. Schintgen, N. Colneric, J. Klučka, U. Lõhmus and E. Levits (Rapporteur), Judges,
      
Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed,
Registrar: K. Sztranc, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on September 2005,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Franz Egenberger GmbH Molkerei und Trockenwerk, by C. Bittner and J. Gündisch, Rechtsanwälte,
–       the Bundesanstalt für Landwirtschaft und Ernährung, by K.-D. Lutz, Verwaltungsangestellter,
–       Fonterra (Logistics) Ltd, by E. Gibson-Bolton, Solicitor, A. Rinne, Rechtsanwalt, C. Firth and C. Humpe, Solicitors,
–       the German Government, by C. Schulze-Bahr, acting as Agent,
–       the French Government, by G. de Bergues, S. Ramet and A. Colomb, acting as Agents,
–       the Polish Government, by T. Nowakowski, acting as Agent,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by C. Cattabriga, F. Erlbacher and F. Hoffmeister, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on December 2005,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the validity of the first subparagraph of Article 25(1) and Article 35(2)
         of Commission Regulation (EC) No 2535/of December laying down detailed rules for applying Council Regulation
         (EC) No 1255/as regards the import arrangements for milk and milk products and opening tariff quotas (OJ L 341,
         p. 29). 
      
The reference was made in the context of proceedings between Franz Egenberger GmbH Molkerei und Trockenwerk (‘Egenberger’),
         a company governed by German law, and the Bundesanstalt für Landwirtschaft und Ernährung (Federal Office for Agriculture and
         Food) (‘the BLE’) concerning the issue of an import licence for New Zealand butter at reduced duty.
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
 Regulation No 1255/Article 26(1) of Council Regulation (EC) No 1255/of May on the common organisation of the market in milk and
         milk products (OJ L 160, p. 48) provides that imports into the Community of any of the products listed in Article of
         that regulation – including butter – are to be subject to the presentation of an import licence.
      
Article 26(2) of that regulation states as follows:
‘Licences shall be issued by Member States to any applicant, irrespective of his place of establishment in the Community …
         
      
Import and export licences shall be valid throughout the Community. Such licences shall be issued subject to the lodging of
         a security guaranteeing that the products are imported or exported during the term of validity of the licence; except in cases
         of force majeure, the security shall be forfeited in whole or in part if import or export is not carried out, or is carried
         out only partially, within that period.’ 
      
Pursuant to Article 26(3)(c) of the regulation, the other detailed rules for the application of this article are to be adopted
         by the Commission of the European Communities.
      
Article 29(2) of Regulation No 1255/determines the methods which may be applied to management of the tariff quotas and
         states that they are to avoid any discrimination between the operators concerned.
      
 Regulation No 2535/The first subparagraph of Article 25(1) of Regulation No 2535/provides that:
‘Import licences for the products listed in Annex III at the rate of duty indicated shall be issued only on presentation of
         a corresponding IMA [Inward Monitoring Arrangement] certificate, for the total net quantity indicated therein.’ 
      
In that regard, Annex III to that regulation defines the volume of the quota and the rate of import duty for New Zealand butter.
         Furthermore, it is clear from recital in the preamble to that regulation that the IMA certificate, issued by the competent
         authorities of the exporting States, certifies that the conditions of eligibility for reduced rates for products imported
         into the European Community are met.
      
In accordance with Article 32(2) of Regulation No 2535/2001, IMA certificates are to be valid only if issued by the issuing
         body of the exporting State listed in Annex XII to the regulation.  With regard to New Zealand, that annex designates as the
         issuing body the Food Assurance Authority of the Ministry of Agriculture and Forests.  In addition, Annex IV to that regulation
         defines the method to be used to check the weight and fat content of New Zealand butter and the conditions for the completion
         and checking of the IMA certificate for that product. 
      
Under Article of Regulation No 2535/2001, the provisions of Articles to of that regulation apply to New Zealand butter.
         Article 35(2) of the regulation provides:
      
‘Import licence applications may be submitted only in the United Kingdom.
The United Kingdom shall monitor all IMA certificates issued, cancelled, amended, corrected, or in respect of which copies
         have been issued.  It shall ensure that the total quantity for which import licences are issued does not exceed the quota
         for any import year.’
      
 World Trade Organisation rules
Article XVII(1)(a) of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of October 1947, in the version applicable with effect
         from March (‘GATT’), provides:
      
‘Each contracting party undertakes that if it establishes or maintains a State enterprise, wherever located, or grants to
         any enterprise, formally or in effect, exclusive or special privileges, such enterprise shall, in its purchases or sales involving
         either imports or exports, act in a manner consistent with the general principles of non‑discriminatory treatment prescribed
         in this Agreement for governmental measures affecting imports or exports by private traders.’ 
      
Article 1(3) of the Agreement on Import Licensing Procedures, annexed to the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation
         of (‘WTO’), adopted in the context of the multilateral negotiations of the Uruguay Round (to 1994) (OJ L 336,
         p. 151), provides that the rules for import licensing procedures are to be neutral in application and administered in a fair
         and equitable manner.
      
 The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
By the Dairy Industry Restructuring Act (‘the DIRA 2001’), which entered into force on September 2001, the New Zealand
         legislature granted an exclusive licence to export New Zealand butter at reduced duty to the European Union to the New Zealand
         Dairy Board (‘NZDB’), which recently merged with other milk producers to become Fonterra Cooperative Group Ltd (‘Fonterra’),
         a cooperative marketing agency governed by New Zealand law.  The DIRA prohibits any assignment of that export licence
         to third parties.  Fonterra exports New Zealand butter to the European Union exclusively through NZMP Logistics (‘NZMP’),
         another of its subsidiaries, established in the United Kingdom.  It follows that NZMP is the exclusive importer of New Zealand
         butter at reduced duty into the European Union.
      
In that respect, the import procedure may be described as follows: the IMA certificate is issued by the Food Assurance Authority
         to NZDB, which transfers it to NZMP after having sold it the butter.  That subsidiary lodges the application for an import
         licence in accordance with Regulation No 2535/2001, together with the IMA certificate, in the United Kingdom, imports the
         New Zealand butter into the European Union, sells it on free of duty and subject to tax and thus earns the difference between
         the import price and the higher Community price.
      
On August 2003, Egenberger lodged with the BLE an application for an import licence for New Zealand butter at reduced duty.
         By decision of October 2003, the BLE refused the application on the grounds that Egenberger had not produced an IMA certificate
         to it and that applications for import licences for New Zealand butter could be introduced solely in the United Kingdom. 
      
Egenberger appealed against that decision before the Verwaltungsgericht Frankfurt am Main (Frankfurt am Main Administrative
         Court), claiming that certain provisions of Regulation No 2535/are contrary to Article EC, the second subparagraph
         of Article 34(2) EC and Article EC.  Egenberger observes, in that regard, that it had previously submitted an offer to
         purchase New Zealand butter to Fonterra in April 2001.  However, that offer was rejected on the ground that Fonterra exported
         butter at reduced duty to the European Union solely through NZMP.  Consequently, Egenberger was unable to obtain the required
         IMA certificate or to purchase butter for import. 
      
The referring court shares the doubts expressed by Egenberger concerning the validity of Article 35(2) and the first subparagraph
         of Article 25(1) of Regulation No 2535/2001.  In that regard, it bases its reasoning on four points. 
      
Firstly, that court suggests, on the one hand, that Article 35(2) of Regulation No 2535/conflicts with the second subparagraph
         of Article 34(2) EC, in that it permits potential importers of New Zealand butter established in the United Kingdom to lodge
         their application for an import licence with the authorities managing the markets in their own State whereas all other importers
         must lodge such applications in another Member State, namely the United Kingdom.  This gives rise to additional costs for
         those importers and has a dissuasive effect in particular on small and medium-sized undertakings.  In addition, that provision
         is contrary to Article 26(2) of Regulation No 1255/1999, which provides that import licences are to be issued by all Member
         States.
      
On the other hand, the first subparagraph of Article 25(1) of Regulation No 2535/is also contrary to the prohibition
         on discrimination laid down in the second subparagraph of Article 34(2) EC and Article 29(2) of Regulation No 1255/1999, since
         in practice it has the effect of excluding any potential importer of New Zealand butter under the export quota at reduced
         duty, with the exception of NZMP, which is the only undertaking likely to obtain an IMA certificate.  
      
Secondly, the referring court takes the view that the contested provisions of Regulation No 2535/conflict with Article
         EC.
      
It takes the view, on the one hand, that Article 35(2) of that regulation makes access to the import quota for New Zealand
         butter at reduced duty more difficult for undertakings not established in the United Kingdom and thus restricts free trade
         within the Community.
      
On the other hand, the first subparagraph of Article 25(1) of the regulation limits the movement of New Zealand butter within
         the Community because of Fonterra’s anti-competitive conduct in refusing to sell that product at reduced duty to importers
         other than NZMP. 
      
Thirdly, the referring court points out that the first subparagraph of Article 25(1) of Regulation No 2535/imports into
         the Community legal order the New Zealand legislation which grants a monopoly to Fonterra for the export of New Zealand butter
         at reduced duty.  In that respect, the provision is also contrary to Article 82(1) EC. 
      
Finally, and fourthly, the contested provisions of Regulation No 2535/are contrary to Article XVII(1)(a) of GATT and
         Article 1(3) of the Agreement on Import Licensing Procedures.  The referring court takes the view that, in adopting Regulation
         No 2535/2001, the intention of the Community legislature was to implement obligations assumed in the context of the WTO. 
         Thus, according to the case-law set out in Case C‑69/Nakajima v Council [1991] ECR I‑2069, the legality of that act can be assessed in the light of the applicable WTO rules.
      
On the one hand, inasmuch as it imports the New Zealand legislation, contrary to the provisions of GATT, into Community secondary
         legislation, Article 25(1) of Regulation No 2535/is contrary to the principle of non-discrimination as laid down in Article
         XVII(1)(a) of GATT.
      
On the other hand, the rules laid down in Articles 35(2) and 25(1) of Regulation No 2535/are neither neutral nor appropriate
         and are therefore contrary to Article 1(3) of the Agreement on Import Licensing Procedures.
      
It is on that basis that the Verwaltungsgericht Frankfurt am Main decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following
         questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Is Article 35(2) of … Regulation No 2535/… contrary to higher-ranking Community law, in particular the prohibition in
         Article EC of quantitative restrictions on imports and of measures having equivalent effect, the prohibition of discrimination
         in the second subparagraph of Article 34(2) EC and Article 26(2) of … Regulation No 1255/1999, and is it therefore invalid?
      
(2)      Is Article 25(1) of … Regulation No 2535/contrary to higher-ranking Community law, in particular the prohibition of discrimination
         in the second subparagraph of Article 34(2) EC, the prohibition of discrimination in the second subparagraph of Article 29(2)
         of … Regulation No 1255/1999, Article EC and the first paragraph of Article EC, and is it therefore invalid?
      
(3)      Are Articles 25(1) and 35(2) of … Regulation No 2535/contrary to Article XVII(1)(a) of [GATT] and Article 1(3) of the
         Agreement on Import Licensing Procedures, and are they therefore invalid?’
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 The first question
By its first question, the referring court asks whether, since it provides that it is mandatory that an application for an
         import licence for New Zealand butter be lodged in the United Kingdom, Article 35(2) of Regulation No 2535/is invalid
         on the grounds that it is contrary to the principle of non-discrimination laid down in the second subparagraph of Article
         34(2) EC and Article 26(2) of Regulation No 1255/1999, and to the prohibition in Article EC of quantitative restrictions
         on imports and of measures having equivalent effect. 
      
 Observations submitted to the Court
Egenberger, the BLE and the German, French and Polish Governments submit that the discrimination at issue concerns the method
         of management of the import quota, that is to say the place where applications are to be lodged (the United Kingdom) to obtain
         an import licence for New Zealand butter.  They point out that for the other products covered by the common organisation of
         the market in the sector of milk and milk products applications for import licences may be made to the different national
         bodies.
      
Moreover, the fact of having to lodge an application for an import licence in the United Kingdom disadvantages the economic
         operators established in another Member State since such a requirement gives rise to additional costs for those operators.
         However, there is nothing to justify such a difference in treatment.
      
Fonterra and the Commission submit that in matters of agricultural policy the latter has a wide margin of discretion.  Thus,
         the fact that a single measure has different repercussions for certain importers does not constitute discrimination, since
         that measure is determined on the basis of objective criteria, formulated to meet the needs of the general common organisation
         of the market.  In that regard, the contested provision is intended to ensure correct use of the tariff quota in question
         and to make it easier to check. 
      
The inconvenience arising from that procedure for potential importers of New Zealand butter established in other Member States
         is very slight, since Regulation No 2535/allows them to lodge an application in the language of their choice and the
         costs thus caused do not exceed those incurred in the course of normal commercial relations.  Thus that difference in treatment
         is justified on objective grounds and remains within the limits of what is necessary to achieve the objective. 
      
 Findings of the Court
As a preliminary point, according to settled case-law, the second subparagraph of Article 34(2) EC, which prohibits all discrimination
         in the context of the common agricultural policy, is merely a specific expression of the general principle of equal treatment,
         which requires that comparable situations must not be treated differently and different situations must not be treated alike
         unless such treatment is objectively justified (see, inter alia, Case C-15/EARL de Kerlast [1997] ECR I-1961, paragraph 35; Case C-292/Karlsson and Others [2000] ECR I-2737, paragraph 39; Case C‑14/Niemann [2003] ECR I‑2279, paragraph 49; and Joined Cases C‑87/and C‑100/Spain v Council [2006] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 48).
      
In the present case, it cannot be disputed that the position of the importers of New Zealand butter established in the United
         Kingdom is comparable to that of importers established in another Member State.
      
However, by requiring the latter to lodge applications for import licences in a Member State other than that in which they
         are established, Article 35(2) of Regulation No 2535/leads to a difference in treatment between these potential importers
         and those established in the United Kingdom.  The fact that the importers have to lodge an application in a different Member
         State is likely to lead to their encountering difficulties which importers established in the United Kingdom do not.  In that
         regard, it is less the use of language thus imposed, since the application forms for the licence are available in all official
         languages, than the difficulties linked to an administrative and possibly contentious procedure under a foreign administrative
         and legal system which are likely to put importers established in another Member State at a disadvantage and to dissuade them
         from lodging applications for import licences.
      
With regard to the argument put forward by the Commission and Fonterra that the Court’s review of a provision adopted by the
         Commission in the sphere of the common agricultural policy is limited to assessment of whether there has been a manifest error
         of assessment, or abuse or misuse of powers, it should be noted that Regulation No 2535/is based on Articles 26(3) and
         29(1) of Regulation No 1255/and that the Council expressly indicated in Article 29(2) that the established methods of
         management of the import quota are to ‘avoid any discrimination between the operators concerned’.
      
In those circumstances, it is appropriate to consider whether the contested provision is, as the Commission submits, objectively
         justified by the need to ensure correct use of the tariff quota in question and to make it easier to check.
      
The Commission submits that the fact that the competent authorities of the other Member States are authorised to issue import
         licences for New Zealand butter at reduced duty is not sufficient to achieve the aims which justify the limitation of the
         power to issue those licences to a single Member State, aims which can be met only by way of the system put into place by
         Article 35(2) of Regulation No 2535/2001.
      
In that regard, it should be noted that, for the import of other agricultural products, the competent authorities of each
         Member State are given the power to issue import licences (see, inter alia, with regard to other milk products subject to
         the requirement of an IMA certificate, Section of Chapter III of Title of Regulation No 2535/and Articles to
         of that regulation, with regard to milk products for which no IMA certificate is required).  Accordingly, it cannot be
         claimed that the limitation to a single Member State of the power to issue import licences for New Zealand butter is necessary
         to ensure correct use of the tariff quota in question and to make it easier to check. 
      
The aim mentioned by the Commission therefore cannot justify the difficulties, arising from the requirement to lodge applications
         for import licences in the United Kingdom, for economic operators which are not established in that Member State or, consequently,
         the difference in treatment as between importers resulting from Article 35(2) of Regulation No 2535/2001.
      
It follows that that provision is discriminatory and therefore contrary to the second subparagraph of Article 34(2) EC.
Consequently, and without it being necessary to answer the other limbs of the first question, it must be held that Article
         35(2) of Regulation No 2535/is invalid inasmuch as it provides that applications for import licences for New Zealand
         butter at reduced duty may be lodged solely with the competent authorities of the United Kingdom. 
      
 The second question
By its second question, the referring court asks essentially whether the provisions of Regulation No 2535/implementing
         the detailed rules for import of New Zealand butter at reduced duty, that is to say Articles and of that regulation,
         read in conjunction with Annexes III, IV and XII to that regulation, are invalid on the grounds that they are contrary to
         the principle of non-discrimination as laid down in the second subparagraph of Article 34(2) EC and Article 29(2) of Regulation
         No 1255/1999, and with Articles EC and EC, inasmuch as in practice they give rise to a system of management of the tariff
         quotas for the product which, as in the circumstances of the present case, limit to a single undertaking the possibility of
         obtaining an import licence.
      
Egenberger and the German and Polish Governments submit that the provision in the first subparagraph of Article 25(1) of Regulation
         No 2535/is contrary to the prohibition on discrimination laid down in the second subparagraph of Article 34(2) EC.  In
         that regard, Egenberger points out that that provision has the effect of encouraging Fonterra’s anti-competitive conduct and
         strengthening its dominant position, which results in discrimination between potential Community importers of New Zealand
         butter and the European subsidiary of Fonterra, NZMP.
      
The Commission and Fonterra take the view that the latter’s allegedly anti-competitive conduct does not, even indirectly,
         fall within the scope of the legislative content of Article 25(1) of Regulation No 2535/2001, since that provision does not
         distinguish between potential Community importers of New Zealand butter at reduced duty.
      
As a preliminary point, it should be noted that the second subparagraph of Article 34(2) EC and Article 29(2) of Regulation
         No 1255/express one and the same principle, that is to say that of non-discrimination.
      
It follows from Articles 26(3) and of Regulation No 1255/that the Council imposed the obligation on the Commission
         to define, in compliance with the principle of non-discrimination, the detailed rules for the management of the tariff quota
         for New Zealand butter at reduced duty. 
      
For that purpose, the Commission opted for the system of import licences issued on presentation of IMA certificates.  According
         to recital in the preamble to Regulation No 1255/1999, that system, under which the exporting country gives an assurance
         that the exported products conform with their description, considerably simplifies the import procedure. 
      
With regard to New Zealand butter, responsibility for issuing IMA certificates for butter imported at reduced duty into
         the Community was given, in accordance with Annex XII to Regulation No 2535/2001, to the Food Assurance Authority.  Pursuant
         to Article 25(1) of that regulation, an import licence for New Zealand butter at reduced duty is issued only on presentation
         of a corresponding IMA certificate to the competent authorities. 
      
It is appropriate to note that the Commission enjoys a degree of latitude in choosing the administrative methods which it
         uses to fulfil the task conferred on it by the Council under Articles and of Regulation No 1255/1999.
      
It is for the Commission to ensure that its methods comply with the principle of non-discrimination as set out in Article
         29(2) of Regulation No 1255/1999.
      
It is in the light of those considerations that the compatibility of the system for issuing import licences for New Zealand
         butter at reduced duty, put into place by the relevant provisions of Regulation No 2535/2001, with the principle of non-discrimination
         must be examined.
      
Pursuant to Article 24(1) of the DIRA 2001, NZDB is granted an exclusive licence for the export of New Zealand butter at reduced
         duty to the European Community.  Thus NZDB is the sole undertaking able to hold export licences and IMA certificates corresponding
         to the quantity of butter exported.
      
It is common ground that NZDB sells the butter covered by the corresponding IMA certificates, with a view to its import
         into the Community, exclusively to its European subsidiary, NZMP. Consequently, NZMP is the sole undertaking able to import
         New Zealand butter at reduced duty.
      
Although the choice of the IMA certificate procedure, as implemented by Regulation No 2535/2001, meets the objectives of
         simplification of the import procedure and better monitoring of compliance with the tariff quotas, such a method of management
         of those quotas cannot permit the exclusion from the procedure for butter imports into the Community of all potential importers
         of that product with the exception of one undertaking and result in discrimination between those economic operators. 
      
The system for the import of New Zealand butter at reduced duty as laid down in Articles and of Regulation No 2535/2001,
         read in conjunction with Annexes III, IV and XII to that regulation, allows such discrimination.
      
By entrusting the New Zealand authorities with the issuing of IMA certificates, whilst the DIRA instituting an export
         monopoly in favour of NZDB was in force, the Commission failed to take the necessary steps to prevent discrimination in the
         issue of import licences, whereas such an obligation had been imposed on it pursuant to Article 29(2) of Regulation No 1255/1999.
         
      
Consequently, without its being necessary to answer the other limbs of the second question, it must be held that Articles
         and of Regulation No 2535/2001, read in conjunction with Annexes III, IV and XII to that regulation, are invalid since
         they permit discrimination in the issue of import licences for New Zealand butter at reduced duty.
      
 The third question
In the light of the answers to the first two questions, it is not necessary to answer the third question.
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court.  Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the
         costs of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article 35(2) of Commission Regulation (EC) No 2535/of December laying down detailed rules for applying Council
            Regulation (EC) No 1255/as regards the import arrangements for milk and milk products and opening tariff quotas is invalid
            inasmuch as it provides that applications for import licences for New Zealand butter at reduced duty may be lodged solely
            with the competent authorities of the United Kingdom.
2.      Articles and of Regulation No 2535/2001, read in conjunction with Annexes III, IV and XII to that regulation, are invalid
            since they permit discrimination in the issue of import licences for New Zealand butter at reduced duty.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 