
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-249/Portuguese Republic
v
Commission of the European Communities
(Agriculture – Common agricultural policy – Financing by the EAGGF – Actual expenditure of a Member State which is less than the forecast expenditure notified by it to the Commission – Power of the Commission to reduce sums paid as advances – Letter from a Director-General of the Commission informing the Member State of that reduction – Measure producing binding legal effects)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Action for annulment – Actionable measures – Meaning – Measures producing binding legal effects – Decision contained in a
            letter from the Director-General for Agriculture of the Commission informing a Member State of a reduction in the financial
            advances extended under the EAGGF – Included
(Art. EC; Commission Regulation No 750/1999, Art. 39(3))
2.        Agriculture – Common agricultural policy – Financing by the EAGGF – Flat-rate reduction to financial advances extended – Decision
            contained in a letter from the Director-General for Agriculture of the Commission – No delegation by the Commission – Decision
            vitiated by lack of powers
(Rules of Procedure of the Commission, Arts and 14; Commission Regulation No 1750/1999, Art. 39(3))
1.        In order to ascertain whether measures are acts within the meaning of Article EC, it is necessary to look to their substance,
         as the form in which they are cast is, in principle, immaterial in this respect. Only a measure the legal effects of which
         are binding on, and are capable of affecting the interests of, the applicant by bringing about a distinct change in his legal
         position is an act or decision which may be the subject of an action for annulment under that article.
      
That applies to the decision contained in the letter of the Director-General for Agriculture of the Commission informing a
         Member State of a reduction in advances extended, in accordance with Article 39(3) of Regulation No 1750/laying down
         detailed rules for the application of Regulation No 1257/on support for rural development from the European Agricultural
         Guidance and Guarantee Fund (EAGGF), as most recently amended by Regulation No 1763/2001, since that decision constitutes
         the only measure which clearly determines the content and scope of the disputed financial correction, while the decisions
         regarding the advances to be paid to the Member States refer only to the overall amount of monthly advances to be paid to
         them and do not contain any reference to the amount of the financial corrections to be made with respect to the parties to
         whom they are addressed.
      
(see paras 35, 41-42)
2.        The decision contained in the letter of the Director-General for Agriculture of the Commission informing a Member State of
         a reduction in advances extended, in accordance with Article 39(3) of Regulation No 1750/laying down detailed rules for
         the application of Regulation No 1257/on support for rural development from the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee
         Fund (EAGGF), as most recently amended by Regulation No 1763/2001, is vitiated by a lack of powers, since its signatory did
         not himself have the power to adopt that decision and the Commission did not invoke any act of delegation or sub-delegation
         taken on the basis of Article or Article of the Commission’s Rules of Procedure which might have applied to that Director.
      
(see paras 44, 47)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)November 2004(1)
(Agriculture  –  Common agricultural policy  –  Financing by the EAGGF  –  Actual expenditure of a Member State which is less than the forecast expenditure notified by it to the Commission  –  Power of the Commission to reduce sums paid as advances  –  Letter from a Director-General of the Commission informing the Member State of that reduction  –  Measure producing binding legal effects)
 In Case C-249/02,ACTION for annulment under Article EC,brought on July 2002,
            
Portuguese Republic, represented by L. Fernandes, acting as Agent, and by C. Botelho Moniz and E. Maia Cadete, advogados, with an address for
            service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant,
v
Commission of the European Communities, represented by L. Visaggio, acting as Agent, and by N. Castro Marques, advogado, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
defendant,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),,
 composed of: C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, C. Gulmann, J.‑P. Puissochet (Rapporteur), R. Schintgen and J.N.
            Cunha Rodrigues, Judges,
            
 Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer, Registrar: M. Múgica Arzamendi, Principal Administrator,
             having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on July 2004,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By its application, the Portuguese Republic seeks the annulment of the letter of the Director-General of the Directorate-General
         for Agriculture of the Commission of the European Communities of April (‘the contested decision’), concerning a reduction
         in advances paid in the financial year in accordance with Article 39(3) of Commission Regulation (EC) No 1750/of
         July laying down detailed rules for the application of Council Regulation (EC) No 1257/on support for rural development
         from the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund (EAGGF) (OJ L 214, p. 31), as most recently amended by Commission
         Regulation (EC) No 1763/of September (OJ L 239, p. 10) (‘Regulation No 1750/1999’).
         
Legal framework
            
 Council Regulation (EC) No 1257/of May on support for rural development from the European Agricultural Guidance
         and Guarantee Fund (EAGGF) and amending and repealing certain regulations (OJ L 160, p. 80) requires the Member States
         to draw up rural development plans covering a period of seven years from January 2000. Those plans are to be submitted to
         the Commission, which is to approve rural development financial programming documents on the basis of them.
         
            
 Article of Regulation No 1257/states:
         ‘1.     Community support for rural development from the EAGGF Guarantee Section shall be subject to financial planning and accounting
         on an annual basis. … 
          2.       The Commission shall make initial allocations to Member States, broken down on an annual basis and using objective criteria
         …
          3.       Initial allocations shall be adjusted on the basis of actual expenditure and revised expenditure forecasts submitted by the
         Member States taking into account programme objectives, and be subject to the funds available …’
         
            
 Article 47(3) of the same regulation provides:
         ‘Payments of financial assistance from the EAGGF Guarantee Section may take the form of advances for programme implementation
         and of payments in respect of expenditure incurred.’
         
            
 According to the second paragraph of Article of Regulation No 1257/1999:
         ‘[That regulation] shall apply in relation to Community support as from January 2000’.
         
            
 Article 7(1) to (3) of Council Regulation (EC) No 1258/of May on the financing of the common agricultural policy
         (OJ L 160, p. 103) states:
         ‘1.     The Commission, after consulting the [EAGGF] Committee shall adopt the decisions set out in paragraphs 2, and 4.
          2.       The Commission shall decide on monthly advances on the provision for expenditure effected by the accredited paying agencies.
         …
          3.       The Commission shall, before April of the year following the financial year concerned, … clear the accounts of the paying
         agencies.
         …’
         
            
 Article of the same regulation provides that the EAGGF Committee is to consist of representatives of the Member States
         and of the Commission and that a representative of the Commission is to be its chairman.
         
            
 Commission Regulation (EC) No 296/of February on data to be forwarded by the Member States and the monthly booking
         of expenditure financed under the Guarantee Section of the Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund (EAGGF) and repealing
         Regulation (EEC) No 2776/(OJ L 39, p. 5) lays down the conditions under which the Member States may benefit from the
         financing by the EAGGF Guarantee Section of expenditure incurred by them.
         
            
 Article 4(1) of Regulation No 296/provides that ‘on the basis of data sent [by the Member States], the Commission shall
         adopt decisions and make the monthly advances against booking of expenditure …’
         
            
 The second subparagraph of Article 7(1) of the same regulation states:
         ‘For a year “n”, account shall be taken of expenditure effected by the Member States from October of year “n-1” to October
         of year “n”.’
         
            
 Article 37(1) of Regulation No 1750/provides:
         ‘No later than September each year, the Member States shall forward to the Commission, for each rural development programming
         document …: 
         
(a)
a statement of expenditure incurred in the current financial year and of expenditure remaining to be disbursed by the end
               of that year and covered by Community support …, and
            
(b)
revised forecasts of such expenditure for subsequent financial years until the end of the programming period in question,
               keeping within the allocation for each Member State.
            
…’
         
            
 The first paragraph of Article of Regulation No 1750/states:
         ‘For the month during which the decision approving a rural development programming document … is adopted, the paying agencies
         may enter into the accounts as expenditure an advance not exceeding 12.5% of the average annual EAGGF contribution provided
         for in the programming document …’
         
            
 Article 39(3) and (4) of Regulation No 1750/provides that:
         ‘3.     Where expenditure actually incurred by a Member State in a given financial year is less than 75% of the amounts referred to
         in paragraph 1, the expenditure to be recognised for the following financial year shall be reduced by a third of the difference
         between this threshold … and the actual expenditure incurred during the financial year in question.
          This reduction shall not be taken into account when establishing actual expenditure in the financial year following that in
         which the reduction was made.
          4.       Paragraph shall not apply in relation to the first declaration of expenditure under the rural development programming document
         …’
         
            
 Article of Regulation No 1750/provides that it is to apply in relation to Community support as from January 2000.
         
            
 With effect from its entry into force on March 2002, Commission Regulation (EC) No 445/of February laying
         down detailed rules for the application of Regulation No 1257/(OJ L 74, p. 1) replaced Regulation No 1750/1999,
         which it repealed.
         
            
 Article 47(1) of Regulation No 445/restates the provisions of Article 37(1) of Regulation No 1750/1999.
         
            
 Article 48(1) of Regulation No 445/repeats the provisions of the first paragraph of Article of Regulation No 1750/1999.
         
            
 The provisions of Article 39(3) of Regulation No 1750/are likewise replicated at Article 49(1) and (4) of Regulation
         No 445/2002.
         
            
 Lastly, Article 49(5) of Regulation No 445/repeats the provisions of Article 39(4) of Regulation No 1750/1999, but states
         in addition that the first statement of expenditure covered is that relating to ‘the financial year’.
         
Facts
            
 By decisions of November 2000, and March and April 2001, the Commission approved, for the programming period to 2006, the rural development plans for the Portuguese mainland, the autonomous region of the Azores and the autonomous region
         of Madeira, respectively. Those decisions include an annex setting out a general indicative financial table which records
         the national public expenditure allocated to the implementation of the measures covered by the rural development plan concerned
         and the contribution of the EAGGF Guarantee Section. Article 2(2) of each of those decisions provides that the budgetary
         year is to cover payments made by the paying organisations from October 1999. Under Article 3(1) of the decisions, expenditure
         is eligible from the date on which the rural development plans concerned were submitted to the Commission, that is to say
         January, and and February 2000, respectively.
         
            
 By communication of September 2000, the Portuguese Republic submitted to the Commission its expenditure forecasts for the
         subsequent financial years of the programming period and for each rural development programming document, in accordance with
         Article 37(1)(b) of Regulation No 1750/1999. That communication stated that the amount of the forecast expenditure in respect
         of the financial year, that is to say from October to October 2001, was EUR 000.
         
            
 However, in the light of the data forwarded each month by the Portuguese authorities, the Commission found that, in the financial year, the expenditure actually incurred by the Portuguese Republic had amounted only to EUR 332.52, corresponding
         to 70.11% of the forecast expenditure for that financial year.
         
            
 As the actual expenditure was, for the Portuguese Republic as for other Member States, less than the threshold of 75% of the
         forecast expenditure referred to in Article 39(3) of Regulation No 1750/1999, the application of the reductions provided for
         under that provision was discussed at the meetings of the EAGGF Committee held on January and February 2002. Point of the minute of the latter meeting states that ‘the [six] Member States [concerned by the reductions] will be advised by
         letter of the date on which the penalties will be deducted from their monthly advance …’
         
            
 By the contested decision, the Director-General of the Directorate‑General for Agriculture of the Commission informed the
         Instituto Nacional de Garantia Agrícola (‘the INGA’), the organisation which is responsible in Portugal for the coordination
         of expenditure financed by the Guarantee Section of the EAGGF, that:
         ‘During the EAGGF financial year, the total expenditure attributed to Portugal under heading 1b (Rural development) amounted
         to EUR 332.52.
          The forecast expenditure for which was intimated to the Commission on September under Article of Regulation
         (EC) No 1750/amounted to EUR 000.
          As the total of the expenditure fails to meet the threshold of 75% of the forecast submitted, Article 39(3) of Regulation
         (EC) No 1750/is applicable. Document AGRI/46059/– Rev. 2, which was discussed by the EAGGF Committee on February
         and which sets out the detail of the calculations, is attached as an annex to this letter.
          Pursuant to the abovementioned article, a reduction of EUR 055.will therefore be applied to the advances for 2002.
          I should add that this reduction of EUR 055.to the advances will be attributed to Chapter B01-(Clearance of accounts
         and reductions/corrections to advances) …’
         
            
 At the meeting held on April 2002, the EAGGF Committee was consulted on the advances to be paid to the Member States in
         May for the booking of expenditure incurred by them in March 2002. The application of the reductions provided for in
         Article 39(3) of Regulation No 1750/(now Article 49(4) of Regulation No 445/2002) was discussed again. Point 7.5.of
         the minute of that meeting, headed ‘Reduction provided for by Article 39(3) of Regulation No 1750/1999’), states:
         ‘At the request of the Danish delegation, the Chairman wishes to state that the Legal Service of the Commission has confirmed
         that the reduction in question is indeed of the nature of a standard financial correction, which will take the form of a deduction
         from the advances against booking of expenditure to be paid to the Member States concerned, either in June or in August …’
         
            
 At the meetings held on May and June 2002, the EAGGF Committee was consulted as to the advances to be paid to the Member
         States in June and July respectively for the booking of expenditure incurred in April and May 2002. The minutes of those
         meetings record that the amount of the advances ‘takes into account the corrections – positive and negative – made to the
         expenditure declared by several Member States’. 
         
            
 By decisions of May and June 2002, signed by the Commissioner for Agriculture, the Commission set the amount of the
         advances to be paid to the Member States for April and May 2002.
         
            
 Lastly, by Decision 2002/461/EC of June on the clearance of the accounts of Member States’ expenditure financed by
         the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund (EAGGF), Guarantee Section, for the financial year (OJ L 160,
         p. 28), taken under Article 7(3) of Regulation No 1258/1999, the Commission provided that clearance.
         
Forms of order sought
            
 The application was registered at the Court Registry on July 2002. 
         
            
 The Portuguese Republic claims that the Court should:
         
–
annul the contested decision, and
–
order the Commission to pay the costs.
            
 The Commission claims that the Court should:
         
–
dismiss the action, and
–
order the applicant to pay the costs.
            
 The two parties have submitted a reply and a rejoinder respectively, in which the same forms of order are sought.
         
The actionAdmissibility
            
 The Commission submits that the action is directed towards an act which has no binding legal effect and is therefore inadmissible.
         It states that the reduction in the monthly advances paid to the Portuguese Republic was preceded by close cooperation between
         the Commission and the applicant – as with all the Member States – within the EAGGF Committee, which discussed the matter
         at its meetings of January and February 2002. At the latter meeting, the Commission’s representative informed the representatives
         of the Member States affected by the reductions that they would be advised by letter of the date on which those reductions
         would be made. Further discussions also took place on the same matter at the meetings of April and May of the EAGGF
         Committee. The contested decision is simply the letter which it had been stated at the meeting of February would be
         sent. That letter is merely a communication between the services of the Commission and those of the Portuguese Republic. It
         is purely informative and thus has no binding legal effect.
         
            
 The Commission states that the only decisions having binding legal effect which are capable of affecting the interests of
         the Portuguese Republic are the decisions of May and June 2002, regarding the advances for April and May 2002, in which
         the Commissioner for Agriculture legitimately adopted, under delegation from the Commission, the disputed measure for the
         reduction of the advances.
         
            
 In that regard, in order to ascertain whether measures are acts within the meaning of Article EC, it is necessary to look
         to their substance, as the form in which they are cast is, in principle, immaterial in this respect. Only a measure the legal
         effects of which are binding on, and are capable of affecting the interests of, the applicant by bringing about a distinct
         change in his legal position is an act or decision which may be the subject of an action for annulment under Article EC
         (see, to that effect, Case 60/IBM  v Commission [1981] ECR 2639, paragraph 9, and Case C-308/Netherlands  v Commission [1999] ECR I-6513, paragraph 26). 
         
            
 In the present case, point of the minute of the 583rd meeting of the EAGGF Committee of February 2002, headed ‘Information
         regarding the penalties to be imposed on certain Member States for failure to comply with the expenditure forecasts in relation
         to rural development for the EAGGF financial year [application of Article 39(3) of Regulation No 1750/1999]’, shows that,
         at that meeting, the Commission’s representative took the views of the representatives of the six Member States concerned
         on the Commission’s intention to apply the corrective financial measures provided for in Article to those Member States.
         
            
 Point of the same minute states, at the end of the first paragraph, that ‘those Member States will be notified by letter
         of the date on which the penalties will be deducted from their monthly advance’. That point ends with a reference to a declaration
         by the Luxembourg delegation, stating that it ‘regrets’ that the Commission ‘did not choose to extend the transitional period
         referred to in Article of Regulation (EC) No 1750/… particularly as the adoption by the European Commission of the
         Luxembourg RDP occurred very late in …’.
         
            
 It is apparent from point of that minute that the financial corrections would be applied to the monthly advances paid to
         certain Member States and that those States would subsequently be advised of them by letter.
         
            
 Next, the terms of the contested decision, which is the same letter which it was stated at the EAGGF Committee meeting of
         February would be sent, show that that decision was intended to have legal effect. It is headed: ‘Application of Article
         39(3) of Regulation (EC) No 1750/– Correction to be applied to advances’. The next paragraph of that act, which is plainly
         of the nature of a decision, states that ‘because the total of expenditure does not meet the 75% threshold of the forecast
         submitted, Article 39(3) of Regulation (EC) No 1750/is applicable. Document AGRI/46059/– Rev. 2, which was discussed
         at the meeting of the EAGGF Committee on February and which shows the detail of the calculations, is annexed’.
         
            
 Lastly, as the applicant rightly submits, the contested decision is the only act which states that the expenditure to be booked
         for the financial year of the Portuguese Republic is to be reduced by EUR 055.83, is the only act by which the
         applicant was duly informed of the finding that the actual expenditure did not amount to 75% of the forecast expenditure,
         and also the only act specifying the budget chapter against which that sum was to be applied.
         
            
 By contrast to the contested decision, the decisions of May and June regarding the advances to be paid to the Member
         States for April and May are addressed to all the Member States, refer only to the overall amount of monthly advances
         to be paid to them and do not contain any reference to the amount of the financial corrections to be made with respect to
         the parties to whom they are addressed. Furthermore, the Commission has not specified the financial corrections which those
         two decisions would have applied to the Portuguese Republic.
         
            
 The contested decision accordingly constitutes the only measure which clearly determines the content and scope of the disputed
         financial correction. The applicant is therefore right to submit that the decisions of May and June are no more
         than measures which give effect to the contested decision. This is also apparent from the terms of that act, which had stated
         that those decisions would be taken.
         
            
 It follows from all of the above that the contested decision is indeed the act by which the contested financial correction
         was taken and by which the Portuguese authorities received notification of that correction. That act therefore has binding
         legal effect, with the result that the applicant’s request for annulment is admissible. The preliminary objection of inadmissibility
         raised by the Commission must accordingly be rejected.
         
Substance
            
 By the first part of its first plea, which alleges that the author of the act exceeded its powers, the applicant submits that,
         according to the general principles of administrative law, the delegation and sub-delegation of powers may not be inferred
         but must be expressly invoked where the author of the act is not acting within the scope of its own powers. In this case,
         the Director-General who signed the contested decision did not himself have the power to adopt that decision and did not rely
         upon any act of delegation or sub-delegation taken on the basis of Article or Article of the Commission’s Rules of Procedure.
         
            
 The Commission’s only argument against the first part of the plea states, at point of the defence and at point of the
         rejoinder, that the disputed financial correction was not taken by the contested decision, but by the decisions of May
         and June 2002, adopted by the Commissioner for Agriculture acting under a delegation of powers by the Commission.
         
            
 The Commission thus does not deny that the Director-General who signed the contested decision did not hold any delegation
         of powers authorising him to adopt the disputed financial corrective measure.
         
            
 Accordingly, the contested decision which, as mentioned above, constitutes the act by which the financial correction was adopted
         and notified to the Portuguese authorities, is vitiated by lack of powers and must, on that ground and without there being
         any need to consider the six remaining pleas in the application, be annulled.
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Portuguese Republic applied for the Commission to be ordered to
         pay the costs and the Commission has been unsuccessful, it must be ordered to pay the costs.
         
 On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
         
 
1.
Annuls the decision contained in the letter of the Director‑General of the Directorate‑General for Agriculture of the Commission
                     of the European Communities of April concerning a reduction in advances extended in the financial year in accordance
                     with Article 39(3) of Commission Regulation (EC) No 1750/of July laying down detailed rules for the application
                     of Council Regulation (EC) No 1257/on support for rural development from the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee
                     Fund (EAGGF), as most recently amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1763/of September 2001;
                  
 
2.
Orders the Commission of the European Communities to pay the costs. 
 Signatures.
      
 –
            
Language of the case: Portuguese.
Top  
 