
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-191/P Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs)vWm. Wrigley Jr. Company
«(Appeal – Community trade mark – Regulation (EC) No 40/– Absolute ground for refusal to register – Distinctive character – Marks consisting exclusively of descriptive signs or indications – DOUBLEMINT)»
Opinion of Advocate General Jacobs delivered on April I - Judgment of the Court, October I - Summary of the Judgment
Community trade mark – Definition and acquisition of a Community trade mark – Absolute grounds for refusal – Trade marks which consist exclusively of signs or indications which may serve to designate the characteristics of the goods – Concept(Council Regulation No 40/94, Art. 7(1)(c))Article 7(1)(c) of Regulation No 40/on the Community trade mark provides that trade marks which  
         consist exclusively of signs or indications which may serve, in trade, to designate the kind, quality, quantity, intended
         purpose, value, geographical origin, time of production of the goods or of rendering of the service, or other characteristics
         of the goods or service are not to be registered.In order for the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) to refuse to register a trade mark
         under that article, it is not necessary that the signs and indications composing the mark that are referred to in that article
         actually be in use at the time of the application for registration in a way that is descriptive of goods or services such
         as those in relation to which the application is filed, or of characteristics of those goods or services. It is sufficient,
         as the wording of that provision itself indicates, that such signs and indications could be used for such purposes. A sign
         must therefore be refused registration under that provision if at least one of its possible meanings designates a characteristic
         of the goods or services concerned.To interpret Article 7(1)(c) of Regulation No 40/as precluding the registration of trade marks which are  
         exclusively descriptive of the goods or services in respect of which registration is sought, or of their characteristics, implies the application
         of a test which is not the test laid down by that article and disregards the scope thereof.see paras 29, 32-34, JUDGMENT OF THE COURTOctober (1)
((Appeal – Community trade mark – Regulation (EC) No 40/– Absolute ground for refusal to register – Distinctive character – Marks consisting exclusively of descriptive signs or indications – DOUBLEMINT))
In Case C-191/P, 
            
 Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs),   represented by V. Melgar and S. Laitinen, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
appellant, supported by Federal Republic of Germany,   represented by A. Dittrich and B. Muttelsee-Schön, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,and by United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,   represented by J.E. Collins, acting as Agent, assisted by D. Alexander, Barrister, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
interveners in the appeal, 
APPEAL against the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities (Second Chamber) of January in Case T-193/Wrigley  v  
             OHIM  (
             DOUBLEMINT ) [2001] ECR II-417, seeking to have that judgment set aside, in which the Court of First Instance annulled the decision of
            the First Board of Appeal of the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) of June (Case R 216/1998-1) dismissing the appeal brought by Wm. Wrigley Jr. Company against the refusal to register the word DOUBLEMINT
            as a Community trade mark,
            
the other party to the proceedings being: 
             Wm. Wrigley Jr. Company,   established in Chicago, Illinois (United States of America), represented by M. Kinkeldey, Rechtsanwalt, with an address for
            service in Luxembourg,applicant at first instance, 
THE COURT,,
composed of: V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans, C. Gulmann, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues and A. Rosas (Presidents of Chambers), D.A.O. Edward, A. La Pergola, J.-P. Puissochet (Rapporteur), R. Schintgen, F. Macken, N. Colneric and S. von Bahr, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: F.G. Jacobs, Registrar: H. von Holstein, Deputy Registrar, 
            
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,after hearing oral argument from the parties at the hearing on January 2003, at which the Office for Harmonisation in the
            Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM) was represented by A. von Mühlendahl, acting as Agent, and V. Melgar, and
            Wm. Wrigley Jr. Company by M. Kinkeldey,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on April 2003, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
By an application lodged at the Registry of the Court on April 2001, the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market
         (Trade Marks and Designs) (hereinafter  
         OHIM) brought an appeal under Article of the EC Statute of the Court of Justice against the judgment of the Court of First
         Instance of January in Case T-193/Wrigley  v  
          OHIM  (
          DOUBLEMINT ) [2001] ECR II-(hereinafter  
         the contested judgment), in which the Court of First Instance annulled the decision of the First Board of Appeal of OHIM of June (Case R
         216/1998-1) (hereinafter  
         the contested decision) dismissing the appeal lodged by Wm. Wrigley Jr. Company (hereinafter  
         Wrigley) against the refusal to register the word DOUBLEMINT as a Community trade mark for various classes of goods including in
         particular chewing gum. 
         
Regulation (EC) No 40/Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 40/of December on the Community trade mark (OJ L 11, p. 1) provides
         as follows: A Community trade mark may consist of any signs capable of being represented graphically, particularly words, including personal
         names, designs, letters, numerals, the shape of goods or of their packaging, provided that such signs are capable of distinguishing
         the goods or services of one undertaking from those of other undertakings.
         
            
Article of that Regulation provides as follows: 
         
1.
 The following shall not be registered: 
         
(a)
signs which do not conform to the requirements of Article 4; 
         
(b)
trade marks which are devoid of any distinctive character; 
         
(c)
trade marks which consist exclusively of signs or indications which may serve, in trade, to designate the kind, quality, quantity,
         intended purpose, value, geographical origin or the time of production of the goods or of rendering of the service, or other
         characteristics of the goods or service; 
         ...
         
2.
 Paragraph shall apply notwithstanding that the grounds of non-registrability obtain in only part of the Community.
         
3.
 Paragraph 1(b), (c) and (d) shall not apply if the trade mark has become distinctive in relation to the goods or services
         for which registration is requested in consequence of the use which has been made of it.
         
            
Article of Regulation No 40/provides: A Community trade mark shall not entitle the proprietor to prohibit a third party from using in the course of trade:...
         
(b)
indications concerning the kind, quality, quantity, intended purpose, value, geographical origin, the time of production of
         the goods or of rendering of the service, or other characteristics of the goods or service;  
         ...provided he uses them in accordance with honest practices in industrial or commercial matters.
         Facts of the case
            
On March Wrigley applied to OHIM for registration as a Community trade mark of the word DOUBLEMINT for goods within,
         inter alia, Classes 3, and of the Nice Agreement concerning the International Classification of Goods and Services for
         the Purpose of the Registration of Marks of June 1957, as revised and amended, in particular chewing gum. 
         
            
The examiner at OHIM rejected that application by decision of October 1998, following which Wrigley brought an appeal before
         OHIM. 
         
            
By the contested decision, the First Board of Appeal of OHIM dismissed the appeal on the ground that the word DOUBLEMINT,
         a combination of two English words with no additional fanciful or imaginative element, was descriptive of certain characteristics
         of the goods in question, namely their mint-based composition and their mint flavour, and that it could therefore not be registered
         as a Community trade mark by virtue of Article 7(1)(c) of Regulation No 40/94. 
         Procedure before the Court of First Instance and the contested judgment
            
By an application lodged at the Registry of the Court of First Instance on September 1999, Wrigley brought an action for
         annulment of the contested decision.  The Court of First Instance upheld that action. 
         
            
After citing, at paragraph of the contested judgment, Article 7(1)(c) of Regulation No 40/94, the Court of First Instance
         found, at paragraph of the judgment, that by that provision the Community legislature intended to prevent the registration
         of signs which, owing to their purely descriptive nature, are incapable of distinguishing the goods of one undertaking from
         those of another but that signs or indications whose meaning goes beyond the exclusively descriptive are, by contrast, registrable
         as Community trade marks. 
         
            
Secondly, the Court of First Instance held, at paragraphs to of the contested judgment, that the word DOUBLEMINT was
         not exclusively descriptive in this case. It found that the adjective  
         double was unusual when compared with other English words such as  
         much,  
         strong,  
         extra,  
         best or  
         finest and that, when combined with the word  
         mint, it had two distinct meanings for the potential consumer:  
         twice the usual amount of mint or  
         flavoured with two varieties of mint.  Furthermore, it found that  
         mint is a generic term which includes spearmint, peppermint and other culinary herbs, and that there are several possible ways
         of combining two sorts of mint and, in addition, various strengths of flavour are possible in the case of each combination.
         
         
            
Thirdly, the Court of First Instance found, at paragraph of the contested decision, that the numerous meanings of DOUBLEMINT
         are immediately apparent, at least by association or by allusion, to an average English-speaking consumer and thus deprive
         that sign of any descriptive function, for the purposes of Article 7(1)(c) of Regulation No 40/94, whereas for a consumer
         who does not have a sufficient mastery of the English language, the word will, by its very nature, have a vague and fanciful
         meaning. 
         
            
The Court of First Instance therefore concluded, at paragraph of the contested judgment, that the word DOUBLEMINT, when
         applied to the goods referred to in the application for registration, had an ambiguous and suggestive meaning which was open
         to various interpretations and did not enable the public concerned immediately and without further reflection to detect the
         description of a characteristic of the goods in question.  Since it was not exclusively descriptive, the term could not, according
         to the Court of First Instance, be refused registration. The Court of First Instance accordingly annulled the contested decision.
         
         The appeal
            
OHIM claims that the Court should set aside the contested judgment and order Wrigley to pay the costs. 
         
            
Wrigley contends that the Court should dismiss the appeal and order OHIM to pay the costs. 
         
            
By order of the President of the Court of October 2001, the Federal Republic of Germany and the United Kingdom of Great
         Britain and Northern Ireland were granted leave to intervene in support of OHIM. 
         Arguments of the parties
         
            
OHIM contends that the Court of First Instance erred in law in finding that a word such as DOUBLEMINT had to be  
         exclusively descriptive to be excluded from registration as a Community trade mark under Article 7(1)(c) of Regulation No 40/94. 
         
            
OHIM observes at the outset that a less rigorous approach to interpreting the absolute grounds for refusal in Article of
         Regulation No 40/would have the effect of considerably increasing the number of applications for signs which have more
         than one meaning and which, by reason of their descriptiveness, should never be endowed with the protection conferred by registration
         as a trade mark. 
         
            
Next, OHIM points out that an interpretation of the absolute ground for refusal to register based on a sign's descriptiveness
         must take account of the other two absolute grounds for refusal in Article 7(1)(b) and (d) of Regulation No 40/relating
         to a sign's lack of distinctive character and to its customary usage. 
         
            
In particular, the general exclusion from registration as Community trade marks of signs which are devoid of distinctive character,
         as set out in Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94, is separate from the grounds for refusal in Article 7(1)(a) and 7(1)(c).
          Wholly descriptive signs are, by their very nature, deemed incapable of distinguishing the goods of one undertaking from
         those of another.  There can be no legal monopoly for words which are incapable of fulfilling the function of a trade mark,
         unless they have acquired distinctiveness in consequence of the use made of them, pursuant to Article 7(3) of Regulation No
         40/94. 
         
            
Finally, OHIM contends, contrary to the finding of the Court of First Instance in the contested judgment, that a word such
         as DOUBLEMINT does not cease to be descriptive simply because it can have several meanings and is therefore ambiguous.  In
         the mind of the average consumer, DOUBLEMINT is spontaneously associated with certain potential characteristics of the goods
         in question, namely their mint-based composition and their mint flavour, so that the word is necessarily descriptive and cannot
         therefore be registered as a Community trade mark. 
         
            
Wrigley, on the other hand, takes the view that Article 7(1)(c) of Regulation No 40/does not preclude registration of a
         word such as DOUBLEMINT, consisting of elements each of which by itself is descriptive, where that word, taken as a whole,
         is an unusual combination of those elements and is not, in ordinary language and in the mind of the average consumer, as such
         clearly and unambiguously purely descriptive of certain characteristics of the goods concerned. 
         
            
According to Wrigley, the grammatical structure of the word DOUBLEMINT is unusual and elliptical and nobody would describe
         the characteristics of chewing gum by saying that it  
         has a doublemint flavour.  In addition, the word DOUBLEMINT has many possible meanings, which precludes consumers from remembering one of them in
         particular, and this gives the sign an ambiguous and suggestive meaning. 
         
            
Wrigley adds that OHIM's objective of ensuring that terms which are wholly descriptive remain freely available for use by
         competitors can apply only to signs in respect of which there is a reasonably clear and foreseeable need for competitors to
         use a particular term to describe certain characteristics of their goods.  That is not the case in relation to the word DOUBLEMINT,
         which, since its registration almost a century ago with the United States Patent and Trademark Office, that is to say in an
         English-speaking country, has not been used by the public or by competitors in a descriptive way.  Wrigley also points out
         that OHIM's Boards of Appeal have already accepted composite words for registration such as, for example, Alltravel and Megatours
         for travel services, Transeuropea for transport services and Oilgear for hydraulic machinery. 
         
            
In its observations, Wrigley claims that the word DOUBLEMINT wholly satisfies the conditions laid down by the Court of Justice
         in Case C-383/P  
          Procter & Gamble  v  
          OHIM  [2001] ECR I-relating to the BABY-DRY trade mark for a word to be accepted as having distinctive character. 
         
            
The United Kingdom Government, intervening in support of OHIM, argues that the purpose of Article 7(1)(c) of Regulation No
         40/is to prevent signs or indications, like the word DOUBLEMINT, which are descriptive of the characteristics of the goods
         or services, or which are simply suitable for describing them in normal use by an average consumer, from being used as trade
         marks by one undertaking alone.  As the Court held in Joined Cases C-108/and C-109/Windsurfing Chiemsee  [1999] ECR I-2779, the registration of such signs or indications as trade marks would run counter to the public interest,
         which dictates that they should be freely available for use. 
         
            
The Court ought therefore to make it clear in this case, in so far as it is not evident from the judgment in  
          BABY-DRY , firstly that a term does not have to be in current descriptive use to be precluded from registration, but that a reasonable
         apprehension that it may be so used in the future suffices, and, second, that the fact that more than one term can be used
         to describe the characteristics of particular goods does not mean that those terms cease to be descriptive. 
         
            
The German Government, also intervening in support of OHIM, submits that the word DOUBLEMINT is a purely descriptive indication
         that anybody must be able to use freely.  The possible multiplicity of meanings inherent in the components of the description
         does not contradict that view.  Those other meanings are all of a descriptive nature, including in German-speaking countries,
         as indeed the Bundespatentgericht and the Bundesgerichtshof have held in relation to the words  
         Marktfrisch,  
         Doppel Caramel,  
         Double Color and  
         Double Action. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
Under Article of Regulation No 40/94, a Community trade mark may consist of any signs capable of being represented graphically,
         provided that they are capable of distinguishing the goods or services of one undertaking from those of other undertakings.
         
         
            
Article 7(1)(c) of Regulation No 40/provides that trade marks which  
         consist exclusively of signs or indications which may serve, in trade, to designate the kind, quality, quantity, intended
         purpose, value, geographical origin, time of production of the goods or of rendering of the service, or other characteristics
         of the goods or service are not to be registered. 
         
            
Accordingly, signs and indications which may serve in trade to designate the characteristics of the goods or service in respect
         of which registration is sought are, by virtue of Regulation No 40/94, deemed incapable, by their very nature, of fulfilling
         the indication-of-origin function of the trade mark, without prejudice to the possibility of their acquiring distinctive character
         through use under Article 7(3) of Regulation No 40/94. 
         
            
By prohibiting the registration as Community trade marks of such signs and indications, Article 7(1)(c) of Regulation No 40/pursues an aim which is in the public interest, namely that descriptive signs or indications relating to the characteristics
         of goods or services in respect of which registration is sought may be freely used by all.  That provision accordingly prevents
         such signs and indications from being reserved to one undertaking alone because they have been registered as trade marks (see,
         inter alia, in relation to the identical provisions of Article 3(1)(c) of First Council Directive 89/104/EEC of December
         to approximate the laws of the Member States relating to trade marks (OJ L 40, p. 1),  
          Windsurfing Chiemsee , paragraph 25, and Joined Cases C-53/to C-55/Linde and Others  [2003] ECR I-3161, paragraph 73). 
         
            
In order for OHIM to refuse to register a trade mark under Article 7(1)(c) of Regulation No 40/94, it is not necessary that
         the signs and indications composing the mark that are referred to in that article actually be in use at the time of the application
         for registration in a way that is descriptive of goods or services such as those in relation to which the application is filed,
         or of characteristics of those goods or services.  It is sufficient, as the wording of that provision itself indicates, that
         such signs and indications could be used for such purposes.  A sign must therefore be refused registration under that provision
         if at least one of its possible meanings designates a characteristic of the goods or services concerned. 
         
            
In the present case, the reason given by the Court of First Instance, at paragraph of the contested judgment, for holding
         that the word at issue could not be refused registration under Article 7(1)(c) was that signs or indications whose meaning
          
         goes beyond the merely descriptive are capable of being registered as Community trade marks and, at paragraph of the contested judgment, that  
         that term cannot be characterised as exclusively descriptive.  It thus took the view that Article 7(1)(c) of Regulation No 40/had to be interpreted as precluding the registration
         of trade marks which are  
         exclusively descriptive of the goods or services in respect of which registration is sought, or of their characteristics. 
         
            
In so doing, the Court of First Instance applied a test based on whether the mark is  
         exclusively descriptive, which is not the test laid down by Article 7(1)(c) of Regulation No 40/94. 
         
            
It thereby failed to ascertain whether the word at issue was capable of being used by other economic operators to designate
         a characteristic of their goods and services. 
         
            
It follows that it erred as to the scope of Article 7(1)(c) of Regulation No 40/94. 
         
            
In those circumstances, OHIM's submission that the contested judgment is vitiated by an error of law is well founded. 
         
            
It follows from the foregoing that the contested judgment must be set aside. 
         
            
Under the second sentence of the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, the Court may, if it
         annuls the decision of the Court of First Instance, refer the case back to the Court of First Instance for judgment. 
         
            
In the present proceedings, the case must be referred back to the Court of First Instance and costs must be reserved. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT,
hereby:  
         
1.
 Sets aside the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities of January in Case T-193/Wrigley  v  
             OHIM  (
             DOUBLEMINT ); 
            
2.
 Refers the case back to the Court of First Instance; 
            
3.
 Reserves the costs. 
            
Skouris 
Jann
Timmermans 
Gulmann 
Cunha Rodrigues
Rosas 
Edward 
La Pergola
Puissochet 
Schintgen 
Macken
Colneric 
von Bahr 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on October 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
V. Skouris  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: English.
Top  
 