
Case C-320/R
Commission of the European Communities
v
Republic of Austria
(Application for interim relief – Application for temporary measures – Transport – Sectoral ban on driving)
Summary of the Order
Application for interim relief – Suspension of implementation – Temporary measures – Conditions for granting – Urgency –Serious and irreparable damage –Balancing of all the interests at stake –Extension of a measure suspending implementation in the absence of new factors and agreement between the parties
  
ORDER OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE COURT
April (*)
      
(Application for interim relief – Application for temporary measures – Transport – Sectoral ban on driving)
In Case C-320/R, 
Commission of the European Communities, represented by C. Schmidt, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
supported by
Federal Republic of Germany, represented by W.-D. Plessing and A. Tiemann, acting as Agents, assisted by T. Lübbig, Rechtsanwalt,
      
and by
Italian Republic, represented by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, assisted by G. de Bellis, avvocato dello Stato, with an address for service
         in Luxembourg,
      
interveners,
v
Republic of Austria, represented by H. Dossi, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant,
APPLICATION for suspension of implementation of the sectoral ban on driving contained in the Verordnung des Landeshauptmanns
         von Tirol, mit der auf der A Inntalautobahn verkehrsbeschränkende Maßnahmen erlassen werden (sektorales Fahrverbot) (regulation
         adopted by the First Minister of the Tyrol limiting transport on the A motorway in the Inn valley (sectoral ban on driving))
         of May (BGBl. II, 2003/279),
      
THE PRESIDENT OF THE COURT
makes the following
Order
By an application lodged with the Registry of the Court on July 2003, the Commission of the European Communities brought
         an action under Article EC for a declaration that, by imposing a ban on driving affecting heavy goods vehicles transporting
         certain goods by the Verordnung des Landeshauptmanns von Tirol, mit der auf der A Inntalautobahn verkehrsbeschränkende
         Maßnahmen erlassen werden (sektorales Fahrverbot) (regulation adopted by the First Minister of the Land  of Tyrol limiting traffic on the A motorway in the Inn Valley (sectoral ban on driving)) of May (BGBl. II, 2003/279)
         (‘the contested regulation’), the Republic of Austria has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles and of Council
         Regulation (EEC) No 881/of March on access to the market in the carriage of goods by road within the Community
         to or from the territory of a Member State or passing across the territory of one or more Member States (OJ L 95, p. 1),
         as amended by Regulation (EC) No 484/of the European Parliament and of the Council of March (OJ L 76, p. 1),
         Articles and of Council Regulation (EEC) No 3118/of October laying down the conditions under which non-resident
         carriers may operate national road haulage services within a Member State (OJ L 279, p. 1), as amended by Regulation
         No 484/2002, and Articles EC to EC.
      
 Background to the present proceedings
By separate document, lodged at the Registry of the Court on July 2003, the Commission brought an application under Articles
         EC and EC for interim relief requiring the Republic of Austria to take the measures necessary to suspend application
         of the ban on driving introduced by the contested regulation until such time as the Court has given a ruling in the main action.
      
The Commission also requested, under Article 84(2) of the Rules of Procedure, that the request for interim relief be granted
         provisionally, even before the other party has submitted its observations, until the making of the order terminating the interim
         relief proceedings.
      
By order of July in Case C-320/R Commission v Austria [2003] ECR I-7929, the Republic of Austria was ordered temporarily to suspend implementation of the ban on driving contained
         in the contested regulation until the making of the order terminating the interim relief proceedings.
      
By order of October in Case C-320/R Commission v Austria [2003] ECR I-11665, the measure suspending implementation of that ban on driving was extended up to April 2004.
      
That order of October also granted leave to the Federal Republic of Germany and the Italian Republic to intervene in
         the present interim-relief proceedings in support of the form of order sought by the Commission.
      
Paragraphs to of the above order of October in Commission  v Austria  are worded as follows:
      
‘Nevertheless, given the significant ambient air quality problems in the area in question, the parties are invited to consult
         each other for the purpose of drawing up measures which may reconcile their conflicting interests, even if only temporarily,
         and to notify the Court of any compromise reached.
      
Failing that, the parties are invited to gather all the relevant information, inter alia on changes in ambient air quality
         in the area concerned, the estimated impact of the ban on night travel during and the prospects for developing rail transport
         or transport by other routes, and to submit that information to the Court, together with any observations they consider relevant,
         by February at the latest.
      
On the basis of that information and observations, the measure decided by this order may be extended, revoked or amended.’
On February the Republic of Austria requested, with the agreement of the other parties to the present proceedings,
         that the period for submitting such relevant information to the Court be extended up to March 2004. In support of that request
         it submitted that an extension of that period was desirable in the light of the real possibilities of reconciling the various
         interests in issue. That request was granted by order of the President of the Court of February 2004.
      
However, as this consultation did not lead to a compromise within the new period laid down for that purpose, the Federal Republic
         of Germany, the Republic of Austria and the Commission submitted their observations to the Court on February, February
         and March respectively. 
      
 Prolongation of the measure suspending implementation of the contested regulation
 Observations of the parties
The Commission states that two meetings were held between the parties, the first on January and the second on February
         2004, during which an examination was made of a number of alternative measures to the sectoral ban on driving promulgated
         by the contested regulation and which tended in the same direction, without, however, being discriminatory in nature or constituting
         such a significant obstacle to the freedom to provide transit services and to the free movement of goods.
      
The Commission states that scientific estimates made by Ökoscience AG, established in Coire (Switzerland), represented by
         J. Thudium, an expert in air hygiene who accompanied the Austrian delegation, indicated that the sectoral ban on driving could
         result, in the case of nitrous oxides, in a reduction in pollutants of between 5% and 6% of present emissions. The Commission
         does not call those estimates into question.
      
With regard to the effects of the reduction in pollutants liable to result from the alternative measures to the sectoral ban
         on driving envisaged by the contested regulation, it is clear from those estimates that the ban on driving heavy goods vehicles
         of classes EURO and would allow a 2% reduction in nitrous oxides, a ban on driving heavy goods vehicles of class EURO
         would lead to a reduction of 6% to 7%, while a limitation on the speed of cars over the section covered by the driving ban
         through the installation of a traffic management device would, under ideal conditions, result in a reduction of such nitrous
         oxides in the order of 11%. Data on the effects of an extension of the ban on night driving for heavy goods vehicles from
         seven hours per day, as is the position at present, to twelve hours per day are, the Commission states, not yet available.
      
It follows that at least two of the above measures would, taken separately, have a more significant effect than the sectoral
         driving ban laid down by the contested regulation. As those substitute measures are in accordance with Community law, the
         Commission considers that this constitutes confirmation of its view that this sectoral ban on driving is disproportionate.
      
The Austrian Government points out that measures consisting of a ban on driving heavy goods vehicles have a very graduated
         effect. A ban on driving heavy goods vehicles of classes EURO 0, and on the Inn Valley motorway (A motorway) would
         lead to a reduction of nitrous oxides of 8.5% for and 6% for 2004, with that reduction being no greater than 3.5% for
         2005. By the latest during this latter year the ban on driving ought to be reinforced by including heavy goods vehicles of
         class EURO in order to continue to ensure a significant reductive effect, such a ban being, however, difficult to justify
         in terms of legal certainty.
      
So far as concerns a speed limit for cars travelling on the section covered by the sectoral driving ban laid down by the contested
         regulation, the Austrian Government submits, on the basis of scientific studies, that rigid speed limits, applicable day and
         night over long distances, regardless of the state of traffic, are poorly complied with in relative terms. A traffic management
         device based on polluting emissions would make it possible to envisage a greater degree of compliance with the speed limits
         but its implementation would take some time, with the result that, even if the work on construction of such a device could,
         as planned, start during the first half of 2004, the system would probably not be operational before 2005.
      
From this the Austrian Government concludes that meeting the objectives relating to ambient air quality requires, in addition
         to a ban on night driving, the sectoral ban on driving provided for by the contested regulation. The substitution measures
         proposed by the Commission are not at present achievable or would not be as effective as implementation of that ban.
      
The German Government points out that, by Regulation (EC) No 2327/of the European Parliament and of the Council of December
         establishing a transitional points system applicable to heavy goods vehicles travelling through Austria for within
         the framework of a sustainable transport policy (OJ L 345, p. 30), the Community established a new regulatory system
         of ecopoints from January 2004, which sets out more stringent conditions for transit journeys through Austria. It argues
         that Austria is not implementing that regulation and has therefore not exhausted the measures available to it for the purpose
         of improving the protection of the population and the environment.
      
The German Government stresses the negative economic repercussions and frequently irreparable damage which would be suffered
         by many transport companies as a result of the sectoral ban on driving provided for in the contested regulation. It takes
         the view that the solution advocated by the Republic of Austria of transferring to the railways the transport subject to such
         a ban will encounter much greater obstacles than that Member State acknowledges, in particular because of a shortfall in rail
         transport capacity and the difficulties in transferring certain types of transport to the rail network.
      
 Assessment
It was held in paragraph of the order of October in Commission v Austria, cited above, that the soundness of the main action could not be discounted out of hand, even though the arguments put forward
         by the Republic of Austria in its defence could not be disregarded. Paragraph of that order stated that the risk of serious
         and irreparable damage following immediate application of the contested regulation had to be regarded as having been sufficiently
         established. In those circumstances, the decision was taken in that order to extend for a limited period expiring on April
         the injunction issued to the Republic of Austria to suspend enforcement of the sectoral ban on driving laid down in that
         regulation. The purpose of that suspensory measure was, in particular, to allow the parties to consult each other for the
         purpose of drawing up measures capable of reconciling, even if only temporarily, their conflicting interests.
      
The observations submitted to the Court by the parties to the present proceedings following the failure of the negotiations
         conducted for that purpose do not place in question the basis of that order or the conclusions arrived at by the President
         of the Court of First Instance in his capacity as the judge granting interim relief.
      
The contested regulation imposes a permanent ban on the circulation of heavy goods vehicles with a maximum authorised weight
         greater than 7.tonnes which transport specified goods over a 46-kilometre section of motorway constituting one of the main
         land links for trade between Northern Europe and Northern Italy, whereas bypassing the region in question encounters other
         limitations on circulation and the observations of the Austrian Government have failed to dispose of doubts as to what may
         be the indirectly discriminatory nature of this barrier to the rights of free movement laid down in the EC Treaty.
      
The Austrian Government refers to the concept of ‘rail-compatible goods’ (‘bahnaffine Güter’) as justification for the choice
         of goods covered by the contested regulation. That choice was thus not made on the basis of any particular contribution made
         by the goods in question in exceeding the limit values for harmful emissions but rather on the ostensible appropriateness
         of those goods for rail transport. As the decision to opt for rail transport for specific goods frequently depends less on
         the nature of the goods than on other criteria, such as the journey to be made, the duration of the transport and the resultant
         costs, it cannot be ruled out that this criterion will be unable to justify the choice made. The fact that paragraph of
         that regulation lists a variety of widely differing goods, such as waste, cereals, logs, bark and cork, ferrous and non-ferrous
         ores, pebbles, soil, rubble, motor vehicles and trailers, as well as construction steel, tends rather to reinforce doubts
         existing in that regard.
      
Furthermore, the observations submitted to the Court in pursuance of paragraph of the order of October in Commission v Austria make clear that there are a number of replacement measures which would enable a substantial reduction in harmful emissions
         to be achieved. Admittedly, some of those other measures will lose some of their efficacy over the years, in particular the
         ban on driving heavy goods vehicles of classes EURO 0, and as a result of the progressive replacement of those vehicles
         by more modern heavy goods vehicles. However, the present interim-relief proceedings concern the immediate future, that is
         to say, the period which will elapse before the Court gives its ruling in the main action.
      
The parties express divergent views as to whether these other measures are capable of replacing the sectoral ban on driving
         laid down by the contested regulation or whether only a combination of that ban and those measures will make it possible to
         achieve the vital reduction in harmful emissions. It appears in this regard, even if it is assumed that such a combination
         is necessary, that the fact none the less remains that the other measures might have the effect of reducing such emissions. The
         weight of the interests in the two examples in favour of extending the period of suspension of implementation of the contested
         regulation laid down by the order of July in Commission v Austria  is thus reinforced.
      
Subject to the foregoing, the information supplied to the Court in pursuance of the order of October in Commission v Austria  has not highlighted any new factors which should, at this stage of the proceedings, lead the President of the Court, acting
         in his capacity as the judge responsible for granting interim relief, to an outcome of the balancing of the interests involved
         which differs from that on the basis of which that order was made.
      
In those circumstances, and in the absence of consultation between the parties in regard to measures capable of reconciling,
         even if only temporarily, their conflicting interests for the purpose of reaching a compromise, the measure suspending implementation
         laid down by the order of July in Commission v Austria, which was maintained in force by the order of October in Commission v Austria  for the period expiring on April 2004, is extended, as from that latter date, until such time as the Court has given a
         ruling in the main action.
      
On those grounds,
THE PRESIDENT OF THE COURT
hereby orders:
1.      The measure suspending implementation laid down by the order of July in Case C-320/R Commission v Austria, which was maintained in force by the order of October in Commission v Austria, is extended until such time as the Court has given a ruling in the main action.
2.      Costs are reserved.
Luxembourg, April 2004.
R. Grass
 
      V. Skouris
Registrar
 
      President
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 