
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-34/Sante PasquinivIstituto nazionale della previdenza sociale (INPS)(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Tribunale ordinario di Roma)
         
«(Social security – Old-age pensions – Recalculation – Recovery of sums paid though not due – Limitation – Law applicable – Detailed procedural rules – Concept)»
Opinion of Advocate General Alber delivered on March I - Judgment of the Court (Fifth Chamber), June I - Summary of the Judgment
Social security for migrant workers – Old-age pension and life assurance – Benefits – Extinction of the right to a pension supplement granted under national legislation as a result of the person concerned receiving
                     a pension awarded by the competent institution of another Member State – Recovery of the sums paid though not due – Application of national law – Limits –   Observance of the principles of equivalence and  effectiveness
                  (Council Regulation No 1408/71, Arts 94, 95, 95a and 95b)Since Regulation No 1408/71, as amended and updated by Regulation No 118/97, does no more than ensure coordination of provisions
         of national legislation in the field of social security, it is national law which is applicable to a situation arising out
         of the payment of sums not due, made to a person in receipt of more than one pension by virtue of his belonging to social
         security schemes in various Member States, in the form of a pension supplement where the maximum authorised income is exceeded.
          The two-year time-limit, which is allowed by Articles 94, 95, 95a and 95b of Regulation No 1408/71, as amended, to the persons
         concerned to request that the more favourable provisions introduced into the Community legislation be applied to them, cannot
         be applied by analogy to such a situation.National law must, however, observe the Community principle of equivalence, in accordance with which the detailed procedural
         rules governing the treatment of situations arising out of the exercise of a Community freedom must be no less favourable
         than those governing purely internal situations, and the Community principle of effectiveness, in accordance with which those
         procedural rules must not render virtually impossible or excessively difficult the exercise of rights arising out of the situation
         of Community origin.Those principles apply to all the procedural rules governing the treatment of situations arising out of the exercise of a
         Community freedom, whether those rules are administrative or judicial, such as the provisions of national law relating to
         the limitation of actions and the recovery of sums paid though not due or those requiring the competent institutions to take
         account of the good faith of the persons concerned or to carry out proper checks of their situation with regard to pensions.see paras 52-54, 56-58, 62-63, 73, operative part
      
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)June (1)
((Social security – Old-age pensions – Recalculation – Recovery of sums paid though not due – Limitation – Law applicable – Detailed procedural rules – Concept))
In Case C-34/02, 
            REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Tribunale Ordinario di Roma (Italy) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings
            pending before that court between
            
 Sante Pasquini
and
 Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale (INPS),
on the interpretation of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/of the Council of June on the application of social security
            schemes to employed persons, to self-employed persons and to members of their families moving within the Community, as amended
            and updated by Council Regulation (EC) No 118/of December (OJ L 28, p. 1), and Regulation (EEC) No 574/laying
            down the procedure for implementing Regulation (EEC) No 1408/71,
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),,
composed of: M. Wathelet, President of the Chamber, C.W.A. Timmermans, D.A.O. Edward, P. Jann and A. Rosas (Rapporteur), Judges, 
            
Advocate General: S. Alber, Registrar: H. von Holstein, Deputy Registrar, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
Sante Pasquini, by R. Ciancaglini and M. Rossi, avvocati,
               
─
Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale (INPS), by A. Todaro, A. Riccio and N. Valente, avvocati, 
               
─
the Italian Government, by U. Leanza, acting as Agent, assisted by M. Masella Ducci Teri, Avvocato dello Stato, 
               
─
the Austrian Government, by C. Pesendorfer, acting as Agent, 
               
─
the Portuguese Government, by L. Fernandes and S. Pizarro, acting as Agents, 
               
─
the Commission of the European Communities, by H. Michard and A. Aresu, acting as Agents, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of Mr Pasquini, represented by M. Rossi, of the Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale
               (INPS), represented by A. Riccio, of the Italian Government, represented by A. Cingolo, Avvocato dello Stato, and of the Commission,
               represented by A. Aresu, at the hearing on January 2003,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
By order of January 2002, received at the Court Registry on February 2002, the Tribunale Ordinario di Roma (Rome District
         Court) referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling three questions on the interpretation of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/of the Council of June on the application of social security schemes to employed persons, to self-employed persons
         and to members of their families moving within the Community, as amended and updated by Council Regulation (EC) No 118/of December (OJ L 28, p. 1,  
         Regulation No 1408/71), and Regulation (EEC) No 574/laying down the procedure for implementing Regulation (EEC) No 1408/(
         Regulation No 574/72). 
         
            
Those questions were raised in proceedings between Mr Pasquini and the Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale (National
         Institute of Social Insurance,  
         the INPS), concerning a decision taken by the INPS requiring Mr Pasquini to repay amounts paid though not due by way of an old-age
         pension. 
         
The relevant provisions
The Community legislation
         
            
Article of Regulation No 1408/71, which forms part of Chapter 3, headed  
         Old Age and Death (Pensions), of Title III of that Regulation, lays down the detailed rules for the calculation of benefits, in particular where the person
         concerned does not simultaneously satisfy the conditions laid down by all the legislations under which periods of insurance
         or residence have been completed.  It provides: 
         
1.
 If, at a given time, the person concerned does not satisfy the conditions laid down for the provision of benefits by all the
         legislations of the Member States to which he has been subject, taking into account where appropriate the provisions of Article
         and/or Article 40(3), but satisfies the conditions of one or more of them only, the following provisions shall apply:
         
(a)
each of the competent institutions administering a legislation whose conditions are satisfied shall calculate the amount of
         the benefit due, in accordance with the provisions of Article 46; 
         ...
         
2.
 The benefit or benefits awarded under one or more of the legislations in question, in the case referred to in paragraph 1,
         shall be recalculated automatically in accordance with Article 46, as and when the conditions required by one or more of the
         other legislations to which the person concerned has been subject are satisfied, taking into account, where appropriate, Article
         and taking into account once again, where appropriate, paragraph (1).
         ...
         
3.
 A recalculation shall automatically be made in accordance with paragraph (1), without prejudice to Article 40(2), where the
         conditions required by one or more of the legislations concerned are no longer satisfied.
         
            
Articles 94, 95, 95a and 95b of Regulation No 1408/71, which are transitional provisions applicable following the entry into
         force of the regulation or of amendments to it, each contain similar provisions concerning applications for review of the
         calculation of pensions, having regard to the new provisions applicable.  The essence of those provisions is as follows: 
         
─
if the application is submitted within two years from the date of the application of the new provision, the rights acquired
            under it are to have effect from that date, and the provisions of the legislation of any Member State concerning the forfeiture
            or limitation of rights may not be invoked against the persons concerned (Articles 94(6), 95(6), 95a(5) and 95b(6)); 
         
─
if the application is submitted after the expiry of the period of two years from the date of the application of the new provision,
            rights which have not been forfeited or time-barred have effect from the date of the application, except where more favourable
            provisions of the legislation of any Member State apply (Articles 94(7), 95(7), 95a(6) and 95b(7)). 
         
            
Article of Regulation No 574/provides that, in the event of recalculation, withdrawal or suspension of a benefit, the
         institution which has taken such a decision must immediately notify the person concerned and each of the institutions on which
         the person concerned has a claim, if necessary through the good offices of the investigating institution, that is to say,
         in principle, the institution of the place of residence of the person concerned, in accordance with Articles and of
         Regulation No 574/72. 
         
            
Article of Regulation No 574/deals with cooperation between the social security institutions of various Member States
         with a view to recovering sums paid though not due.  It thus provides,  
          inter alia , that an institution of a Member State which has overpaid certain sums to a recipient of benefits may request the institution
         of any other Member State responsible for the payment of benefits to that recipient to deduct the amount overpaid from the
         amounts which it pays to the said recipient.  The latter institution is to make the deduction under the conditions and within
         the limits provided for such setting-off by the legislation which it administers, as if the sums had been overpaid by itself,
         and transfer the amount deducted to the creditor institution. 
         
            
Article of Regulation No 574/covers the case where recovery of the amounts overpaid is impossible.  It provides as
         follows: When an institution has made payments which are not due, either directly or through another institution, and when their recovery
         has become impossible, the amounts in question shall remain finally chargeable to the first institution, save where the payment
         which was not due is the result of fraud.
         The Italian legislation
         Legislation applicable to migrant workers' pensions
         
            
Article of Law No of April (Ordinary Supplement to GURI No of April 1969) provides: Italian nationals whose insurance records have been transferred from the Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale to the
         Libyan National Institute of Social Insurance pursuant to Article of the Italo-Libyan Agreement of October 1956, ratified
         by Law No of August 1957, and who have acquired the right to a pension payable by Libyan insurance before December
         shall receive from the INPS as from January 1969, and wholly payable by the Fondo per l'Adeguamento delle Pensioni
         (Pensions Adjustment Fund), an increase in the supplement referred to in Article of Law No of August 1962, in order
         to attain the monthly amount of minimum pension provided by compulsory insurance covering invalidity, old-age and the dependants
         of employed persons.The minimum pensions referred to in the previous paragraph shall also be payable as from the same date to persons receiving
         a pension who have acquired that right by virtue of the aggregation of periods of insurance and contributions provided for
         by international agreements or conventions on social insurance.For the purposes of the award of those minimum pensions, account shall be taken of the amount of pension, if any, paid pro
         rata by virtue of that aggregation by foreign insurance bodies.Emigrant workers who satisfy the conditions necessary for entitlement to a pension by virtue of the aggregation of periods
         of insurance and contributions referred to in the second paragraph shall be entitled,  
          inter alia  on the basis of the provisional certificate issued by the competent foreign bodies, to the payment of an advance on the pension,
         which shall be added to until the minimum pension is reached.  Persons receiving other pensions shall not be entitled to that
         supplement and it shall be recovered on the basis of the sums which may have been paid pro rata by the foreign insurance bodies.
         The legislation applicable to limitation of actions and recovery of sums paid though not due
         
            
Article of the Italian Civil Code lays down a general limitation period of years in respect of debts. 
         
            
Article 52(1) of Law No of March restructuring the National Social Security Office and the National Office of Insurance
         against Accidents at Work (Ordinary Supplement to GURI No of March 1989) provides,  
          inter alia , that the amount of old-age pensions may be corrected in the event of an error in their award or payment.  In accordance
         with Article 52(2), the sums paid though not due are to be recovered only where the pensioner has acted fraudulently. 
         
            
Article 13(1) of Law No of December on public finance (GURI No of December 1991), adopted as the authentic
         interpretation of Article of Law No 88/89, states that failure to communicate, or incomplete communication, on the part
         of the pensioner of facts which are relevant to entitlement to the pension or to its amount and which are not already known
         to the competent body authorises the latter to recover the sums paid though not due. 
         
            
Article 13(2) of Law No provides as follows: Once a year the INPS shall check the income of persons in receipt of pensions and its effect on the amount of or entitlement
         to pension benefits; during the course of the following year the INPS shall take steps to recover any sums overpaid.
         
            
Article 1(260) to (265) of Law No of December rationalising public finance (Ordinary Supplement No to GURI
         No of December 1996) introduced an exception to the principle that sums paid though not due are to be recovered in
         the field of social security.  It provides that pension benefits overpaid by public compulsory insurance bodies in respect
         of periods before January are not to give rise to recovery if in the persons concerned had taxable personal income
         of no more than ITL 000.  If that taxable personal income is greater than that figure, no recovery is to be made of
         up to a quarter of the amount overpaid.  Recovery is made monthly, without interest, in the form of a direct deduction from
         the pension, and that deduction may not exceed one fifth of the pension. 
         
            
Similar provisions were adopted in with regard to overpayments for periods before January 2001. 
         The dispute in the main proceedings
            
Mr Pasquini worked in turn in Italy (weeks), France (weeks) and Luxembourg (weeks). 
         
            
In response to a request submitted on February Mr Pasquini obtained from the INPS a retirement pension pro rata as
         from March 1987. 
         
            
Additions were made to the amount of that pension to bring it up to the level of the minimum pension referred to in Article
         of Law No 153/69, namely, ITL a month, given that at that time Mr Pasquini was receiving neither a French nor a
         Luxembourg pension. 
         
            
The payment decision stated that, pursuant to the abovementioned provision, the pension as supplemented in order to bring
         it up to the level of the minimum pension would be recalculated, and therefore reduced, if another pension payable by a foreign
         body were to be awarded. 
         
            
On July the INPS notified to Mr Pasquini a second decision recalculating his Italian pension as from March because of the award to him on that date of a pro rata French pension.  That decision reduced the Italian pension to the monthly
         sum of ITL 150. 
         
            
The decisions adopted by the INPS on October and July mention the number of weeks that Mr Pasquini worked
         in Italy (140), France (336) and Luxembourg (256). 
         
            
By a third decision adopted on March 2000, the INPS once again recalculated the applicant's Italian pension as from March
         and reduced its amount as from July 1988, the date on which his Luxembourg pension began, from ITL to ITL a month.  That third decision provided for the recovery of overpayments in the amount of ITL (EUR 005) in respect
         of the period from March to April 2000. 
         
            
The administrative appeal brought by Mr Pasquini before the INPS on October was rejected on December on the
         ground that  
         Article of Law No 412/is not applicable to recovery of sums paid though not due in connection with the withdrawal of
         the supplement bringing the total up to the level of the minimum pension as a result of the award of a foreign pension, since
         at the time of assessment the beneficiary was informed that the amount of the pension was provisional, as provided for by
         Article of Law No 153/69.  By contrast, the decision of December provided for application of Law No 662/and required Mr Pasquini to produce
         a document relating to his income for 1995. 
         
            
On April Mr Pasquini brought an action before the Tribunale Ordinario di Roma challenging the non-applicability to
         his situation of the Italian rules concerning recovery of sums paid though not due.  He claimed that the Italian legislation
         was contrary to Regulations Nos 1408/and 574/72. 
         
            
Those were the circumstances in which the Tribunale Ordinario di Roma decided to stay proceedings and refer the following
         questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling: 
         
1.
 Is a provision of national law, which provides, without any time-limit and thus in breach of the principle of legal certainty,
         for the recovery of an undue payment arising from the application of Community legislation, compatible with the objectives
         of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/of the Council of June on the application of social security schemes to employed persons,
         to self-employed persons and to members of their families moving within the Community, and Council Regulation (EEC) No 574/of March laying down the procedure for implementing Regulation (EEC) No 1408/71? 
         
2.
 Are the Community provisions cited above not to be interpreted as precluding the application of a provision of national law
         which does not lay down time-limits for the recovery of undue payments arising from the belated or improper application of
         the relevant Community provisions? 
         
3.
 Is it not possible, given that the transitional rules for the application of the social security regulations provide for a
         time-limit of two years in which to claim, with retrospective effect, the rights conferred by those regulations, to apply
          
          a contrario  the same time-limit of two years from notification of recovery of undue payment in cases of reduction of rights previously
         conferred, except where more favourable time-limits are laid down by national law, and provided that the person concerned
         is not guilty of improper conduct?
         
Consideration of the questions referred
            
The three questions referred by the national court may appropriately be considered together. 
         Observations submitted to the Court
         
            
Mr Pasquini refers to the national provisions applicable to recovery of sums paid though not due and observes that no criticism
         may be made of him with regard to the sum which has been overpaid to him.  He draws attention to a letter sent on October
         by the Luxembourg workers' social assistance body  
         Patronato ACLI to the INPS, informing the latter of the award of the Luxembourg pension and requesting it to reexamine without delay the
         amount of Mr Pasquini's Italian pension so as to avoid there being any overpayment.  He notes that although the INPS was perfectly
          
          au fait  with his pension position, which was apparent from the mention of Luxembourg on the pension forms as a place where a pension
         had been granted, it waited until March before recalculating his Italian pension, with years' retrospective effect,
         contrary to Article of Regulation No 574/72. 
         
            
He maintains that in the case in the main proceedings the non-applicability to his situation of the Italian legislation concerning
         recovery of sums paid though not due is contrary to the general principles enshrined in Regulations Nos 1408/and 574/72.
         
         
            
He submits that, unlike recovery of a sum paid though not due arising pursuant to a provision solely of national legislation,
         which is a matter of purely national law, recovery of a sum paid though not due arising from application of Community provisions
         is a matter of Community law, because the Council, in the exercise of the powers which it holds under Article EC, has the
         power to lay down detailed rules for the exercise of rights to social benefits which the persons concerned derive from the
         EC Treaty (Case 24/Petroni  [1975] ECR 1149, paragraph 20). 
         
            
Mr Pasquini wonders whether the Community regulations on social security adopted by the Council might not be incompatible
         with the objectives of Article EC, inasmuch as they contain no specific provisions for the detailed rules governing the
         recovery of sums paid though not due and, in particular, the limitation of actions. 
         
            
It is his view that, in order to guarantee legal certainty, the questions must be settled in the context of Article of
         Regulation No 574/and the period of two years laid down in Articles 94, 95, 95a and 95b of Regulation No 1408/must be
         applied by analogy. 
         
            
Article of Regulation No 574/requires the competent institutions to notify immediately to the person concerned decisions
         recalculating, withdrawing or suspending the benefit received.  If the competent social security body does not observe that
         rule, leaving the insured persons in legal uncertainty indefinitely, it must, in Mr Pasquini's submission, bear all the consequences,
         in that it may not require repayment of sums overpaid through its own error or negligence. 
         
            
Mr Pasquini notes that Articles 94, 95, 95a and 95b of Regulation No 1408/allow the persons concerned a period of two years
         to assert their rights when that regulation is amended in their favour.  That period of two years could reasonably apply by
         analogy where the regulation is amended unfavourably, so that the possibility of bringing an action for recovery of sums paid
         though not due would be limited in time where the recipient acted in good faith. 
         
            
The INPS and the Italian Government submit, first, that the questions referred lack reasoning and are inadmissible and, second,
         that the Italian legislation is not incompatible with Regulations Nos 1408/and 574/72. 
         
            
They point out that the decisions calculating the amount of the pension and granting a supplement to bring it up to the level
         of the minimum pension, taken in accordance with Article of Law No 153/69, were adopted provisionally and, pursuant to that
         article, contain the warning that the pension paid by the Italian body could be reduced and that any sums overpaid since the
         payment of the foreign pension could be recovered. 
         
            
The Italian Government states that in their judgment No of February the Sezioni Unite Civili (Joint Civil Chambers)
         of the Supreme Court of Cassation, Italy, held that Article of Law No 153/governs a specific mechanism for the determination
         of pensions, a feature of which is a provisional determination the purpose of which is to grant an advance on the pension
         and to recover the supplement paid in order to bring it up to a minimum level, taking into account any sums paid pro rata
         by foreign social insurance bodies.  According to the Supreme Court of Cassation,  
         [w]ith regard to pensions paid, pursuant to international conventions, by reason of the aggregation of contributions paid
         in Italy and those paid by a foreign country, the recovery of sums which are no longer payable as a result of the payment
         of the foreign pension is provided for as a premiss inherent in the rule laid down in the relevant legislation, in Article
         of Law No of April 1969, and it therefore constitutes specific and autonomous recovery. 
         
            
The INPS and the Italian Government challenge the statement made in the questions referred for a preliminary ruling that there
         is in Italian law no rule on the limitation of actions, and refer to the period of years laid down in Article of the
         Civil Code. 
         
            
Furthermore, the INPS observes that, in accordance with the system established by Article 1(260) to (265) of Law No 662/96,
         applicable in the case in the main proceedings, the sums overpaid to Mr Pasquini will be quite safe from any recovery if in
         his income was no more than ITL 000, or that only three quarters of the amount of those sums may be recovered
         if his income was greater than that ceiling.  Low-income pensioners are accordingly protected by the Italian Law. 
         
            
The INPS and the Italian Government conclude that, with regard to sums paid though not due, former migrant workers now in
         receipt of a pension are treated in the same way as Italian pensioners who have not been migrant workers. 
         
            
At the hearing, in response to a question put by the Court, the INPS's legal adviser stated that, so far as concerns persons
         in receipt of a pension on account of their insurance under more than one Italian social security scheme, the INPS was bound
         to undertake an annual review of total income and of the validity of the amount paid by way of pension.  As regards former
         migrant workers, such annual review was made possible only by legislation adopted in 1996. 
         
            
At the hearing the INPS also stated that it had not received the letter of October from the Patronato ACLI informing
         it of the award of the Luxembourg pension.  It was not until it received a notice of November from the Luxembourg
         institution Établissement d'Assurance contre la Vieillesse et l'Invalidité (Old-age and Invalidity Insurance Establishment,
          
         the EAVI), that it was informed that Mr Pasquini had been receiving an anticipatory Luxembourg old-age pension since July 1988.
          Moreover, the EAVI acknowledged by letter of May that it had not earlier communicated to the INPS the decision determining
         the amount of the Luxembourg pension because Mr Pasquini lived in Luxembourg.  Given that no provision of national law required
         the INPS to review the award of foreign pensions but, rather, that the Community social security regulations required the
         Luxembourg institution to inform the INPS of the grant of the Luxembourg pension, it submits that it cannot be criticised
         for any delay.  It notes that it recalculated Mr Pasquini's pension four months after receiving the relevant information.
         
         
            
The Austrian and Portuguese Governments observe that, in the absence of applicable provisions of Community law, it is domestic
         law which determines the detailed rules and conditions for an action for recovery of sums paid though not due, so long as
         the principles of effectiveness and equivalence have been observed. 
         
            
The Portuguese Government, not being familiar with the law applicable to recovery of a sum paid though not due under Italian
         social security law alone, submits that it does not have enough information available to it to ascertain whether the principle
         of equivalence has been observed in the case in the main proceedings.  On the other hand, it considers that the principle
         of effectiveness is not observed if there is no time-barring of the national competent body's right to require repayment of
         a sum paid though not due, especially when such recovery means the reduction of previously recognised rights and is caused
         by late or incorrect application of the relevant Community rules.  It submits that there has been a breach of the obligation
         imposed by Article 49(2) of Regulation No 574/and of the fundamental principle of legal certainty, which is a principle
         inherent in the Community legal order protecting not only the authorities but also individuals. 
         
            
The Portuguese Government observes, furthermore, that according to the wording of the first recital in the preamble to Regulation
         No 1408/71, the provisions for coordination of national social security legislation fall within the framework of freedom of
         movement for workers and ought to contribute towards the improvement of their standard of living and conditions of employment.
          The possibility of requiring repayment at any time of sums paid though not due would jeopardise that aim. 
         
            
Noting that Article 94(6) of Regulation No 1408/gives expression to the fundamental principle of legal certainty and is
         intended to protect the social security institutions, the Portuguese Government suggests that that provision ought to be interpreted
         as precluding, pursuant to national law, the possibility of bringing an action for recovery of sums paid though not due for
         a period of more than the last two years, from the date of notification of recovery, where the overpayment was made because
         of late or incorrect application of the relevant Community rules. 
         
            
The Austrian Government, noting that problems frequently arise in Austria in connection with the recalculation of Italian
         pensions and the recovery of substantial sums paid though not due, submits that it is worth considering the question whether
         it is possible to deduce in a general way from the transitional provisions of Regulation No 1408/that retrospective effect
         is limited to two years in respect of all the legal consequences of those recalculations for migrant workers. 
         
            
In its view, it is exactly when periods of insurance have been completed in more than one Member State that the persons concerned
         are placed at a disadvantage, as a result of the juxtaposition of various legal orders, compared to workers who have been
         employed in only one Member State.  From that point of view there is justification for special protection of migrant workers'
         legitimate expectations, which might be assisted by limitation to two years of the retrospective effects of recalculation
         provided for by national law. 
         
            
The Austrian Government submits that it is difficult to accept that, although they have done nothing wrong, migrant workers
         should nevertheless be penalised as such, in that they can be required to repay, without temporal limitation, overpayments
         of benefits, when those sums are largely the result of the overlapping of the differing and extremely complex social security
         laws of the various Member States and not of their own personal actions. 
         
            
The Commission notes that Regulations Nos 1408/and 574/did not establish a common social security system but simply
         set up a system for the coordination of national laws in the field of social security. 
         
            
After rejecting the idea that Articles and of Regulation No 574/might be applicable, the Commission submits that
         at first sight all adjustments in the field of social security are the exclusive responsibility of the Member States, which
         are free to enact provisions in that area and that Regulations Nos 1408/and 574/do not impose the slightest restriction.
         
         
            
It notes, however, that the system established by the regulations is founded on the overriding need to ensure that equal treatment
         of migrant workers and resident workers in the field of social security is achieved in actual practice, in particular ensuring
         that migrant workers are not less favourably treated than resident workers. 
         
            
The Commission submits that the answer to be given to the questions referred must therefore be that on a proper construction
         of Regulations Nos 1408/and 574/provisions of national law which preclude recovery of sums paid though not due to persons
         receiving benefits under certain national social security schemes apply also to persons receiving benefits under the similar
         social security schemes taken into consideration by those regulations. 
         The Court's answer
         
            
It is important to bear in mind that the system set up by Regulation No 1408/is based on mere coordination of national
         laws in the field of social security and is not intended to harmonise them (see, to that effect, Case 313/Lenoir [1988] ECR 5391, paragraph 13). 
         
            
The rules on limitation or on recovery of sums paid though not due must therefore be sought in the national law of the Member
         State concerned (with regard to the limitation of actions, see Case 35/Rzepa  [1974] ECR 1241, paragraphs and 13, in relation to Regulation No of the Council of September concerning social
         security for migrant workers (Journal Officiel 30, p. 561), and to Regulation No of the Council of December laying down detailed rules for the implementation of and supplementing the provisions of Regulation No (Journal Officiel
         30, p. 597), but the result of which is applicable by analogy to Regulations Nos 1408/and 574/72). 
         
            
The rules under Articles 94, 95, 95a and 95b of Regulation No 1408/cannot be applied to the case in the main proceedings.
          They are in fact transitional provisions which apply only following the entry into force of Regulation No 1408/or of amendments
         thereto.  The period of two years laid down by those provisions is a period taking effect from the date of application of
         a new legislative provision and during which an interested party may request the application of that provision in his favour,
         and no provision of national law laying down shorter periods for lapse or limitation of actions may be relied upon against
         him.  That time-limit of two years cannot therefore be applied to a decision of the institution competent to recover sums
         paid though not due. 
         
            
The same holds good for Articles and of Regulation No 574/72, which deal exclusively with the relations between the
         social security institutions of different Member States with a view to the recovery of sums paid though not due or to determining
         which institution must support the cost where recovery of such a sum has become impossible. 
         
            
Although national law is applicable to a situation arising from the overpayment of a pension supplement by reason of the authorised
         maximum income's having been exceeded, it must however be stated that, with regard to a situation concerning a worker who
         has exercised his right to freedom of movement under the Treaty, it is a requirement of Community law that the detailed procedural
         rules governing that situation should observe the principles of equivalence and effectiveness (see, to that effect, Case C-261/Palmisani  [1997] ECR I-4025, paragraph and Case C-231/Edis  [1998] ECR I-4951, paragraph 34). 
         
            
In accordance with the principle of equivalence, the procedural rules governing such cases must be no less favourable than
         those governing purely internal situations (see, to that effect,  
          Palmisani , paragraph 32, and  
          Edis , paragraph 34). Otherwise, there would be a breach of the principle of equal treatment for workers who have exercised their
         right to freedom of movement and those who have spent their entire working life in a single Member State. 
         
            
In accordance with the principle of effectiveness, those procedural rules must not render virtually impossible or excessively
         difficult the exercise of rights conferred by Community law (see, to that effect,  
          Palmisani , paragraphs and 29, and  
          Edis , paragraph 34). 
         
            
It would be contrary to the principle of equivalence for a situation arising from the exercise of a Community freedom to be
         classified or treated differently from a purely internal situation when they are similar and comparable, and for the situation
         of Community origin to be subjected to special rules less favourable to the worker than those applicable to a purely internal
         situation, the only reason being that difference in classification or treatment. 
         
            
In their written observations, the INPS and the Italian Government stated that certain rules of Italian law on the limitation
         of actions and recovery of sums paid though not due were applicable to Mr Pasquini's situation, in particular the 10-year
         limitation period prescribed by Article of the Civil Code and the rules providing for an exception to the principle of
         recovery of sums paid though not due in the field of social security and limiting the amounts which may be recovered in step
         with the income of the persons concerned. 
         
            
Application of those rules both to situations arising from the exercise of freedom of movement for persons and to purely internal
         situations satisfies the requirement of the principle of equivalence. 
         
            
However, it must be stated that that principle must be applied not only with regard to provisions of national law on limitation
         of actions and recovery of sums paid though not due, but also to all procedural rules governing the treatment of comparable
         situations, whether administrative or judicial. 
         
            
Provisions making it possible to take into account the good faith of the person concerned must thus be applied in an equivalent
         manner, whether the person is a former migrant worker who has been a member of social security schemes in more than one Member
         State or a former worker who has been a member of more than one scheme under domestic law. 
         
            
In that connection, the fact that Mr Pasquini was informed, on being granted the Italian pension supplement, that the amount
         of the supplement was liable to be reviewed when a foreign pension was awarded, does not appear to justify his receiving treatment
         different from that afforded to an Italian pensioner in receipt of one or more exclusively Italian pensions.  That warning
         would not seem to be capable of making his situation different from that of an Italian pensioner who has been a member of
         several Italian social security schemes and who is in receipt of such a pension supplement and who must expect to have that
         amount reviewed if he is subsequently awarded a pension under another scheme or if the authorised upper limit of income is
         exceeded. 
         
            
Nevertheless, it is for the court making the reference to establish whether, in that respect, Mr Pasquini's situation is comparable
         to that of an Italian pensioner. 
         
            
It must in any case be stated that, so far as Italian pensions received because of the beneficiary's membership of different
         schemes under domestic law are concerned, Italian law requires the INPS to monitor the payment of pensions and, if need be,
         adjust the amount.  Accordingly, Article 13(2) of Law No 412/requires that body once a year to check pensioners' income
         and its effect on entitlement to or the amount of pension benefits. 
         
            
On the other hand, as regards Italian pensions paid to former migrant workers who have to receive several pensions because
         they belonged to social security schemes in various Member States, it is clear from the documents before the Court that for
         a long time no such check was carried out, leaving certain overpayments to build up for many years, as in Mr Pasquini's case.
         
         
            
It must be held that, if the duty to check the payment of pensions had been performed in the same way with regard to pensions
         awarded to former migrant workers as to former workers who had been members of more than one scheme under national law exclusively,
         the overpayment recoverable to be repaid by a former migrant worker would amount at the most to the sums received by him,
         though not due, during one year. 
         
            
Therefore, even if Mr Pasquini cannot be considered as having acted in good faith within the meaning of the Italian Law, according
         to what has been stated in paragraphs and above, the principle of equivalence would in any case prevent the claiming
         of more than the equivalent of a year of pension supplements paid though not due. 
         
            
In this respect it is of small importance that in the case in the main proceedings one of the institutions of a Member State,
         the EAVI, having adopted a decision awarding a pension, failed to fulfil its obligation under Article of Regulation No
         574/to notify that decision without delay to the INPS.  The principle of equivalence, which requires that two comparable
         situations, one of Community origin and the other purely internal, should be subject to the same procedural rules, is in fact
         simply the expression of the principle of equal treatment, which is one of the fundamental principles of Community law.  Article
         of Regulation No 574/72, the sole purpose of which is to regulate relations between social security institutions of the
         various Member States, and not to determine the rights of the persons concerned  
          vis-à-vis  those institutions, may not be interpreted as allowing derogation from that principle of equal treatment. 
         
            
On the contrary, the persons concerned may draw from that article the legitimate expectation that their situation will be
         treated with due care and attention by the social security institutions of the various Member States in which they have worked,
         and that they will not be required to satisfy themselves that administrative information concerning them has been communicated
         by one of those institutions to another. 
         
            
In that regard it must be stated that, as is made clear by the references in the decisions adopted by the INPS on October
         and July 1988, that body was aware of the fact that Mr Pasquini had worked in Luxembourg for weeks, that is
         to say the greater part of his working life. 
         
            
Having regard to all those considerations, the answer to be given to the questions referred by the national court must be
         the following: Since Regulation No 1408/does no more than ensure coordination of provisions of national legislation in the field of social
         security, it is national law which is applicable to a situation arising out of the payment of sums not due, made to a person
         in receipt of more than one pension by virtue of his belonging to social security schemes in various Member States, in the
         form of a pension supplement where the maximum authorised income is exceeded.  The two-year time-limit referred to in Articles
         94, 95, 95a and 95b of Regulation No 1408/cannot be applied by analogy to such a situation.National law must, however, observe the Community principle of equivalence, in accordance with which the detailed procedural
         rules governing the treatment of situations arising out of the exercise of a Community freedom must be no less favourable
         than those governing purely internal situations, and the Community principle of effectiveness, in accordance with which those
         procedural rules must not render virtually impossible or excessively difficult the exercise of rights arising out of the situation
         of Community origin.Those principles apply to all the procedural rules governing the treatment of situations arising out of the exercise of a
         Community freedom, whether those rules are administrative or judicial, such as the provisions of national law applicable to
         the limitation of actions and the recovery of sums paid though not due or those requiring the competent institutions to take
         account of the good faith of the persons concerned or to carry out proper checks of their situation with regard to pensions.
         
Costs
            
The costs incurred by the Italian, Austrian and Portuguese Governments, and by the Commission, which have submitted observations
         to the Court, are not recoverable.  Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action
         pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
in answer to the questions referred to it by the Tribunale Ordinario di Roma by order of January 2002, hereby rules: 
         
Wathelet
Timmermans 
Edward 
Jann
Rosas 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on June 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
M. Wathelet  
Registrar
President of the Fifth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: Italian.
Top  
 