
Order of the Court (Sixth Chamber) of March —Febetra(Case C‑333/11)
Article 104(3), first subparagraph, of the Rules of Procedure — TIR Convention — Community Customs Code — Excise duties — Transport carried out under cover of a TIR carnet — Unlawful unloading — Determination of the place of the offence — Recovery of customs and excise duties — Jurisdiction
1.                     Free movement of goods — External Community transit — Transport of goods under cover of a TIR carnet — Offences or irregularities —
            Determining the place of that offence of irregularity — Presumption in favour of the place at which the finding was made —
            Rebutted on the basis of evidence produced by a guaranteeing association (Commission Regulation No 2454/93, Art. 454(3)) (see
            para. 38, operative part 1)
2.                     Customs union — Customs debt — Value added tax — Excise duties — Directive 92/— Member State with competence for recovery
            (Council Directive 92/12, Art. 6(1) and 7(1) (see para. 43, operative part 2)
Re: 
Reference for a preliminary ruling — Hof van Cassatie van België — Interpretation of Article 454(3), second subparagraph,
                  of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2454/of July laying down provisions for the implementation of Council Regulation
                  (EEC) No 2913/establishing the Community Customs Code (OJ L 253, p. 1), of Articles 6(1) and 7(1) of Council Directive
                  92/12/EEC of February on the general arrangements for products subject to excise duty and on the holding, movement
                  and monitoring of such products (OJ L 76, p. 1) and of Article of the Customs Convention on the International Transport
                  of Goods under cover of TIR carnets (TIR Convention) — Offences or irregularities — Place of the offence or irregularity —
                  Place deemed to be where the offence or irregularity is detected, when it is impossible to determine the place where it was
                  committed.
               
Operative part
1.
	Article 454(3) of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2454/of July laying down provisions for the implementation of Council
                     Regulation (EEC) No 2913/establishing the Community Customs Code, as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1662/of July 1999, must be interpreted as meaning that a guaranteeing association may prove the place where an offence or irregularity
                     was committed by relying on the place where the TIR carnet was accepted and/or where the seals were affixed. If that association
                     succeeds in rebutting the presumption that the customs authorities of the Member State in whose territory an offence or irregularity
                     was detected in the course of transport under cover of a TIR carnet are competent in favour of those of the Member State in
                     whose territory that offence or irregularity was in fact committed, which it is for the referring court to determine, the
                     customs authorities of that latter State become competent to recover the customs debt.
                  
2.
	Articles 6(1) and 7(1) of Council Directive 92/12/EEC of February on the general arrangements for products subject
                     to excise duty and on the holding, movement and monitoring of such products, as amended by Council Directive 96/99/EC of December 1996, must be interpreted as meaning that the customs authorities of the Member State in whose territory the goods
                     were discovered, seized and confiscated are competent to recover the excise duty, even if those goods were introduced into
                     the territory of the European Union in another Member State, in so far as those goods are held for commercial purposes, which
                     it is for the referring court to establish.
                  
Top  
 