
         				Ordonnance de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-320/R Commission of the European CommunitiesvRepublic of Austria
«(Transport – Sectoral ban on driving)»
Order of the President of the Court, July I - Summary of the Order
Applications for interim measures – Interim measures – Powers conferred on the President by Article 84(2) of the Rules of Procedure(Arts EC and EC; Rules of Procedure of the Court, Art. 84(2))
  
ORDER OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE COURTJuly (1)
((Transport – Sectoral ban on driving))
In Case C-320/R, 
         
 Commission of the European Communities,  represented by C. Schmidt, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
         
applicant, 
v
 Republic of Austria
defendant, 
APPLICATION for the suspension of operation of the sectoral ban on driving provided for in the Verordnung des Landeshauptmanns
         von Tirol of May 2003, limiting transport on the A motorway in the Inn valley,
         
THE PRESIDENT OF THE COURT
makes the following 
Order
            
By application lodged at the Court Registry on July 2003, the Commission brought an action under Article EC for a declaration
         that, by imposing the ban on the driving of lorries carrying certain types of goods provided for in the Verordnung des Landeshauptmanns
         von Tirol (Regulation of the First Minister of the  
          Land  of Tyrol) of May limiting use of the A motorway in the Inn valley (BGB1. II, 2003/279,  
         the Regulation), the Republic of Austria has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles and of Council Regulation (EEC) No 881/of March on access to the market in the carriage of goods by road within the Community to or from the territory of
         a Member State or passing across the territory of one or more Member States (OJ L 95, p. 1), Articles and of Council
         Regulation (EEC) No 3118/of October laying down the conditions under which non-resident carriers may operate national
         road haulage services within a Member State (OJ L 279, p. 1), and Articles EC to EC. 
         
            
By a separate document lodged at the Court Registry on July 2003, the Commission made an application for interim relief
         pursuant to Articles EC and EC, seeking an order requiring the Republic of Austria to adopt the measures necessary
         to suspend operation of the national regulation in question until the Court has given a ruling in the main action.  
         
            
The Commission also asked the President of the Court, pursuant to Article 84(2) of the Rules of Procedure, to grant its application
         for interim relief before the other party had  submitted its observations, pending the order terminating the interlocutory
         proceedings.  
         
            
The Commission summarises as follows the facts in its application for interim relief. On May 2003, the Landeshauptmann
         von Tirol (First Minister of the  
          Land  of Tyrol) adopted the Regulation in question, pursuant to the Austrian Immissionsschutzgesetz-Luft (Emission Control Act-Air),
         prohibiting the use of a section, approximately kilometres long, of the A motorway in the Inn valley by heavy goods
         vehicles carrying certain types of goods. This absolute ban on driving comes into force with direct effect on August for an indefinite period in respect of the vehicles concerned.  
         
            
The Regulation in issue, which is based on the Austrian Immissionsschutzgesetz-Luft, is designed to reduce emissions linked
         to human activity and thus to improve air quality so as to ensure lasting protection for human health and for fauna and flora
         (Paragraph of the Regulation). 
         
            
Paragraph of the Regulation delimits a  
         clean zone consisting of a 46-kilometre long section of the A motorway in the Inn valley between the communes of Kundl and Ampass.
         Paragraph of the Regulation prohibits use of this section by heavy goods vehicles or articulated lorries with a maximum
         authorised weight of over 7.tonnes and heavy goods vehicles with trailers with a combined maximum authorised weight exceeding
         7.tonnes carrying the following goods: all of the waste products listed in the European Waste Catalogue (corresponding to
         Commission Decision 2000/532/EC of May replacing Decision 94/3/EC establishing a list of wastes pursuant to Article
         1(a) of Council Directive 75/442/EEC on waste and Council Decision 94/904/EC establishing a list of hazardous waste pursuant
         to Article 1(4) of Council Directive 91/689/EEC on hazardous waste (OJ L 226, p. 3), as amended by Council Decision 2001/573/EC
         of July amending Decision 2000/532/EC as regards the list of wastes (OJ L 203, p. 18)), cereals, logs, bark and
         cork, ferrous and non-ferrous ores, stones, soil, rubble, motor vehicles and trailers, or structural steel. It is not necessary
         for any authority to intervene by adopting a decision; the ban takes direct effect.  
         
            
Paragraph exempts from the ban laid down in Paragraph of the Regulation heavy goods vehicles whose journeys start from
         or terminate in the territory of the City of Innsbruck or in the districts of Kufstein, Schwaz or Innsbruck-Land. The Immissionsschutzgesetz-Luft
         contains other exemptions. It excludes various categories of vehicle from the ban on driving, including motorway maintenance
         vehicles, refuse vehicles and agricultural and forestry vehicles. These vehicles are directly excluded. An individual exemption
         may be requested for other vehicles on grounds of public interest or significant individual interest.  
         
            
The Commission takes the view that the ban on driving manifestly hinders the freedom to provide services in the sector of
         carriage of goods by road, guaranteed by the EC Treaty and confirmed by secondary legislation in Regulations No 881/and
         No 3118/93, and the free movement of goods within the meaning of Article EC. 
         
            
The measure de facto affects, if not exclusively at least predominantly, the transit of the goods in question. It operates
         what amounts to at least indirect discrimination. According to the Commission, that is incompatible with the aforementioned
         regulations on the market in the carriage of goods within the Community and on cabotage, and with Article EC et seq., inasmuch
         as there is no conceivable justification for it. Such a measure cannot be justified on grounds of environmental protection
         and is in any event disproportionate.  
         
            
As for urgency, the Commission argues
          inter alia  that the Regulation in question impacts directly and significantly on the activity of transport undertakings operating on
         the market concerned and, more generally, on the proper working of the internal market. 
         
            
According to the Commission, the case serves as an example with regard to public policy, inasmuch as other Austrian  
          Länder  which have heavy transit traffic have already indicated that they wish to follow the Tyrol's example and consider adopting
         bans on driving. It is also conceivable that other Member States may contemplate similar measures.  
         
            
Furthermore, the ban on driving directly affects the logistical network of the economic operators handling the goods concerned,
         which is strictly dictated by market requirements. An internal measure adopted unilaterally without notice causes a sudden
         and fundamental change in the existing conditions of the Community market in the carriage of goods which, according to the
         Commission, cannot be fully restored. It submits that the first to suffer would be the weakest links in the chain, namely,
         the road transport undertakings, particularly the small undertakings which, owing to the size of their fleets of vehicles,
         specialise in the transportation of a single type of goods. The Commission states that more than half of the transport undertakings
         concerned have only between one and three lorries and 31% have between four and ten lorries. Only about 15% of the undertakings
         have more than ten vehicles.  
         
            
For undertakings specialising in the transport of certain goods and using special vehicles for that purpose (for example,
         the transport of new cars or waste), the sectoral ban on driving is tantamount to a general ban because they cannot simply
         switch to transporting other types of goods. 
         
            
In most Member States, in particular Germany, the road transport sector suffers from overcapacity, which explains the keen
         competition between undertakings and the low profit margins. According to the Commission, only an undertaking whose vehicles
         are in permanent use can compete on that market. It is therefore essential for transport undertakings not to lose orders in
         progress and existing customers. A few days of inactivity might even mean financial ruin for undertakings with few vehicles.
         
         
            
In that critical situation, the transport undertakings concerned would, in theory, have only two possible ways of avoiding
         the ban on driving: they could choose a route which avoids the ban or switch to rail transport. 
         
            
After examining these possibilities, the Commission maintains that, whatever approach they take, the undertakings concerned
         would face additional costs and lose time if they were not to be forced to cease their activities altogether. In view of the
         keen competition in the road transport sector, these additional costs could not be passed directly on to those placing orders
         or customers but would have to be borne by the carriers, at least for the time being. However, the Commission maintains that
         only large undertakings would be able to offset additional costs on a route (in this case, the Brenner route through Austria).
         Small undertakings specialising in the transport of the goods covered by the ban on driving would not be able to bear those
         additional costs in the short term and would lose their orders and customers. The Commission submits that since, as has already
         been stated, most small undertakings specialise, it is to be feared that many of them will not be able to receive replacement
         orders at short notice and will have to leave their vehicles stationary.  
         
            
The Commission concludes that, in the light of the small profit margins of road transport undertakings, it is to be feared
         that the small and medium-sized undertakings concerned will be forced to cease operating. The resultant damage will impact
         significantly on the European economy and is unlikely to be repaired. 
         
            
It appears from the information which the Republic of Austria provided in the pre-litigation procedure and in particular from
         its statement in response to the Commission's reasoned opinion that it considers that the Regulation in question is compatible
         with Community law. It contends that the ban on driving at issue was adopted in accordance with the rules of national law
         and the Community directives on the protection of air quality. It is a necessary, proportionate and non-discriminatory measure.
         The Commission's concerns regarding the catastrophic effects of those measures are groundless because, it maintains, rail
         transport is an alternative manner ─ feasible from both a technical and a financial point of view ─ of transporting the goods
         covered by the sectoral ban on driving.  
         
            
Under Article 84(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the President of the Court may grant an application for interim relief even
         before the other party has submitted its observations. That measure may subsequently be varied or cancelled, even of the Court's
         own motion.  
         
            
At the present stage of the proceedings, the Republic of Austria has not yet been able to submit its observations on the application
         for interim relief brought by the Commission, with the result that it is not yet possible to decide whether the Commission
         has made out a satisfactory case, both in law and in fact, for the measure which it seeks. 
         
            
Nevertheless, the pleas put forward by the Commission do not appear prima facie to be entirely unfounded and the possibility
         remains that the facts stated by the Commission may establish the urgency required for immediately laying down the measure
         sought. 
         
            
On the other hand, it is not prima facie apparent that the suspension for a few weeks of the enforcement of the national Regulation
         in question would seriously jeopardise the objective set out in Paragraph of that regulation. 
         
            
In those circumstances, and particularly in view of the imminent entry into force of the Regulation in question, it appears
         necessary, in the interests of the proper administration of justice, that the status quo should be maintained pending a decision
         on the application for interim measures (see, to this effect, the order in Case C-195/R  
          Commission   v  
          Germany  [1990] ECR I-2715). 
         
            
It is for those reasons appropriate to order, as a protective measure, that the Republic of Austria suspend the sectoral ban
         on driving provided for in the Regulation in question pending delivery of the order terminating the present proceedings for
         interim relief. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE PRESIDENT OF THE COURT
hereby orders:
         
1.
 The Republic of Austria shall suspend the sectoral ban on driving provided for in the Verordnung des Landeshauptmanns von
            Tirol of May limiting use of the A motorway in the Inn valley pending delivery of the order terminating the present
            proceedings for interim relief. 
            
2.
 Costs are reserved. 
Luxembourg, July 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: German.
Top  
 