
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-441/Commission of the European CommunitiesvKingdom of the Netherlands
«(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 89/391/EEC – Measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health of workers at work – Article 7(3))»
Opinion of Advocate General Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer delivered on January I - Judgment of the Court (Fifth Chamber), May I - Summary of the Judgment
1..
Social policy – Protection of workers' safety and health – Directive 89/on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health of workers at work – Organisation of activities related to protection against and prevention of occupational risks – Obligation of employers to designate one or more workers to carry out those activities – Obligation taking precedence over that to enlist competent external persons or services  (Council Directive 89/391, Art. 7(1), (3), (4) and (6)) 
2..
Social policy – Protection of workers' safety and health – Directive 89/on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health of workers at work – Objectives – Promotion of balanced participation of employers and workers in activities related to protection against and prevention of
                     occupational risks  
                  (Council Directive 89/391, Art. 7) 
3..
Social policy – Protection of workers' safety and health – Directive 89/on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health of workers at work – Organisation of activities related to protection against and prevention of occupational risks – Employers allowed to choose between internal organisation of those activities and enlistment of external competent services – Effectiveness of the Directive – Not ensured  (Council Directive 89/391, Art. 7(1) and (3)) 
1.
 Article of Directive 89/on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health of workers
         at work places the obligations imposed on employers in an order of precedence. Article 7(1) imposes on employers a principal
         obligation to designate one or more workers to carry out activities related to protection against and prevention of occupational
         risks. Article 7(3) provides for an obligation to enlist competent external persons or services. However, that obligation
         is merely subsidiary to that laid down in Article 7(1), since it arises only  
         if such protective and preventive measures cannot be organised for lack of competent personnel in the undertaking and/or establishment. Paragraphs and of Article by no means call into question the order of precedence laid down in paragraphs to of
         that article. Thus, in order to ensure full applicability of Directive 89/in a clear and precise manner, its transposition
         into Netherlands national law must reflect the order of precedence laid down in Article 7.  see paras 20-21, 23, 2.
 The decision, given expression in Article of Directive 89/on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements
         in the safety and health of workers at work, to favour, where there is sufficient competent personnel within the undertaking,
         participation of the workers in the activities related to protection against and prevention of occupational risks over the
         enlistment of external competent persons or services is an organisational measure consistent with the aim of that directive
         to favour participation of workers in their own safety. It is clear from the 11th and 12th recitals of the Directive that
         its aims include a dialogue and balanced participation between employers and workers with a view to adopting the measures
         necessary for the protection of workers against accidents at work and occupational diseases.  see paras 39-3.
 Allowing employers to choose between internal organisation of activities related to  protection against and prevention of
         occupational risks or the enlistment of external competent services does not contribute to ensuring the effectiveness of Directive
         89/on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health of workers at work but constitutes
         a failure to fulfil the obligation to ensure full applicability of that directive.  First, Article 7(1) and (3) of that directive clearly lays down an order of precedence with regard to the organisation of
         those activities within the undertaking. It is only where there is a lack of competent personnel within the undertaking that
         the employer must enlist external competent services. Second, the aim of Directive 89/is to promote balanced participation
         of employers and workers in activities related to protection against and prevention of occupational risks. It is therefore
         by giving precedence to the internal organisation of such activities that the best possible effectiveness of the Directive
         can be ensured. see paras 53-JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)May (1)
((Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 89/391/EEC – Measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health of workers at work – Article 7(3)))
In Case C-441/01, 
            
 Commission of the European Communities,  represented by H. van Vliet and H. Kreppel, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant, 
v
 Kingdom of the Netherlands,  represented by H.G. Sevenster, acting as Agent,
            
defendant, 
APPLICATION for a declaration that, by authorising employers to choose freely whether to make use of internal or external
            health and safety services, the Kingdom of the Netherlands has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EC Treaty and Article
            7(3) of Council Directive 89/391/EEC of June on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety
            and health of workers at work (OJ L 183, p. 1),
            
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),,
composed of: C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Fourth Chamber, acting for the President of the Fifth Chamber, A. La Pergola, P. Jann, S. von Bahr and A. Rosas (Rapporteur), Judges, 
            
Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer, Registrar: M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator, 
            
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,after hearing oral argument from the parties at the hearing on November 2002, at which the Commission was represented by
            H. van Vliet and the Kingdom of the Netherlands by N.A.J. Bel, acting as Agent,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
By application lodged at the Court Registry on November 2001, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action
         under Article EC for a declaration that, by authorising employers to choose freely whether to make use of internal or
         external health and safety services, the Kingdom of the Netherlands has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EC Treaty
         and Article 7(3) of Council Directive 89/391/EEC of June on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements
         in the safety and health of workers at work (OJ L 183, p. 1,  
         the Directive). 
         
Legal background
Community legislation
         
            
The 11th and 12th recitals of the Directive are worded as follows: ... in order to ensure an improved degree of protection, workers and/or their representatives must be informed of the risks
         to their safety and health and of the measures required to reduce or eliminate these risks; ... they must also be in a position
         to contribute, by means of balanced participation in accordance with national laws and/or practices, to seeing that the necessary
         protective measures are taken;... information, dialogue and balanced participation on safety and health at work must be developed between employers and
         workers and/or their representatives by means of appropriate procedures and instruments, in accordance with national laws
         and/or practices.
         
            
Article of the Directive, which is entitled  
         Protective and preventive services, provides: 
         
1.
 Without prejudice to the obligations referred to in Articles and 6, the employer shall designate one or more workers to
         carry out activities related to the protection [from] and prevention of occupational risks for the undertaking and/or establishment.
         
         
2.
 Designated workers may not be placed at any disadvantage because of their activities related to the protection [from] and
         prevention of occupational risks. Designated workers shall be allowed adequate time to enable them to fulfil their obligations arising from this Directive.
         
         
3.
 If such protective and preventive measures cannot be organised for lack of competent personnel in the undertaking and/or establishment,
         the employer shall enlist competent external services or persons. 
         
4.
 Where the employer enlists such services or persons, he shall inform them of the factors known to affect, or suspected of
         affecting, the safety and health of the workers and they must have access to the information referred to in Article 10(2).
         
         
5.
 In all cases: 
         
─
the workers designated must have the necessary capabilities and the necessary means, 
         
─
the external services or persons consulted must have the necessary aptitudes and the necessary personal and professional means,
         and 
         
─
the workers designated and the external services or persons consulted must be sufficient in number to deal with the organisation of protective and preventive measures, taking into account the size of the undertaking and/or
         establishment and/or the hazards to which the workers are exposed and their distribution throughout the entire undertaking
         and/or establishment. 
         
6.
 The protection from, and prevention of, the health and safety risks which form the subject of this article shall be the responsibility
         of one or more workers, of one service or of separate services whether from inside or outside the undertaking and/or establishment.
         The worker(s) and/or agency(ies) must work together whenever necessary.
         
7.
 Member States may define, in the light of the nature of the activities and size of the undertakings, the categories of undertakings
         in which the employer, provided he is competent, may himself take responsibility for the measures referred to in paragraph
         1. 
         
8.
 Member States shall define the necessary capabilities and aptitudes referred to in paragraph 5. They may determine the sufficient number referred to in paragraph 5.
         
            
Article 11(2) of the Directive provides: Workers or workers' representatives with specific responsibility for the safety and health of workers shall take part in a
         balanced way, in accordance with national laws and/or practices, or shall be consulted in advance and in good time by the
         employer with regard to:...
         
(b)
the designation of workers referred to in Articles 7(1) and 8(2) and the activities referred to in Article 7(1); 
         ...
         
(d)
the enlistment, where appropriate, of the competent services or persons outside the undertaking and/or establishment, as referred
         to in Article (3); 
         ....
         National law
         
            
Article of the Nederlandse Arbeidsomstandighedenwet (Netherlands law on working conditions), amended by the Law of December
         (
          Staatsblad  1993, No 757) and by the Law of June (
          Staatsblad  1994, No 441,  
         the  
          arbowet ), is worded as follows: General obligationArticle 1.
 With respect to their obligations under this law, employers shall seek the assistance of: 
         
(a)
one or more expert workers, irrespective of whether they are organised in the form of a service; 
         
(b)
one or more other experts; 
         
(c)
one or more services composed of other experts; or 
         
(d)
a combination of expert workers, other experts or services within the meaning of (a), (b) and (c) above. 
         
2.
 Employers shall take measures and manage activities in such a way as to ensure that the tasks of expert workers, of other
         experts or of the services referred to in paragraph are mutually compatible. 
         
3.
 Employers shall consult the works council or, in the absence of a works council, the workers concerned prior to any decision
         which they intend to take in accordance with paragraph 1.
         
            
Amendments were made to that Law after the pre-litigation procedure had been closed. A new law on working conditions was adopted
         in (
          Staatsblad  1999, No 184) and amended on December (
          Staatsblad  2000, No 595). Article of that Law replaced Article of the previous one but it is undisputed that this does not affect
         the subject-matter of the proceedings because Article applies the same principles to the use of internal or external services
         in relation to working conditions. 
         The pre-litigation procedure
            
Since the pre-litigation procedure is not the subject of dispute, it is appropriate merely to outline the principal stages
         of that procedure. 
         
            
By letter of February 1994, the Netherlands authorities communicated to the Commission the laws transposing the Directive
         into Netherlands law, which included the  
          arbowet . 
         
            
On July 1997, the Commission addressed to the Kingdom of Netherlands a letter of formal notice, to which the Netherlands
         authorities responded by letter of November 1997. 
         
            
On December 1998, the Commission delivered a reasoned opinion, to which the Netherlands authorities responded by letter
         of March 1999. 
         
            
Since it was not satisfied with the Netherlands authorities' response to the reasoned opinion, the Commission decided to bring
         the present proceedings. 
         The action
            
The Commission claims that the Kingdom of the Netherlands has failed properly to transpose Article 7(3) of the Directive.
         In its view, Article 17(1) of the  
          arbowet  does not provide for an order of precedence between the various options listed under (a) to (d). Employers thus enjoy a wide
         freedom of choice between internal and external organisation of activities related to protection against and prevention of
         occupational risks, whereas the Directive does not provide them with such a choice but rather lays down an order of precedence
         between the two alternatives by reference to an objective criterion, namely the existence or absence within the undertaking
         and/or establishment of staff possessing the appropriate competence to carry out those activities. 
         
            
The Netherlands Government challenges the Commission's interpretation of the Directive. It submits arguments based on the
         wording of Article 7(3) of the Directive, on the scheme of that article and on the aim of, the minimal degree of harmonisation
         sought by, and the effectiveness of the Directive. Those arguments must be examined in turn. 
         The wording of Article 7(3) of the Directive
         Arguments of the parties
         
            
First of all, the Netherlands Government submits that the wording of Article 7(3) of the Directive is too vague to serve as
         a criterion for deciding whether recourse may be had to external services. It merely provides that, where sufficient means
         are not available to an undertaking, the employer must enlist external experts. The wording of Article 7(3) permits a broad
         and open interpretation. 
         
            
Next, with respect to the transposition of directives, the Netherlands Government contends that it is left to the Member States
         to choose the form and the means of implementation and that their obligation is to ensure that the directive is effective,
         which the Netherlands law does. 
         
            
The Netherlands Government argues that, in any event, it is the employer who decides whether or not there is sufficient competent
         personnel within the undertaking and, therefore, whether or not recourse must be had to competent external services. The employer
         may or may not himself create the conditions necessary for setting up an internal service. 
         
            
Lastly, the Netherlands Government sets out the negative consequences for undertakings which an interpretation of Article
         7(3) of the Directive such as that advocated by the Commission might have. Thus, employers who have sufficient personnel could
         never enlist an external service unless they dismiss that personnel. Similarly, if they were to engage staff able to carry
         out the tasks, even though those tasks are currently carried out by an external service, they would have to amend the agreement
         concluded with that service or terminate it. 
         
            
The Commission observes that Article 7(3) of the Directive follows two paragraphs which clearly provide for the participation
         of workers of the undertaking in the activities related to protection against and prevention of occupational risks. Article
         7(3) does not leave the choice to the employer. To interpret it to the contrary would deprive the clause  
         if such protective and preventive measures cannot be organised for lack of competent personnel in the undertaking and/or establishment of any practical effect. 
         
            
It submits that, although a Member State is not required to transpose the precise wording of a directive into domestic law,
         it must ensure that it is fully applicable in a sufficiently clear and precise manner. If the Directive has been properly
         transposed, the order of precedence actually laid down by Article 7(3) must apply equally in the Netherlands. Similarly, it
         is not a matter for employers alone to determine whether or not there is sufficient competent personnel within the undertaking
         but, rather, their decisions may be reviewed by the national authorities. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
Article 7(1) of the Directive imposes on employers a principal obligation to designate one or more workers to carry out activities
         related to protection against and prevention of occupational risks. Article 7(3) provides for an obligation to enlist competent
         external persons or services. However, that obligation is merely subsidiary to that laid down in Article 7(1), since it arises
         only  
         if such protective and preventive measures cannot be organised for lack of competent personnel in the undertaking and/or establishment. 
         
            
Article therefore places the obligations imposed on employers in an order of precedence. 
         
            
That interpretation is supported by the wording of Article 11(2) of the Directive, which refers, under (b), to the designation
         of workers provided for in Article 7(1) and, under (d), to the enlistment, provided for in Article 7(3), of competent external
         services while adding, in respect of the latter reference only, the phrase  
         where appropriate. 
         
            
In order to ensure full applicability of the Directive in a clear and precise manner, its transposition into Netherlands national
         law must reflect the order of precedence laid down in Article 7. 
         
            
The fear of a purely subjective assessment by the employer of whether the condition laid down in Article 7(3) is satisfied
         does not appear to be well founded. Article 7(8) of the Directive obliges the Member States to define the necessary capabilities
         and aptitudes which the workers must have and it is open to those States to lay down further objective criteria to guide employers
         in their assessment of the competence within their undertaking. 
         
            
The negative consequences described by the Netherlands Government and referred to in paragraph of this judgment cannot
         be as drastic as it suggests. According to Article 7(2) of the Directive, designated workers may not be placed at any disadvantage
         on account of their activities related to protection against and prevention of occupational risks. The external services which
         may have been enlisted by employers are without doubt protected against the sudden termination of agreements. In any event,
         it must be borne in mind that, as specialist services, they are aware of the Community legislation and are able to take the
         necessary measures to adapt to it. 
         
            
It follows that the Netherlands Government's argument based on the wording of Article 7(3) of the Directive is unfounded.
         
         The scheme of Article of the Directive
         Arguments of the parties
         
            
The Netherlands Government submits that Article 7(3) of the Directive cannot be read in isolation but that it must be interpreted
         in the light of the other provisions of that article. 
         
            
It challenges the interpretation that Article 7(4) of the Directive demonstrates the Community legislature's preference for
         services inside the undertaking. It also submits that Article 7(6) does not refer to any order or hierarchy. 
         
            
The Commission submits that Article 7(6) of the Directive in no way affects the order of precedence laid down in Article 7(1)
         to (3). 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
An examination of the structure of Article of the Directive and the order of its various paragraphs does not permit a different
         conclusion from that drawn from the examination of the wording of paragraph 3. In particular, paragraphs and of Article
         by no means call into question the order of precedence laid down in paragraphs to of that article. 
         
            
It follows that the Netherlands Government's argument based on the scheme of Article 7(3) of the Directive is unfounded. 
         The aim of the Directive
         Arguments of the parties
         
            
The Netherlands Government denies that the aim of the Directive is to achieve maximum participation of workers in activities
         related to protection against and prevention of occupational risks. Such an aim is not clear from the wording of Article of the Directive, the recitals in the preamble, the comments on the directive initially proposed or the structure of the Directive.
         
         
            
According to the Netherlands Government, the Directive is intended to ensure that working conditions and occupational risks
         within the undertaking are the subject of systematic and preventive scrutiny. In that connection, it refers to Article 1(1)
         and (2) of the Directive. The method of organisation of activities related to protection against and prevention of occupational
         risks is not an end in itself but merely a means of achieving that end. 
         
            
The Netherlands Government submits further that, if the aim of the Directive were that which the Commission claims, the Community
         legislature would have placed restrictions on the enlistment of external experts, for example by imposing a minimum of protective
         and preventive activities to be organised within the undertaking or more requirements with regard to the competence and skills
         of those experts, in order to prevent employers from enlisting their services too readily. 
         
            
In any event, the Netherlands legislation does not neglect participation of workers, which is mandatory under Articles and of the Directive. 
         
            
The Commission does not deny that the aim of the Directive is to improve the safety and health of workers at work. However,
         it submits that several recitals in the preamble to the Directive indicate the intention of the Community legislature to have
         a  
         balanced participation of workers introduced with a view to achieving that aim. 
         
            
Moreover, it is wrong to claim that, if the Commission's interpretation were correct, the Community legislature would have
         imposed a minimum of protective and preventive activities to be organised within the undertaking. According to the Commission,
         the Directive is based on the principle that each of the undertakings at which it is aimed is capable of organising such a
         minimum of activities. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
As the title itself shows, the Directive is intended to introduce measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health
         of workers at work. Contrary to what the Netherlands Government claims, the aim of the Directive is not solely to improve
         the protection of workers against accidents at work and the prevention of occupational risks; it is also intended to introduce
         specific measures to organise that protection and prevention. It thus states a number of means regarded by the Community legislature
         as being suitable to facilitate achievement of the set purpose. 
         
            
The 11th and 12th recitals of the Directive show that its aims include a dialogue and balanced participation between employers
         and workers with a view to adopting the measures necessary for the protection of workers against accidents at work and occupational
         diseases. 
         
            
The decision, given expression in Article of the Directive, to favour, where there is sufficient competent personnel within
         the undertaking, participation of the workers in the activities related to protection against and prevention of occupational
         risks over the enlistment of external competent persons or services is an organisational measure consistent with the aim of
         participation of workers in their own safety. 
         
            
It follows that the Netherlands Government's argument based on the aim of the Directive is unfounded. 
         The minimum degree of harmonisation sought by the Directive
         Arguments of the parties
         
            
The Netherlands Government claims that the Directive achieves only a minimum degree of harmonisation. In that connection,
         it observes that it was adopted on the basis of Article A of the EEC Treaty, now Article EC (Articles to of
         the EC Treaty were replaced by Articles EC to EC), which is a basis for minimum harmonisation, and that Article 1(3)
         of the Directive provides that it is without prejudice to provisions which are more favourable to protection of workers. According
         to the Netherlands Government, the Member States may therefore adopt stricter national provisions to protect workers. 
         
            
The Netherlands Government takes the view that, in some respects, the  
          arbowet  offers a greater degree of protection than the Directive, in particular by establishing a system of high quality services
         covering the whole territory, with preventive tasks going beyond the requirements of the Directive. It claims that Article
         7(3) of the Directive must be interpreted to that effect. The greater protection which the Kingdom of the Netherlands is authorised
         to provide under the Directive means that employers must be able to choose freely the service which, in their case, will guarantee
         them that high level of protection. Any interpretation of Article 7(3) which, as a matter of law, gives precedence to the
         internal organisation of activities related to protection against and prevention of occupational risks could prejudice Article
         1(3) of the Directive. 
         
            
The Commission contests the argument that workers' safety is better ensured by the enlistment of external competent services.
         It cites a report drawn up at its request by a research centre, which makes clear that the enlistment of external experts
         does not necessarily contribute to improving safety at work, and refers to the example of a company providing a risk assessment
         on the internet without having visited the undertaking. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
As the Netherlands Government submits, it is clear from Article 1(3) that the Directive is without prejudice to existing or
         future national and Community provisions which are more favourable to protection of the safety and health of workers at work.
         
         
            
However, as the Advocate General noted in point of his Opinion, the question in this case is not whether the Netherlands
         legislation guarantees greater protection for workers than that offered by the Directive but rather whether or not that legislation
         runs counter to the requirements of that Directive, including the order of priority given to the two alternatives provided
         for in Article 7. 
         
            
It follows that the Netherlands Government's argument based on the minimum degree of harmonisation sought by the Directive
         is unfounded. 
         The effectiveness of the Directive
         Arguments of the parties
         
            
The Netherlands Government takes the view that it has ensured the effectiveness of the Directive. In its opinion, the Netherlands
         legislation provides for sufficient means of achieving the aim of the Directive, which is intended to ensure a preventive
         and systematic health and safety policy in undertakings, based on sufficiently skilled and competent personnel. 
         
            
The Netherlands Government submits, first, that the persons responsible for activities related to protection against and prevention
         of occupational risks must observe stringent quality requirements. It is therefore the kind and the size of the undertaking
         which determine whether the necessary resources are available internally or whether it is appropriate to enlist external services,
         which often have the advantage of being able to display a greater objectivity than internal services. 
         
            
It claims, second, that the Netherlands legislation provides for a variety of measures designed to ensure the participation
         of workers in the policy adopted in relation to working conditions (provision of information to the works council, consultation,
         annual report on the protective measures adopted, etc.). It submits, in particular, that, under the law on works councils,
         decisions of employers relating to the organisation of such protective and preventive activities are subject to the consent
         of the workers' representatives. 
         
            
The Netherlands Government declares that it is convinced that a flexible system which imposes requirements as to expertise
         and grants significant rights to workers' representatives best guarantees compliance with the aims of the Directive. 
         
            
The Commission takes the view that the effectiveness of the Directive can be assured only by giving preference to internal
         organisation of the activities related to protection against and prevention of occupational risks. First of all, the workers
         are more motivated than external experts to guarantee a high level of protection for themselves and their colleagues. In addition,
         they are better informed of the risks to which they are exposed. Finally, the fact that they are familiar with the other workers
         and that they cannot be placed at a disadvantage on account of their activities enables them to speak in the name of the other
         workers and to make demands on the employer as regards safety. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
First, it should be observed that Article 7(1) and (3) of the Directive clearly lays down an order of precedence with regard
         to the organisation of activities related to protection against and prevention of occupational risks within the undertaking.
         It is only where there is a lack of competent personnel within the undertaking that the employer must enlist external competent
         services. 
         
            
Second, as was explained in paragraphs and of the present judgment, the aim of the Directive is to promote balanced
         participation of employers and workers in activities related to protection against and prevention of occupational risks. It
         is therefore by giving precedence to the internal organisation of such activities that the best possible effectiveness of
         the Directive can be ensured. 
         
            
In the light of those findings, allowing employers to choose between internal organisation of such activities or the enlistment
         of external competent services does not contribute to ensuring the effectiveness of the Directive but constitutes a failure
         to fulfil the obligation to ensure full applicability of that directive. 
         
            
It follows that the argument of the Netherlands Government based on the effectiveness of the Directive is unfounded. 
         
            
Consequently, the Court finds that, by not reflecting, in its national legislation, the subsidiary nature of the enlistment
         by undertakings of external competent services to carry out activities related to protection against and prevention of occupational
         risks within those undertakings, the Kingdom of the Netherlands has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 7(3) of
         the Directive. 
         
Costs
            
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party's pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Kingdom of the Netherlands
         has been unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
hereby: 
         
1.
 Declares that, by not reflecting, in its national legislation the subsidiary nature of the enlistment by undertakings of external
            competent services to carry out activities related to protection against and prevention of occupational risks within those
            undertakings, the Kingdom of the Netherlands has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 7(3) of Council Directive
            89/391/EEC of June on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health of workers at
            work; 
            
2.
 Orders the Kingdom of the Netherlands to pay the costs. 
            
Timmermans
La Pergola 
Jann 
von Bahr
Rosas 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on May 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
M. Wathelet  
Registrar
President of the Fifth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: Dutch.
Top  
 