
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-64/P
Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM)
v
Erpo Möbelwerk GmbH
(Appeal – Community trade mark – Phrase DAS PRINZIP DER BEQUEMLICHKEIT – Absolute ground for refusal – Distinctive character – Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation (EC) No 40/94)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Community trade mark – Definition and acquisition of the Community trade mark – Absolute grounds for refusal – Trade marks
            devoid of any distinctive character – Trade marks consisting of advertising slogans – Distinctive character – Application
            of specific assessment criteria – Not permissible
(Council Regulation No 40/94, Art. 7(1)(b))
2.        Community trade mark – Definition and acquisition of the Community trade mark – Absolute grounds for refusal – Trade marks
            devoid of any distinctive character – Limitation of the ground for refusal referred to in Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No
            40/to trade marks to which the ground for refusal referred to in subparagraph (d) of that provision applies – Not permissible
(Council Regulation No 40/94, Art. 7(1)(b) and (d))
1.        In order for it to be assessed as having distinctiveness for the purpose of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/on the
         Community trade mark, every trade mark, of whatever category, must be capable of identifying the product as originating from
         a particular undertaking, and thus distinguishing it from those of other undertakings. Although the criteria for assessing
         distinctiveness are the same for the various categories of marks, it may become apparent, in applying those criteria, that
         the relevant public’s perception is not necessarily the same for each of those categories and that, therefore, it may prove
         more difficult to establish distinctiveness for some categories of mark than for others.
      
However, difficulties in establishing distinctiveness which may be associated with certain categories of trade marks because
         of their very nature, such as those consisting of advertising slogans – difficulties which it is legitimate to take into account
         – do not justify laying down specific criteria supplementing or derogating from the criterion of distinctiveness as interpreted
         in the foregoing. A refusal to register imposing a different and stricter criterion for assessing the distinctiveness of trade
         marks consisting of advertising slogans, such as ‘imaginativeness’ or even ‘conceptual tension which would create surprise
         and so make a striking impression’, is therefore incorrect. 
      
(see paras 33-34, 36)
2.        Each of the grounds for refusal listed in Article 7(1) of Regulation No 40/on the Community trade mark is independent of
         the others and calls for separate examination. Therefore, it is not appropriate to limit the scope of Article 7(1)(b), relating
         to trade marks which are devoid of any distinctive character, to trade marks for which registration is refused on the basis
         of Article 7(1)(d) of that regulation, which relates to trade marks which consist of elements which have become customary
         in the current language or in the practices of the trade, by reason of the fact that they are commonly used in business communications
         and, in particular, in advertising.
      
To hold that a trade mark is not devoid of distinctive character unless it is demonstrated that it is commonly used in business
         communications and, in particular, in advertising, therefore constitutes an error of law since such a criterion differs from
         the one laid down by Article 7(1)(b).  
      
(see paras 39-40, 46, 48)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)October 2004(1)
(Appeal  –  Community trade mark  –  Phrase DAS PRINZIP DER BEQUEMLICHKEIT  –  Absolute ground for refusal  –  Distinctive character  –  Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation (EC) No 40/94)
 In Case C-64/P, APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice,brought on February 2002,
            
Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs),  represented by A. von Mühlendahl and G. Schneider, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
appellant, supported byUnited Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, represented by P. Ormond, C. Jackson, M. Bethell and M. Tappin, acting as Agents, assisted by D. Alexander, barrister, with
            an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
intervener,
 the other party to the proceedings being:
            Erpo Möbelwerk GmbH, represented by S. von Petersdorff-Campen, Rechtsanwalt, and H. von Rohr, Patentanwalt, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),,
 composed of C.W.A. Timmermans (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, C. Gulmann, J.-P. Puissochet, R. Schintgen and J.N.
            Cunha Rodrigues, Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: M. Poiares Maduro,Registrar: M. Múgica Arzamendi, Principal Administrator,
            
 after considering the observations submitted on behalf of the parties,
            
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on May 2004,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on June 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By its appeal, the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (‘OHIM’ or ‘the Office’) seeks
         annulment of the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities (Fourth Chamber) of December in Case T-138/Erpo Möbelwerk v OHIM (DAS PRINZIP DER BEQUEMLICHKEIT) [2001] ECR II-(‘the contested judgment’) by which the Court of First Instance annulled the decision of the OHIM Third
         Board of Appeal of March (Case R 392/1999‑3) (‘the contested decision’) which, in essence, dismissed the appeal brought
         by Erpo Möbelwerk GmbH (‘Erpo’) against the OHIM examiner’s decision refusing to register the phrase DAS PRINZIP DER BEQUEMLICHKEIT
         as a Community trade mark for various classes of goods, including in particular furniture.
         
Legal background
            
 Under Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 40/of December on the Community trade mark (OJ L 11, p. 1):
         ‘1. The following shall not be registered:
         ...
         
(b)
trade marks which are devoid of any distinctive character; 
(c)
trade marks which consist exclusively of signs or indications which may serve, in trade, to designate the kind, quality, quantity,
               intended purpose, value, geographical origin or the time of production of the goods or of rendering of the service, or other
               characteristics of the goods or service;
            
(d)
trade marks which consist exclusively of signs or indications which have become customary in the current language or in the
               bona fide and established practices of the trade; 
            
...
          3. Paragraph 1(b), (c) and (d) shall not apply if the trade mark has become distinctive in relation to the goods or services
         for which registration is requested in consequence of the use which has been made of it.’
         
            
 Under the heading ‘Limitation of the effects of a Community trade mark’, Article of Regulation No 40/provides:
         ‘A Community trade mark shall not entitle the proprietor to prohibit a third party from using in the course of trade:
         ...
         
(b)
indications concerning the kind, quality, quantity, intended purpose, value, geographical origin, the time of production of
               the goods or of rendering of the service, or other characteristics of the goods or service; 
            
...
         
provided he uses them in accordance with honest practices in industrial or commercial matters.’
The facts
            
 On April Erpo filed an application with OHIM for registration as a Community trade mark of the phrase DAS PRINZIP
         DER BEQUEMLICHKEIT for goods in Class (tools (hand‑operated); cutlery), Class (land vehicles and parts therefor) and
         Class (household furniture, in particular upholstered furniture, seating, chairs, tables, unit furniture, as well as office
         furniture) in accordance with the Nice Agreement concerning the International Classification of Goods and Services for the
         Purposes of the Registration of Marks of June 1957, as revised and amended.
         
            
 The OHIM examiner rejected that application by decision of June on the ground that that word combination designated
         a characteristic of the goods concerned and was devoid of any distinctive character. Erpo then appealed against that decision.
         
            
 By the contested decision, the OHIM Third Board of Appeal annulled the examiner’s decision to the extent to which he had rejected
         the claim for products in Class 8. For the rest, the Board of Appeal dismissed the appeal on the ground, in essence, that
         the phrase in question did not meet the requirements of Article 7(1)(b) and (c) and (2) of Regulation No 40/94.
         
The procedure before the Court of First Instance and the contested judgment
            
 By application lodged at the Registry of the Court of First Instance on May 2000, Erpo brought an action for the annulment
         of the contested decision. The Court of First Instance upheld the action by the contested judgment.
         
            
 The Court of First Instance held, in paragraphs to of the contested judgment, that the first plea in law, alleging infringement
         of Article 7(1)(c) of Regulation No 40/94, was well founded since, even if the word Bequemlichkeit (meaning ‘comfort’) of
         itself designates a quality of the goods concerned which is likely to be taken into account when the public targeted makes
         a decision to purchase, the word combination DAS PRINZIP DER BEQUEMLICHKEIT, assessed on the basis of all the elements of
         which it is composed and read in its entirety, cannot be regarded as consisting exclusively of signs or indications which
         may serve to designate the quality of the goods concerned.
         
            
 The Court of First Instance then examined the second plea in law, alleging infringement of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No
         40/94.
         
            
 The Court of First Instance held, in paragraphs and of the contested judgment, that that plea should also be upheld
         since the Board of Appeal had, in essence, deduced lack of distinctive character from the descriptiveness of the phrase claimed,
         it being clear from paragraphs to of the contested judgment concerning the first plea that the contested decision was
         vitiated in that respect by en error of law.
         
            
 In paragraphs to of the contested judgment, the Court of First Instance held that the first plea was also well founded,
         on the basis of the following considerations:
         ‘43. Furthermore, the Board of Appeal again noted, in paragraph of the contested decision, that DAS PRINZIP DER BEQUEMLICHKEIT
         was characterised by the lack of any additional element of imagination. In addition, the Office submitted in its response
         that, in order to be able to serve as marks, slogans must possess an additional element ... of originality and that the term
         at issue had no such originality. 
          44. In that regard, it is clear from the case‑law of the Court of First Instance that lack of distinctiveness cannot be found
         because of lack of imagination or of an additional element of originality (Case T‑135/Taurus‑Film  v OHIM (Cine Action) [2001] ECR II‑379, paragraph 31; Case T‑136/Taurus‑Film  v OHIM (Cine Comedy) [2001] ECR II‑397, paragraph 31; and Case T‑87/Bank für Arbeit und Wirtschaft  v OHIM (EASYBANK) [2001] ECR II‑1259, paragraphs and 40). Furthermore, it is not appropriate to apply to slogans criteria which
         are stricter than those applicable to other types of sign. 
          45. To the extent that the Board of Appeal, in paragraph of the contested decision, again points out the lack of any conceptual
         tension which would create surprise and so make a striking impression, it must be stated that that point is really only a
         paraphrase of the Board of Appeal’s finding of no additional element of imagination. 
          46. The dismissal, on the basis of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94, of the appeal brought before the Board of Appeal
         would have been justified only if it had been demonstrated that the combination of the words das Prinzip der ... (the principle
         of ...) alone with a term designating a characteristic of the goods or services concerned is commonly used in business communications
         and, in particular, in advertising. The contested decision does not contain any finding to that effect and neither in its
         written pleadings nor at the hearing has the Office asserted that such a usage exists.’
         
            
 On those grounds, the Court of First Instance annulled the contested decision.
         
The appeal
            
 In its appeal, the Office claims that the Court of Justice should:
         
–
annul the contested judgment;
–
dismiss the action brought against the decision of the Third Board of Appeal of OHIM of March in Case R 392/1999‑and, in the alternative, refer the case back to the Court of First Instance;
            
–
order the other party to pay the costs both at first instance and on appeal.
            
 Erpo contends that the Court of Justice should:
         
–
dismiss the appeal;
–
confirm the contested judgment;
–
order the Office to pay the costs, including those that are reimbursable in appeal proceedings.
            
 By order of the President of the Court of Justice of September 2002, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
         was granted leave to intervene in support of the forms of order sought by the Office.
         
Arguments of the parties 
            
 By its sole plea, the Office submits that, by holding in paragraph of the contested judgment that the possibility of refusing
         registration of a trade mark by reason of lack of a distinctive character is limited to those cases in which it is demonstrated
         that the sign in question is commonly used in the relevant commercial circles, the Court of First Instance infringed Article
         7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94.
         
            
 In that connection, the Office submits that assessment of the distinctive character of a trade mark must start with an a priori
         examination of the likelihood that the mark will specifically enable the targeted public to identify the products or services
         for which registration is sought as originating from one undertaking rather than another or, in any event, as being manufactured
         or marketed under the entire responsibility of the trade mark owner.
         
            
 Like marks consisting of colours or three‑dimensional marks, but in contrast to those that are purely word marks or figurative
         marks, trade marks consisting of slogans, such as the one at issue in these proceedings, must incorporate an additional presentational
         element conferring on them a distinctive character. That requirement is accounted for by the fact that in most cases the signs
         in question fulfil a purely advertising function and not a function of enabling the origin of the goods to be identified.
         
            
 The Office also contends that the assessment of the distinctive character of a trade mark must not take account of any use
         thereof in the market. Admittedly, if it is found that the sign in question is a priori capable of distinguishing the goods
         or services in question but that that sign or terms of the same kind are commonly used by the relevant public, the application
         must be rejected on the twofold basis of Article 7(1)(b) and (d) of Regulation No 40/94. However, if, as in the present case,
         the sign concerned is not a priori capable of distinguishing the goods or services in question, its registration as a trade
         mark must be refused on the basis of Article 7(1)(b) of the same regulation, without its being necessary to produce proof
         that it is already commonly used by the relevant public.
         
            
 Erpo submits, on the contrary, that the plea put forward by the Office against paragraph of the contested judgment is unfounded.
         It is apparent from paragraphs and of the contested judgment that the Court of First instance considered that the distinctive
         character of the trade mark in question derives from the combination of the phrase ‘Das Prinzip der ...’ with the descriptive
         element ‘Bequemlichkeit’. However, the Court First Instance did not require proof of general use of the phrase concerned in
         its entirety. It did not find that the use of the phrase ‘Das Prinzip der ...’ reinforces the descriptive element. It inferred
         that the contested decision did not contain an objective statement of the reasons for refusing registration on the ground
         of lack of a distinctive character.
         
            
 Erpo also contends that registration as a trade mark of the slogan in question does not moreover entail the consequence of
         preventing competitors from using a combination of the words ‘Prinzip’ (principle) and ‘Bequemlichkeit’ (comfort). Article
         12(b) of Regulation No 40/in particular precludes such an outcome. The latter provision establishes sufficient protection
         of competition to justify a liberal registration practice, allowing protection of the trade mark applied for to be granted
         in cases of doubt.
         
            
 Erpo also denies that the distinctive character of a trade mark consisting of a slogan requires the presence of an additional
         presentational element by reason of the purely advertising function of such a sign. In its view, according both to the case‑law
         of the Court of First Instance and to the practice of the Office, the advertising function of a slogan does not preclude its
         having a distinctive character.
         
            
 The United Kingdom Government maintains that the analysis of distinctive character in the judgment is contrary to the case‑law
         both of the Court of Justice and of the Court of First Instance itself. In this case, the Court of First Instance did not,
         in particular, correctly apply Community law, which requires account to be taken of the nature of a trade mark when its distinctive
         character is assessed. Moreover, the Court of First Instance adopted an incorrect approach to determining such distinctiveness.
         
            
 That Government submits that it is clear from the case‑law that, to satisfy the condition of distinctive character, a trade
         mark must unambiguously identify the trade origin of the goods or services concerned. A sign cannot guarantee such origin
         if, having regard to the presumed expectations of an average consumer of the category of goods or services in question, a
         genuine doubt remains in the mind of that person as to their origin.
         
            
 It is true, according to that Government, that the legal principles to be applied in assessing the distinctive character of
         a trade mark are the same for all categories of mark. The fact remains however that the manner in which those principles are
         applied must take account of the context and in particular of the nature of the trade mark concerned, as shown by the case‑law
         concerning three‑dimensional marks comprising the shape of the product (Case T-119/Procter & Gamble v OHIM (Square white tablet with yellow and blue speckles) [2001] ECR II-2761, paragraphs to 55, Case T-88/Mag Instrument v OHIM [2002] ECR II-467, paragraphs to 35, and point of the Opinion of Advocate General Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer in Joined Cases
         C-53/to C-55/Linde and Others [2003] ECR I-3161).
         
            
 The United Kingdom Government submits that the mark at issue in this case is essentially an advertising slogan which purports
         to communicate the principles on the basis of which the products concerned were manufactured. An average consumer would be
         less likely to regard an advertising slogan, in particular where it contains a reference to the specific characteristics of
         the goods or services, as a badge of origin uniquely identifying the undertaking responsible for them. However, if such a
         slogan makes a striking impression when used in relation to the goods or services in question, the average consumer might
         ultimately regard it as signifying the trade origin of those goods or services, in addition to its promotional function.
         
            
 The OHIM Board of Appeal was right to take that consideration into account. However, in the contested judgment, the Court
         of First Instance did not, or did not sufficiently, take account of the nature of the mark when assessing its distinctive
         character.
         
            
 The United Kingdom Government submits in addition that, in so far as paragraph of the contested judgment implies that the
         registration of the sign at issue as a mark with a distinctive character could only be refused if the phrase ‘Das Prinzip
         der ...’ were commonly used in business communications and in advertising, the Court of First Instance infringed Article 7(1)(b)
         and (c) of Regulation No 40/94.
         
            
 In its view, the Court of First Instance confused the requirements of Article 7(1)(b) and (c) of Regulation No 40/with
         those of Article 7(1)(d). The requirement of demonstrating, in order to refuse registration, that a mark has become customary
         in trade in respect of the goods and services in question applies only to the latter provision and not to the first-mentioned
         provisions (Case C‑517/Merz & Krell [2001] ECR I-6959, paragraph 35). Paragraphs (b) and (c) of Article 7(1) of that regulation each set out an independent basis
         for refusal of registration of a sign despite the clear overlap between the scope of those two provisions.
         
Findings of the Court
            
 First, it must observed that the sole plea put forward by the Office, concerning the distinctive character of the trade mark
         and alleging infringement of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94, is expressly concerned only with paragraph of the
         contested judgment. However, that paragraph is inextricably linked with the immediately preceding paragraphs to 45, so
         that the Office’s plea must be examined in the context of all the reasoning set out in those paragraphs. Moreover, that is
         how the parties, and the intervener, have construed the subject-matter of the appeal, in so far as they deal, in their submissions,
         with paragraphs to of the contested judgment together. 
         
            
 Paragraphs to of the contested judgment refer to paragraphs and of the contested decision according to which a
         slogan must display ‘imaginativeness’ or even ‘conceptual tension which would create surprise and so make a striking impression’
         so as not to lack the minimal level of distinctiveness required by Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94.
         
            
 In paragraphs to of the contested judgment, the Court of First Instance rightly rejected that requirement, essentially
         on the ground that it is inappropriate to apply to slogans criteria which are stricter than those applicable to other types
         of sign.
         
            
 It is clear from the case‑law of the Court of Justice that, as far as assessing distinctiveness is concerned, every trade
         mark, of whatever category, must be capable of identifying the product as originating from a particular undertaking, and thus
         distinguishing it from those of other undertakings (see, to that effect, in relation to Article 3(1)(b) of First Council Directive
         89/104/EEC of December to approximate the laws of the Member States relating to trade marks (OJ L 40, p. 1),
         which is identical to Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94, Linde and Others, paragraphs and 47).
         
            
 The Court of Justice has also held that, although the criteria for assessing distinctiveness are the same for the various
         categories of marks, it may become apparent, in applying those criteria, that the relevant public’s perception is not necessarily
         the same for each of those categories and that, therefore, it may prove more difficult to establish distinctiveness for some
         categories of mark than for others (see Joined Cases C-456/P and C-457/P Henkel v OHIM [2004] ECR I-0000, paragraph 38; Joined Cases C-468/P to C-472/P Procter & Gamble v OHIM [2004] ECR I-0000, paragraph 36; and Joined Cases C-473/P and C‑474/P Procter & Gamble  v OHIM [2004] I‑0000, paragraph 36).
            
 The possibility cannot be excluded that the case‑law mentioned in the foregoing paragraph of this judgment is also relevant
         to word marks consisting of advertising slogans such as the one at issue in this case. That could be the case in particular
         if it were established, when assessing the distinctiveness of the trade mark in question, that it served a promotional function
         consisting, for example, of commending the quality of the product in question and that the importance of that function was
         not manifestly secondary to its purported function as a trade mark, namely that of guaranteeing the origin of the product.
         Indeed, in such a case, the authorities may take account of the fact that average consumers are not in the habit of making
         assumptions about the origin of products on the basis of such slogans (see, to that effect, Procter & Gamble, paragraph 36).
         
            
 However, difficulties in establishing distinctiveness which may be associated with certain categories of trade marks because
         of their very nature, such as those consisting of advertising slogans – difficulties which it is legitimate to take into account
         – do not justify laying down specific criteria supplementing or derogating from the criterion of distinctiveness as interpreted
         in the case-law referred to in paragraphs to of this judgment. The Court of First Instance was therefore right to annul
         the contested decision for imposing a different and stricter criterion for assessing the distinctiveness of trade marks consisting
         of advertising slogans.
         
            
 Having properly rejected, in paragraphs to of the contested judgment, the criterion adopted in the contested decision
         for assessing the distinctive character of the trade mark in question, in paragraph of the contested judgment the Court
         of First Instance applied another criterion, namely that according to which a trade mark is not devoid of distinctiveness
         within the meaning of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/unless it is demonstrated that the phrase concerned is commonly
         used in business communications and, in particular, in advertising – the existence of such a situation not having been established
         in the contested decision.
         
            
 Admittedly, it is true that if it is demonstrated that the phrase concerned is commonly used in business communications and,
         in particular, in advertising, as provided by Article 7(1)(d) of Regulation No 40/94, it follows that that sign is not capable
         of distinguishing the goods or services of an undertaking from those of other undertakings and does not therefore fulfil the
         essential function of a trade mark – unless the use made of such signs or terms has enabled them to acquire a distinctive
         character capable of being recognised under Article 7(3) of Regulation No 40/(see, to that effect, in relation to identical
         provisions contained in Article 3(1)(b) and (d) and (3) of Directive 89/104, Merz & Krell, paragraph of 37).
         
            
 However, each of the grounds for refusal listed in Article 7(1) of Regulation No 40/is independent of the others and calls
         for separate examination (see, in particular, Henkel v OHIM, paragraph 45, and the case‑law there cited). 
         
            
 Therefore, it is not appropriate to limit the scope of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/to trade marks for which registration
         is refused on the basis of Article 7(1)(d) thereof by reason of the fact that they are commonly used in business communications
         and, in particular, in advertising.
         
            
 The Court of Justice has held that the registration of a mark made up of signs or indications that are also used as advertising
         slogans, indications of quality or incitements to purchase the goods or services covered by that mark is not excluded as such
         by virtue of such use (see Merz & Krell,  paragraph 40). 
         
            
 It is also clear from the case-law that the distinctiveness of a trade mark within the meaning of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation
         No 40/means that the mark in question makes it possible to identify the product for which registration is sought as originating
         from a given undertaking and therefore to distinguish the product from those of other undertakings and, therefore, is able
         to fulfil the essential function of the trade mark (see, to that effect, in particular Procter & Gamble  v OHIM, paragraph 32, and the case-law there cited, and, in relation to the same provision contained in Article 3(1)(b) of Directive
         89/104, Merz & Krell,  paragraph 37, and Linde and Others, paragraph 40, and the case-law there cited).
         
            
 According to the case-law, that distinctiveness must be assessed, first, in relation to the goods or services in respect of
         which registration is applied for and, second, in relation to the perception of the relevant public, which consists of average
         consumers of the products or services in question, who are reasonably well informed and reasonably observant and circumspect
         (see, in particular, Procter & Gamble, paragraph 33, and the case-law there cited).
         
            
 It follows that the distinctiveness of a trade mark consisting of signs or indications that are also used as advertising slogans,
         indications of quality or incitements to purchase the goods or services covered by that mark, as in the case of the mark at
         issue in these proceedings, must be assessed on the basis of the principles mentioned in paragraphs and of this judgment
         (see, to that effect, also, as regards marks of that kind, Case T-130/Sykes Enterprises v OHIM (REAL PEOPLE, REAL SOLUTIONS) [2002] ECR II-5179, paragraph 20, and Case T‑122/Best Buy Concepts v OHIM (BEST BUY) [2003] ECR II-2235, paragraph 21).
         
            
 In that connection, the argument put forward by Erpo to the effect that Article 12(b) of Regulation No 40/establishes sufficient
         protection of competition to justify a liberal registration policy, allowing protection of the mark applied for to be granted
         in cases of doubt, must also be rejected. Such an argument has already been rejected by the Court of Justice on the ground
         that examination of applications for registration must not be minimal but must be stringent and full in order to prevent trade
         marks from being improperly registered and to make sure that, for reasons of legal certainty and sound administration, trade
         marks whose use could be successfully challenged before the courts are not registered (see, to that effect, Case C-104/Libertel [2003] ECR I-3793, paragraphs and 59).
         
            
 Therefore, by holding in paragraph of the contested judgment that a trade mark is not devoid of distinctive character within
         the meaning of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/unless it is demonstrated that the phrase concerned is commonly used
         in business communications and, in particular, in advertising – the existence of such a situation not having been established
         in the contested decision – the Court of First Instance applied a criterion other than the one laid down by Article 7(1)(b)
         of Regulation No 40/94.
         
            
 It follows that, on that point, the Court of First Instance did not keep within the bounds of that article.
         
            
 Accordingly, the Office is correct to say that, on that point, the contested judgment is vitiated by an error of law.
         
            
 It must nevertheless be pointed out that that error of law has no influence on the outcome of the dispute.
         
            
 As is apparent from paragraph of this judgment, it was correctly held, on the basis of paragraphs to of the contested
         judgment, that the contested decision should be annulled because registration of the mark was refused on the basis of the
         incorrect criterion set out in paragraphs and of the contested decision concerning distinctive character within the
         meaning of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94, namely the absence of an additional element of imagination or an additional
         element of originality.
         
            
 It follows that, notwithstanding the error of law identified in paragraph of this judgment, the operative part of the contested
         judgment remains justified.
         
            
 It is settled case-law that if the grounds of a judgment of the Court of First Instance reveal an infringement of Community
         law but the operative part appears well founded on other legal grounds, the appeal must be dismissed (see, in particular,
         Case C-265/P VBA v Florimex and Others [2000] ECR I-2061, paragraph 121, and the case-law there cited).
         
            
 Consequently, the plea relied on cannot be upheld and the appeal must be dismissed.
         
Costs
            
 Under the first subparagraph of Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, which applies to the appeal procedure by virtue of
         Article of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied
         for in the successful party’s pleadings. As Erpo has applied for costs and OHIM has been unsuccessful, it must be ordered
         to pay the costs.
         
            
 Under the first subparagraph of Article 69(4) of the Rules of Procedure, the United Kingdom must bear its own costs.
         
 On those grounds, the Court hereby:
         
 
1.
Dismisses the appeal;
 
2.
Orders the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) to pay the costs;
 
3.
Orders the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to bear its own costs.
 Signatures.
      
 –
            
Language of the case: German.
Top  
 