
Case C-568/Combinatie Spijker Infrabouw-De Jonge Konstruktie and Others 
v
Provincie Drenthe
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Rechtbank Assen)
(Public contracts – Procedures for reviewing the award of public works contracts – Directive 89/665/EEC – Duty of Member States to make provision for a review procedure – National legislation permitting a court hearing an application for interim measures to authorise a decision awarding a public
         contract which may subsequently be held contrary to European Union legal rules by the court hearing the substance of the case
         – Compatibility with the directive – Award of damages to the tenderers harmed – Conditions)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Preliminary rulings – Jurisdiction of the Court – Limits – Clearly irrelevant questions and hypothetical questions raised
            in a context that excludes a useful answer – Questions bearing no relation to the subject-matter of the dispute in the main
            proceedings
(Art. EC)
2.        Approximation of laws – Review procedures in respect of the award of public supply and public works contracts – Directive
            89/– Duty of Member States to make provision for a review procedure – Interlocutory procedure
(European Parliament and Council Directive 2004/18; Council Directive 89/665, as amended by Directive 92/50, Arts 1(1) and
            (3), and 2(1) and (6)
3.        Approximation of laws – Review procedures in respect of the award of public supply and public works contracts – Directive
            89/– Duty of Member States to make provision for a review procedure – Interlocutory procedure
(European Parliament and Council Directive 2004/18; Council Directive 89/665, as amended by Directive 92/50)
4.        EU law – Rights conferred on individuals – Infringement by a Member State – Obligation to make good damage caused to individuals
1.        The Court of Justice may not give a preliminary ruling on a question submitted by a national court when it is quite obvious
         that the ruling sought by that court on the interpretation or validity of EU law bears no relation to the actual facts of
         the main action or its purpose, when the problem is hypothetical, or when the Court does not have before it the factual or
         legal material necessary to give a useful answer to the questions submitted to it.
      
(see para. 43)
2.        Article 1(1) and (3) and Article 2(1) and (6) of Directive 89/on the coordination of the laws, regulations and administrative
         provisions relating to the application of review procedures to the award of public supply and public works contracts, as amended
         by Directive 92/50, do not preclude a system in which, in order to obtain a rapid decision, the only procedure available is
         characterised by the fact that it is designed to enable swift adoption of a mandatory measure, that lawyers have no right
         to exchange views, that no evidence is, as a rule, presented other than in written form, that statutory rules on evidence
         are not applicable, and that the judgment does not lead to the final determination of the legal situation and does not form
         part of a decision-making process leading to such a final decision.
      
As is stated in the fifth recital of Directive 89/665, the short duration of procedures for the award of public contracts
         means that infringements of provisions of EU law need to be dealt with urgently.
      
Given that objective, the said directive leaves Member States a discretion in the choice of the procedural guarantees for
         which it provides, and the formalities relating thereto.
      
(see paras 51, 57, 59, 65, operative part 1)
3.        Directive 89/on the coordination of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the application of
         review procedures to the award of public supply and public works contracts, as amended by Directive 92/50, must be interpreted
         as not precluding a court hearing an application for interim measures, for the purposes of adopting a provisional measure,
         from carrying out an interpretation of Directive 2004/of the European Parliament and of the Council on the coordination
         of procedures for the award of public works contracts, public supply contracts and public service contracts which is, subsequently,
         classified as erroneous by the court hearing the substance of the case.
      
On the one hand, the court hearing an application for interim measures is called upon to give a decision in the context of
         an urgent procedure in which both the gathering of evidence and the examination of the pleas of the parties are necessarily
         more cursory than in the context of the proceedings on the substance. On the other hand, the intervention of the court hearing
         an application for interim measures is not designed, like that of the court hearing the substance, to rule definitively on
         the claims presented to it but to protect provisionally the interests at stake, possibly by balancing them. 
      
(see paras 77, 80, operative part 2)
4.        As regards State liability for damage caused to individuals by infringements of EU law for which the State may be held responsible,
         the individuals harmed have a right to redress where the rule of EU law which has been infringed is intended to confer rights
         on them, the breach of that rule is sufficiently serious, and there is a direct causal link between the breach and the loss
         or damage sustained by the individuals. When there exist no provisions of EU law in that area, it is for the internal legal
         order of each Member State, once those conditions have been complied with, to determine the criteria on the basis of which
         the damage arising from an infringement of EU law on the award of public contracts must be determined and estimated, provided
         the principles of equivalence and effectiveness are observed.
      
(see para. 92, operative part 3)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
December (*)
      
(Public contracts – Procedures for reviewing the award of public works contracts – Directive 89/665/EEC – Duty of Member States to make provision for a review procedure – National legislation permitting a court hearing an application for interim measures to authorise a decision awarding a public
         contract which may subsequently be held contrary to European Union legal rules by the court hearing the substance of the case
         – Compatibility with the directive – Award of damages to the tenderers harmed – Conditions)
      
In Case C‑568/08,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Rechtbank Assen (Netherlands), made by decision of December
         2008, received at the Court on December 2008, in the proceedings
      
Combinatie Spijker Infrabouw/De Jonge Konstruktie,
Van Spijker Infrabouw BV,
De Jonge Konstruktie BV
v
Provincie Drenthe,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, A. Arabadjiev, A. Rosas, A. Ó Caoimh and P. Lindh,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: P. Cruz Villalón,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Combinatie Spijker Infrabouw/De Jonge Konstruktie, Van Spijker Infrabouw BV and De Jonge Konstruktie BV, by H. Hoogwout, advocaat,
–        the Provincie Drenthe, by M. Mutsaers and A. Hoekstra‑Borzymowska, advocaten,
–        the Netherlands Government, by C. Wissels and Y. de Vries, acting as Agents,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by M. Konstantinidis and S. Noë, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles 1(1) and (3) and 2(1) and (6) of Council Directive
         89/665/EEC of December on the coordination of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the
         application of review procedures to the award of public supply and public works contracts (OJ L 395, p. 33), as amended
         by Council Directive 92/50/EEC of June relating to the coordination of procedures for the award of public service
         contracts (OJ L 209, p. 1; ‘Directive 89/665’).
      
The reference has been made in the context of a dispute between Combinatie Spijker Infrabouw/De Jonge Konstruktie, Van Spijker
         Infrabouw BV and De Jonge Konstruktie BV (‘Combinatie and others’) and Provincie Drenthe (Province of Drenthe; ‘Provincie’),
         concerning the award of a public works contract. 
      
 Legal context
 Union legislation
The fifth recital of Directive 89/states:
      
‘Whereas, since procedures for the award of public contracts are of such short duration, competent review bodies must, among
         other things, be authorised to take interim measures aimed at suspending such a procedure or the implementation of any decisions
         which may be taken by the contracting authority; whereas the short duration of the procedures means that the aforementioned
         infringements need to be dealt with urgently’.
      
Article 1(1) and (3) of Directive 89/provide:
      
‘1. The Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that, as regards contract award procedures falling within
         the scope of Directives 71/305/EEC, 77/62/EEC, and 92/50/EEC, decisions taken by the contracting authorities may be reviewed
         effectively and, in particular, as rapidly as possible in accordance with the conditions set out in the following Articles
         and, in particular, Article 2(7) on the grounds that such decisions have infringed Community law in the field of public procurement
         or nation[al] rules implementing that law.
      
...
3.      The Member States shall ensure that the review procedures are available, under detailed rules which the Member States may
         establish, at least to any person having or having had an interest in obtaining a particular public supply or public works
         contract and who has been or risks being harmed by an alleged infringement. In particular, the Member States may require that
         the person seeking the review must have previously notified the contracting authority of the alleged infringement and of his
         intention to seek review.’
      
Article 2(1) and (6) of Directive 89/read:
      
‘1.      The Member States shall ensure that the measures taken concerning the review procedures specified in Article include provision
         for the powers to: 
      
(a)      take, at the earliest opportunity and by way of interlocutory procedures, interim measures with the aim of correcting the
         alleged infringement or preventing further damage to the interests concerned, including measures to suspend or to ensure the
         suspension of the procedure for the award of a public contract or the implementation of any decision taken by the contracting
         authority;
      
(b)      either set aside or ensure the setting aside of decisions taken unlawfully, including the removal of discriminatory technical,
         economic or financial specifications in the invitation to tender, the contract documents or in any other document relating
         to the contract award procedure;
      
(c)      award damages to persons harmed by an infringement. 
2.      The powers specified in paragraph may be conferred on separate bodies responsible for different aspects of the review procedure.
         
      
3.      Review procedures need not in themselves have an automatic suspensive effect on the contract award procedures to which they
         relate. 
      
4.      The Member States may provide that when considering whether to order interim measures the body responsible may take into account
         the probable consequences of the measures for all interests likely to be harmed, as well as the public interest, and may decide
         not to grant such measures where their negative consequences could exceed their benefits. A decision not to grant interim
         measures shall not prejudice any other claim of the person seeking these measures.
      
5.      The Member States may provide that where damages are claimed on the grounds that a decision was taken unlawfully, the contested
         decision must first be set aside by a body having the necessary powers.
      
6.      The effects of the exercise of the powers referred to in paragraph on a contract concluded subsequent to its award shall
         be determined by national law.
      
Furthermore, except where a decision must be set aside prior to the award of damages, a Member State may provide that, after
         the conclusion of a contract following its award, the powers of the body responsible for the review procedures shall be limited
         to awarding damages to any person harmed by an infringement.’
      
By virtue, respectively, of Article of Council Directive 93/37/EEC of June concerning the coordination of procedures
         for the award of public works contracts (OJ L 199, p. 54) and Article of Council Directive 93/36/EEC of June coordinating procedures for the award of public supply contracts (OJ L 199, p. 1), Council Directive 71/305/EEC of July concerning the co-ordination of procedures for the award of public works contracts (OJ, English Special Edition
         (II), p. 682) and Council Directive 77/62/EEC of December coordinating procedures for the award of public supply
         contracts (OJ L 13, p. 1), have been repealed.
      
Article of Directive 2004/18/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of March on the coordination of procedures
         for the award of public works contracts, public supply contracts and public service contracts (OJ L 134, p. 114) provides
         that Directive 92/50, save for Article thereof, and Directives 93/and 93/are repealed. References to those repealed
         directives as a whole are to be construed as references to Directive 2004/18.
      
According to Article 7(c) of Directive 2004/18, as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 2083/of December (OJ L 333, p. 28), that directive was applicable, between January and December 2007, to public works contracts
         with a value exclusive of value added tax (VAT) estimated to be equal to or greater than EUR 000.
      
Article 9(5)(a) of Directive 2004/provides:
      
‘Where a proposed work or purchase of services may result in contracts being awarded at the same time in the form of separate
         lots, account shall be taken of the total estimated value of all such lots.
      
[…]’
 National legislation
At the time of the facts giving rise to the dispute in the main proceedings, the Kingdom of the Netherlands had not adopted
         specific measures for transposing Directive 89/into national law, taking the view that Netherlands legislation in force
         already met the requirements of that directive.
      
According to the information in the Court’s file, the award of public contracts is a matter for private law, the award of
         a public contract constitutes an act of private law, and decisions preliminary to the award of a public contract taken by
         administrative bodies are regarded as preparatory acts of private law. The civil courts have jurisdiction to hear disputes
         on the award of public contracts as regards both the adoption of protective measures and the procedure on the substance. The
         administrative courts do not have jurisdiction, unless a law provides otherwise.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
According to the order for reference, the Provincie decided to renew two bascule bridges on the Erica-Ter Apel navigable waterway
         in the Commune of Emmen (Netherlands). That navigable waterway is stated to be of great importance at the international level.
         The European Union granted a subsidy in support of that project, on condition that the works were carried out within a certain
         time-limit, fixed at July 2008.
      
The contract for the renewal of the bascule bridges was made the subject-matter of a public call for tenders at European level.
         The contract notice of July was published in the supplement to the Official Journal of the European Union.
      
The tenderers were subjected to certain conditions, particularly as regards technical capacity, integrity and solvency. Other
         conditions concerned the tenders themselves, particularly as regards the evidence which had to accompany them. The criterion
         for award of the contract was the lowest price.
      
The contract notice was amended by a notice of July 2007.
      
The tenders, which had to be lodged before September 2007, were opened on that date, and the Provincie issued a report
         at the conclusion of that operation. It was stated therein, amongst other things, that four tenderers had submitted a tender,
         and that the lowest tender, of EUR 200, was that of Machinefabriek Emmen BV (‘MFE’), whilst Combinatie’s tender, of
         EUR 400, came second.
      
By letter of October 2007, the Provincie informed Combinatie and others that it intended to award the contract to MFE because
         its tender was the lowest, without further explanations.
      
Combinatie and others objected to that decision, by letter of October 2007, arguing that there was serious evidence to cast
         doubt as to whether MFE did in fact meet the criteria for the award of the contract. That letter gave rise to a telephone
         conversation with the staff of the Provincie, during which the question was raised whether a successor undertaking might use
         the references of its predecessor.
      
On October 2007, Combinatie and others brought an application for interim measures against the Provincie before the Rechtbank
         Assen, from which it sought a ruling that MFE had submitted an invalid tender, that Combinatie had submitted the lowest tender,
         and that the Provincie should award the contract to the latter. 
      
By letter of November 2007, the Provincie informed all tenderers that it had decided to withdraw its call for tenders because,
         following an analysis by its award procedure staff, it had become apparent that the procedure was vitiated by such flaws that
         it was no longer possible to continue. According to that letter, the main flaws were as follows: (a) the requirement concerning
         experience had been reduced from to % of the market in question, and the requirement concerning turnover had been reduced
         from to 125% of that amount; (b) the reference period for calculation of turnover had been extended from to years;
         (c) the criterion of experience had been modified in such a way that it no longer fully corresponded to the criterion initially
         laid down; (d) those modifications had been communicated on the website www.aanbestedingskalender.nl, but not on the website
         on which the call for tenders had been published, namely www.ted.europa.eu. In that same letter, the Provincie indicated that
         it was considering the possibility of making a fresh call for tenders.
      
Combinatie and others took the view that the letter of November was not a factor sufficient to enable it to withdraw
         its application for interim measures, but it nevertheless modified the claims made therein.
      
On November 2007, MFE intervened in the interim proceedings on the advice of the Provincie, claiming that the court hearing
         those proceedings should award the contract to MFE. 
      
By judgment of November 2007, the judge hearing the application for interim measures at the Rechtbank Assen took the view
         that MFE had convincingly argued, by means of documents lodged during the award procedure and commented upon at the hearing,
         that the works which had been carried out in the past by Machinefabriek Hidding BV, which during became Synmet Engineering
         & Production BV, could be attributed to it. The judge hearing the application for interim measures also found that MFE had
         met the conditions laid down by the Provincie in the call for tenders and provided the necessary information in time, that
         the signature of the model K declaration lodged by MFE’s representative should be regarded as sufficient, and that MFE had
         submitted the lowest tender.
      
The judge hearing the application for interim measures ruled that the Provincie had not acted consistently when it defined
         the turnover and experience criteria, and that substantive changes had been introduced into the call for tenders. Nevertheless,
         the court found that the changes had been made at an early stage of the award procedure, that those changes did not appear
         to have been introduced in order to favour one of the tenderers, and that neither did it appear that third parties had submitted
         a tender after the project was modified. In those circumstances, the court held that the changes were not of sufficient importance
         to permit the conclusion that the call for tender procedure had not been sufficiently transparent.
      
The court considered that, having regard to the principles of equality and legitimate expectations, and by reason of pre-contractual
         good faith, it was no longer permissible for the Provincie, at that stage of the award procedure, to award, following a second
         call for tenders, the same works contract to an undertaking other than that which fulfilled the conditions laid down at the
         time of the first call for tenders.
      
The court therefore prohibited the Provincie from awarding the contract to an undertaking other than MFE, and declared that
         decision immediately enforceable.
      
On December 2007, the Provincie awarded the contract to MFE.
      
On December 2007, Combinatie and others brought an interlocutory action before the Gerechsthof Leeuwarden, claiming that
         the judgment of the Rechtbank Assen of November should be set aside.
      
By interlocutory judgment of January 2008, the Gerechsthof Leeuwarden dismissed that application on the ground that MFE
         had a protected interest in the execution of the judgment of the Rechtbank Assen.
      
The Gerechtshof Leeuwarden held that the contract concluded meanwhile between the Provincie and MFE should be regarded as
         having been concluded in a legally valid manner and that, apart from individual cases, the mere fact that the call for tenders
         procedure was vitiated by defects did not render that validity open to challenge. The Gerechtshof concluded that the only
         action remaining open to Combinatie and others, were an infringement of the law on public contracts to be established, was
         an action for damages.
      
On December 2007, Combinatie and others lodged a further appeal against the interim judgment, seeking the annulment of
         that judgment and the award of the contract. It desisted from that appeal after becoming aware of the interlocutory judgment
         of the Gerechtshof Leeuwarden of January and decided to sue the Provincie for damages before the Rechtbank Assen.
         The writ was issued on February 2008.
      
In the context of that action, the Rechtbank Assen considers that the decision of November 2007, whereby the Provincie decided
         to withdraw its award decision of October and make a fresh call for tenders, is the only correct application of the
         law on public contracts. It considers that the Provincie could not reduce the experience requirement from to 50% and the
         turnover requirement from to 125%, that it could not extend the reference period for calculation of turnover from to
         years, and that it should have published the changes which it thus made to the call for tenders on the same internet site
         as that on which it had published that call. The Rechtbank Assen states that, for those reasons, it intends to give a definitive
         judgment in substitution for the interim judgment. The Rechtbank considers that, since the contract has been awarded and the
         works already begun, or perhaps even finished, the only issue is whether to award damages to Combinatie and others.
      
The Rechtbank Assen questions whether that unlawful act falls to be ascribed to the Provincie, given the circumstances and
         the statutory structure of legal protection within which it took place. The major social interests to which the Provincie
         refers and the decision of the court hearing the application for interim measures, along with the Netherlands legislature’s
         choice of legal protection system, might serve as justification.
      
In those circumstances, the Rechtbank Assen decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court
         for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      (a)   Must Article 1(1) and (3) and Article 2(1) and (6) of Directive 89/be interpreted as meaning that they have not been complied
         with if the legal protection to be afforded by national courts in disputes relating to tendering procedures governed by European
         law is impeded by the fact that conflicting decisions may arise under a system in which both administrative courts and civil
         courts may have jurisdiction with respect to the same decision and its consequences?
      
(b)      Is it permissible in this context for the administrative courts to be confined to forming an opinion and ruling on the tendering
         decision, and if so, why and/or under what conditions?
      
(c)      Is it permissible in this context for the Algemene wet bestuursrecht (Netherlands General Law on Administrative Law), which,
         as a rule, governs applications for access to the administrative courts, to exclude such applications in the case of decisions
         concerning the conclusion of a contract by the contracting authority with one of the tenderers, and if so, why and/or under
         what conditions?
      
(d)      Is the answer to Question of relevance in this context?
(2)      (a)   Must Article 1(1) and (3) and Article 2(1) and (6) of Directive 89/be interpreted as meaning that they have not been complied
         with if the only procedure for obtaining a rapid decision is characterised by the fact that it is in principle geared to a
         rapid mandatory measure, that lawyers have no right to exchange views, that [no] evidence is, as a rule, presented in other
         than written form and that statutory rules on evidence are not applicable?
      
(b)      If not, does this also apply if the decision does not lead to the final determination of the legal situation and does not
         form part of a decision-making process leading to such a final decision?
      
(c)      Does it make a difference in this context if the decision is binding only on the parties to the proceedings, even though other
         parties may have an interest?
      
(3)      Is it compatible with Directive 89/for a court, in interim relief proceedings, to order the contracting public authority
         to take a tendering decision which is subsequently deemed, in proceedings on the substance, to be contrary to tendering rules
         under European law?
      
(4)      (a)   If the answer to the previous question is in the negative, must the contracting public authority be deemed liable in that
         regard, and if so, in what sense?
      
(b)      Does the same apply if the answer to that question is in the affirmative?
(c)      If that authority is required to pay damages, does Community law set criteria for determining and estimating those damages,
         and if so, what are they?
      
(d)      If the contracting public authority cannot be deemed liable, is it possible, under Community law, for some other person to
         be shown to be liable, and on what basis?
      
(5)      If it in fact appears to be impossible, or extremely difficult, under national law and/or with the aid of the answers to the
         above questions to attribute liability, what must the national court do?’
      
 The questions referred
 Preliminary observation 
Pursuant to Article 1(1) thereof, Directive 89/applies as regards contract award procedures falling within the scope of
         Directive 71/305, that latter directive having been replaced by Directive 93/37, itself replaced by Directive 2004/18.
      
According to Article 7(c) thereof, Directive 2004/applied, both at the date of publication of the contract notice and at
         the date of the award of the contract at issue in the main proceedings, to public works contracts the value of which, excluding
         VAT, was equal to, or higher than, EUR 000.
      
According to the order for reference, the amount of the successful tender in the procedure giving rise to the dispute in the
         main proceedings was EUR 200, including VAT.
      
The question therefore arises whether or not the contract at issue in the main proceedings falls within the scope of Directive
         2004/18.
      
On December 2009, the Court sent the referring court a request for clarification pursuant to Article 104(5) of the Rules
         of Procedure, with a view to determining the estimated value of the contract at issue in the main proceedings and, in particular,
         to determine whether that contract formed part of an aggregate whole for the purposes of Article 9(5)(a) of that directive,
         with the result that account would need to be taken of the estimated overall value of that aggregate whole.
      
By letter of January 2010, which reached the Registry of the Court of Justice on February 2010, the referring court indicated
         that the contract at issue in the main proceedings concerned works forming part of a more extensive project, namely the renewal
         of the Erica-Ter Apel navigable waterway, of an amount estimated at EUR 000.
      
It is possible to infer from that answer that the contract at issue in the main proceedings forms part of an aggregate whole
         for the purposes of Article 9(5)(a) of Directive 2004/18, the overall amount of which exceeds the threshold for the application
         of the latter. The Court therefore considers that that contract falls within the scope of that directive, and thus within
         the scope of Directive 89/665. 
      
 The first question
According to settled case-law, it is solely for the national court before which the dispute has been brought, and which must
         assume responsibility for the subsequent judicial decision, to determine in the light of the particular circumstances of the
         case both the need for a preliminary ruling in order to enable it to deliver judgment and the relevance of the questions which
         it submits to the Court (see, in particular, Case C‑415/Bosman [1995] ECR I‑4921, paragraph 59, and Case C‑459/Elshani [2009] ECR I‑2759, paragraph 40). 
      
Nevertheless, the Court has held that it cannot give a preliminary ruling on a question submitted by a national court where
         it is quite obvious that the ruling sought by that court on the interpretation or validity of European Union (EU) law bears
         no relation to the actual facts of the main action or its purpose, where the problem is hypothetical, or where the Court does
         not have before it the factual or legal material necessary to give a useful answer to the questions submitted to it (Bosman, paragraph 61; Elshani, paragraph 41). 
      
As is apparent from the order for reference, the first question is based on the premiss that, in the context of national law,
         both the administrative courts and the civil courts may have jurisdiction in relation to the same decision taken in the context
         of the award of a public contract, which might lead to the adoption of contradictory court decisions.
      
However, the observations submitted to the Court by the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Commission show that, under Netherlands
         law, the civil courts generally have exclusive jurisdiction to hear disputes on the award of public contracts. According to
         those observations, the administrative courts have jurisdiction in the matter if a particular law so provides. In that case,
         they would have exclusive jurisdiction. It would therefore be impossible, under Netherlands law, for an administrative court
         and a civil court both to have jurisdiction concerning the same dispute on the award of public works contracts. 
      
It is true that, when ruling in the context of a reference for a preliminary ruling, the Court of Justice may not rule on
         the interpretation of national laws or regulations (Case 32/Saieva [1976] ECR 1523, paragraph 7; Joined Cases 91/and 127/Heineken Brouwerijen [1984] ECR 3435, paragraph 10; and Joined Cases C‑92/and C‑326/Phil Collins and Others [1993] ECR I‑5145, paragraph 13).
      
However, it is undisputed that, in the dispute in the main proceedings, there is no risk of contradictory decisions through
         the intervention of an administrative court, since all the proceedings have taken place before civil courts.
      
According to the Court’s information, therefore, the interpretation of EU law requested in the first question bears no relation
         to the subject-matter of the dispute in the main proceedings.
      
Therefore, the first question must be regarded as inadmissible.
      
 The second question
By its second question, part (a), the referring court asks, in essence, whether Directive 89/precludes a system in which,
         in order to obtain a rapid decision, the only procedure available is characterised by the fact that it is geared to a rapid
         mandatory measure, that lawyers have no right to exchange views, that no evidence is, as a rule, presented other than in written
         form and that statutory rules on evidence are not applicable.
      
It should be remembered, as is stated in the fifth recital of Directive 89/665, that the short duration of procedures for
         the award of public contracts means that infringements of provisions of EU law need to be dealt with urgently.
      
In view of that objective, Article 1(1) of Directive 89/provides for the establishment in the Member States of review
         procedures which are effective, and in particular as rapid as possible, against decisions which may have infringed EU law
         on public procurement or national rules implementing that law.
      
More specifically, Article 2(1)(a) of that directive requires Member States to make provision for the powers to ‘take, at
         the earliest opportunity and by way of interlocutory procedures, interim measures with the aim of correcting the alleged infringement
         or preventing further damage to the interests concerned’.
      
Since Article 2(2) of the same directive provides that the powers specified in Article 2(1) may be conferred on separate bodies
         responsible for different aspects of the review procedure, it follows in particular that Member States may confer the power
         to take provisional measures and the power to award damages on separate bodies.
      
Article 2(3) of Directive 89/provides that review procedures need not in themselves have an automatic suspensive effect
         on the contract award procedures to which they relate. It follows that this directive allows Member States to provide, in
         their national legislation, that suspensive measures may be applied for, in appropriate cases, in proceedings which are separate
         from those concerning the substance of the procedures for the award of public contracts.
      
Article 2(4) of the said directive, which provides that a decision not to grant interim measures shall not prejudice any other
         claim of the person seeking those measures, also allows for the possibility of a procedure on the substance separate from
         the procedure seeking the grant of interim measures.
      
Thus, it may be concluded that Directive 89/leaves Member States a discretion in the choice of the procedural guarantees
         for which it provides, and the formalities relating thereto.
      
It should be noted that, since the characteristics of the interim procedure at issue in the main proceedings are inherent
         in procedures seeking the quickest possible adoption of interim measures, they comply, as such, with the requirements of Articles
         1(1) and 2(1)(a) of Directive 89/665.
      
It follows from the above that Directive 89/does not preclude a system in which, in order to obtain a rapid decision,
         the only procedure available is characterised by the fact that it is geared to a rapid mandatory measure, that lawyers have
         no right to exchange views, that no evidence is, as a rule, presented other than in written form and that statutory rules
         on evidence are not applicable.
      
By part (b) of its second question, the national court asks whether the above analysis also applies where the interim judgment
         does not lead to the final determination of the legal situation and does not form part of a decision-making process leading
         to such a final decision.
      
By its nature, an interim measure does not finally determine the legal situation. Moreover, the effects produced by the decision-making
         process of which that measure forms part follow from the internal legal order of the State concerned. Therefore, Directive
         89/does not preclude the adoption of such a measure.
      
By part (c) of its second question, the referring court asks whether it makes a difference that the interim judgment is binding
         only on the parties, even though other parties may have an interest.
      
That part of the question is based on a hypothesis that does not obtain in the main dispute. In that dispute, the interim
         proceedings were not limited to the applicant and the defendant, namely Combinatie and others and the Provincie. On the contrary,
         a third interested party, namely MFE, was able to intervene to defend its interests, and moreover to do so with success.
      
Consequently, there is no need to reply to that part of the question.
      
Having regard to the above considerations, the answer to the second question is that Article 1(1) and (3) and Article 2(1)
         and (6) of Directive 89/do not preclude a system in which, in order to obtain a rapid decision, the only procedure available
         is characterised by the fact that it is geared to a rapid mandatory measure, that lawyers have no right to exchange views,
         that no evidence is, as a rule, presented in other than written form, that statutory rules on evidence are not applicable
         and that the judgment does not lead to the final determination of the legal situation and does not form part of a decision-making
         process leading to such a final decision.
      
 The third question
By its third question, the referring court asks in essence whether Directive 89/must be interpreted as precluding a court
         hearing an application for interim measures from ordering an awarding authority to adopt a decision to award a public contract
         which, in the course of a subsequent procedure on the substance, will be declared incompatible with Directive 2004/18.
      
As stated in paragraph 42, it is for the national court to assess, having regard to the particular features of the case, the
         relevance of the questions which it puts to the Court.
      
The third question of the referring court is based on the premiss that, in the main proceedings, the court hearing the application
         for interim measures has ordered the awarding authority to award the contract in question to MFE.
      
According to the findings contained in the order for reference, that premiss in inaccurate. As the referring court finds,
         the court hearing the application for interim measures has prohibited the Provincie from awarding the contract to an undertaking
         other than MFE. It is not, however, apparent from the information on file that the court hearing the application for interim
         measures required the Provincie to award the contract to MFE.
      
In that respect, in reply to a question put by the Court, Combinatie and others, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Commission
         argued that the Provincie could have pursued a number of courses of action following the interim judgment of November other than awarding the contract at issue in the main proceedings to MFE. 
      
It is, moreover, apparent from the replies received by the Court that the Provincie could have refrained from awarding the
         contract or brought court action on the substance, or appealed against the interim judgment of November or, finally,
         have waited, before awarding the contract, for a possible appeal to be made by Combinatie and others against that interim
         judgment.
      
Concerning that fourth possibility, the documents before the Court show that Combinatie and others did in fact bring an appeal,
         on December 2007, against the interim judgment, whereas the Provincie awarded the contract to MFE on December 2007.
      
It follows that the hypothesis that a court hearing an interim application required an awarding authority to adopt a decision
         awarding a public contract does not obtain in the dispute in the main proceedings.
      
In order to give a useful answer to the referring court, it is thus necessary to reformulate the third question. By that question,
         the national court is actually asking whether Directive 89/must be interpreted as precluding a court hearing an application
         for interim measures, in order to adopt a provisional measure, from carrying out an interpretation of Directive 2004/which
         is subsequently classified as erroneous by the court dealing with the substance.
      
As has been emphasised in paragraphs to of this judgment, Directive 89/requires Member States to establish review
         procedures against decisions which may have infringed EU law on public procurement or national rules implementing that law.
      
Article 2(2) of that directive provides that such procedures may be handled by separate bodies from those responsible for
         actions on the substance, such as actions for damages.
      
Given the possibility of making provision for such a system, the possibility cannot be excluded that the court hearing an
         application for interim measures and the court dealing with the substance, called upon successively to deal with the same
         dispute, might give a divergent interpretation of the relevant EU legal rules. On the one hand, the court hearing an application
         for interim measures is called upon to give a decision in the context of an urgent procedure in which both the gathering of
         evidence and the examination of the pleas of the parties is necessarily more cursory than in the context of the proceedings
         on the substance. On the other hand, the intervention of the court hearing an application for interim measures is not designed,
         like that of the court hearing the substance, to rule definitively on the claims presented to it but to protect provisionally
         the interests at stake, possibly by balancing them.
      
The EU legislature has recognised the specific nature of the mission of the court hearing an application for interim measures
         in Article 2(1)(a) and (4) of Directive 89/665, by emphasising in particular the provisional nature of the measures taken
         by such a court.
      
It is inherent in the review system established by that directive that the court hearing the substance may adopt an interpretation
         of EU law, and of Directive 2004/in particular, which is different from that of the court hearing an application for interim
         measures. Such a divergence in assessment does not imply that a court system such as that at issue in the main proceedings
         does not comply with the requirements of Directive 89/665.
      
Therefore, the answer to the third question is that Directive 89/must be interpreted as not precluding a court hearing
         an application for interim measures, for the purposes of adopting a provisional measure, from carrying out an interpretation
         of Directive 2004/which is, subsequently, classified as erroneous by the court hearing the substance of the case.
      
 The fourth question
By its fourth question, parts (a) and (b), the referring court asks, in essence, whether an awarding authority may be held
         liable where it makes a decision to award a public contract following a direction to that effect by a court hearing an application
         for interim measures, and that decision is, during subsequent proceedings on the substance, declared incompatible with EU
         rules on the award of public contracts.
      
Those questions are based on the hypothesis that, in the dispute in the main proceedings, the court hearing the application
         for interim measures directed the awarding authority to award the contract in question to a certain operator.
      
As explained in paragraphs to of this judgment, that is not the case in the dispute in the main proceedings.
      
Under those circumstances, it is not necessary to answer the fourth question, parts (a) and (b).
      
By its fourth question, part (c), the referring court asks, in essence, whether, if the awarding authority has to make good
         the damage arising from an infringement of EU law on the award of public contracts, EU law provides criteria on the basis
         of which the damage may be determined and estimated and, if so, what those criteria are.
      
Article 2(1)(c) of Directive 89/clearly indicates that Member States must make provision for the possibility of awarding
         damages in the case of infringement of EU law on the award of public contracts, but contains no detailed statement either
         as to the conditions under which an awarding authority may be held liable or as to the determination of the amount of the
         damages which it may be ordered to pay.
      
That provision gives concrete expression to the principle of State liability for loss and damage caused to individuals as
         a result of breaches of EU law for which the State can be held responsible. According to case-law developed since the adoption
         of Directive 89/665, but which is now consistent, that principle is inherent in the legal order of the Union. The Court has
         held that individuals harmed have a right to reparation where three conditions are met: the rule of EU law infringed must
         be intended to confer rights on them; the breach of that rule must be sufficiently serious; and there must be a direct causal
         link between the breach and the loss or damage sustained by the individuals (Joined Cases C-6/and C-9/Francovich and Others [1991] ECR I-5357, paragraph 35; Joined Cases C-46/and C-48/Brasserie du Pêcheur and Factortame [1996] ECR I-1029, paragraphs and 51; and Case C‑445/Danske Slagterier [2009] ECR I‑2119, paragraphs and 20).
      
As matters stand at present, the case-law of the Court of Justice has not yet set out, as regards review of the award of public
         contracts, more detailed criteria on the basis of which damage must be determined and estimated. 
      
As regards EU legislation, it should be noted that Directive 89/has been largely amended by Directive 2007/66/EC of the
         European Parliament and of the Council of December amending Council Directives 89/665/EEC and 92/13/EEC (OJ L 335,
         p. 31), adopted after the date of the facts which gave rise to the dispute in the main proceedings. However, on that occasion,
         the EU legislature refrained from adopting any provisions on that point.
      
In the absence of EU provisions in that area, it is for the legal order of each Member State to determine the criteria on
         the basis of which damage arising from an infringement of EU law on the award of public contracts must be determined and estimated
         (see, by analogy, Case C‑315/GAT [2003] ECR I‑6351, paragraph 46; and Case C 314/Strabag and Others [2010] ECR I-0000, paragraph 33) provided the principles of equivalence and effectiveness are complied with (see, to that
         effect, Joined Cases C‑295/to C‑298/Manfredi and Others [2006] ECR I‑6619, paragraph 98).
      
It is apparent from well-established case-law that the detailed procedural rules governing actions for safeguarding an individual’s
         rights under EU law must be no less favourable than those governing similar domestic actions (principle of equivalence) and
         must not render practically impossible or excessively difficult the exercise of rights conferred by EU law (principle of effectiveness)
         (see, in particular, Case 33/Rewe-Zentralfinanz and Rewe-Zentral [1976] ECR 1989, paragraph 5; Case C‑432/Unibet [2007] ECR I‑2271, paragraph 43; Case C‑268/Impact [2008] ECR I‑2483, paragraph 46; and Case C‑246/Bulicke [2010] ECR I-0000, paragraph 25).
      
Therefore, the answer to the fourth question, part (c) is that, as regards State liability for damage caused to individuals
         by infringements of EU law for which the State may be held responsible, the individuals harmed have a right to redress where
         the rule of EU law which has been infringed is intended to confer rights on them, the breach of that rule is sufficiently
         serious, and there is a direct causal link between the breach and the loss or damage sustained by the individuals. In the
         absence of any provisions of EU law in that area, it is for the internal legal order of each Member State, once those conditions
         have been complied with, to determine the criteria on the basis of which the damage arising from an infringement of EU law
         on the award of public contracts must be determined and estimated, provided the principles of equivalence and effectiveness
         are complied with.
      
In view of that answer, there is no need to reply to part (d) of the fourth question.
      
 The fifth question 
By the fifth question, the referring court asks what the national court must do if it proves impossible or extremely difficult
         in practice to attribute liability.
      
Given the answers to the previous questions and having regard to the Court’s file on the case, there is nothing to indicate
         that that is so in the case in the main proceedings.
      
Therefore, this question does not require an answer.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article 1(1) and (3) and Article 2(1) and (6) of Council Directive 89/665/EEC of December on the coordination of the
            laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the application of review procedures to the award of public supply
            and public works contracts, as amended by Council Directive 92/50/EEC of June relating to the coordination of procedures
            for the award of public service contracts, do not preclude a system in which, in order to obtain a rapid decision, the only
            procedure available is characterised by the fact that it is geared to a rapid mandatory measure, that lawyers have no right
            to exchange views, that no evidence is, as a rule, presented other than in written form, that statutory rules on evidence
            are not applicable, and that the judgment does not lead to the final determination of the legal situation and does not form
            part of a decision-making process leading to such a final decision.
2.      Directive 89/665, as amended by Directive 92/50, must be interpreted as not precluding a court hearing an application for
            interim measures, for the purposes of adopting a provisional measure, from carrying out an interpretation of Directive 2004/18/EC
            of the European Parliament and of the Council of March on the coordination of procedures for the award of public works
            contracts, public supply contracts and public service contracts which is, subsequently, classified as erroneous by the court
            hearing the substance of the case.
3.      As regards State liability for damage caused to individuals by infringements of European Union (EU) law for which the State
            may be held responsible, the individuals harmed have a right to redress where the rule of EU law which has been infringed
            is intended to confer rights on them, the breach of that rule is sufficiently serious, and there is a direct causal link between
            the breach and the loss or damage sustained by the individuals. In the absence of any provisions of EU law in that area, it
            is for the internal legal order of each Member State, once those conditions have been complied with, to determine the criteria
            on the basis of which the damage arising from an infringement of EU law on the award of public contracts must be determined
            and estimated, provided the principles of equivalence and effectiveness are complied with.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Dutch.
      
Top  
 