
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-194/Commission of the European Communities
v
Republic of Austria
(Failure to fulfil obligations – Directive 75/442/EEC – Definition of waste – European Waste Catalogue – Directive 91/689/EEC – List of hazardous waste)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Proof of the failure – Burden of proof on the Commission – Presumptions – Not
            permissible
(Art. EC) 
2.        Acts of the institutions – Directives – Implementation by the Member States – Need for complete transposition – Existence
            of national rules rendering transposition by specific legislative or regulatory measures superfluous – Whether permissible
            – Conditions 
3.        Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Disregard of obligations under a decision or a directive – Pleas in defence –
            Plea questioning the lawfulness of the decision or directive – Not admissible
(Art. EC) 
1.        In an action for failure to fulfil obligations it is for the Commission to prove the allegation that the obligation has not
         been fulfilled. It is the Commission which must provide the Court with the evidence necessary for the Court to establish that
         the obligation has not been fulfilled, and it may not rely on any presumption.
      
The Commission does not comply with that obligation if, in the case of a national system of waste classification that is compatible
         with that laid down by the Community legislation, it confines itself to pointing out differences between the two systems in
         order to complain that the Member State has implemented that legislation incorrectly, without showing that the differences
         established are such as to harm the interests of the operators concerned and affect the principle of legal certainty.
      
(see paras 34, 47-48)
2.        Each of the Member States to which a directive is addressed is obliged to adopt, in its national legal system, all the measures
         necessary to ensure that the directive is fully effective, in accordance with the objective it pursues.
      
The obligation to ensure the full effectiveness of the directive, in accordance with its objective, cannot be interpreted
         as meaning that the Member States are released from adopting transposing measures where they consider that their national
         provisions are better than the Community provisions concerned and that the national provisions are therefore better able to
         ensure that the objective pursued by the directive is achieved. The existence of national rules may render transposition by
         specific legislative or regulatory measures superfluous only if those rules actually ensure the full application of the directive
         by the national authorities and, where the relevant provision of the directive seeks to create rights for individuals, the
         legal situation arising from those national rules is sufficiently precise and clear and the persons concerned are in a position
         to know the full extent of their rights and obligations and, where appropriate, to rely on them before the national courts.
      
(see paras 38-39)
3.        A Member State cannot properly plead the unlawfulness of a directive or decision addressed to it as a defence in an action
         for a declaration that it has failed to fulfil its obligations arising out of its failure to implement that decision or comply
         with that directive.
      
(see para. 41)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)April 2004(1)
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil its obligations  –  Directive 75/442/EEC  –  Concept of waste  –  European Waste Catalogue  –  Directive 91/689/EEC  –  List of hazardous waste)
 In Case C-194/01,
            
Commission of the European Communities, represented by G. zur Hausen, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant,
v
Republic of Austria,  represented by H. Dossi, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
defendant,
 APPLICATION for a declaration that the Republic of Austria has failed to fulfil its obligations under Council Directive 75/442/EEC
            of July on waste (OJ L 194, p. 39), as amended by Council Directive 91/156/EEC of March (OJ L 78,
            p. 32), and under Council Directive 91/689/EEC of December on hazardous waste (OJ L 377, p. 20), as amended by
            Council Directive 94/31/EC of June (OJ L 168, p. 28),
            
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),,
 composed of: P. Jann, acting for the President of the Fifth Chamber, A. Rosas (Rapporteur) and S. von Bahr, Judges,
            
 Advocate General: P. Léger,Registrar:  M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator,
            
 after hearing oral argument from the parties at the hearing on May 2003, at which the Commission was represented by G.
            zur Hausen and the Republic of Austria by E. Riedl, F. Mochty and E. Wolfslehner, acting as Agents,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By application lodged at the Court Registry on May 2001, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action under
         Article EC for a declaration that, by failing to transpose correctly the concept of ‘waste’ in Article 1(a) of Council
         Directive 75/442/EEC of July on waste (OJ L 194, p. 39), as amended by Council Directive 91/156/EEC of March
         (OJ L 78, p. 32) (‘Directive 75/442’), and the concept of ‘hazardous waste’ in Article 1(4) of Council Directive
         91/689/EEC of December on hazardous waste (OJ L 377, p. 20), as amended by Council Directive 94/31/EC of June
         (OJ L 168, p. 28) (‘Directive 91/689’), the Republic of Austria had failed to fulfil its obligations under those
         directives.
         
Legal background
Community legislation
            
 Article 1(a) of Directive 75/defines ‘waste’ as
         ‘any substance or object in the categories set out in Annex I which the holder discards or intends or is required to discard.
         
          The Commission, acting in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 18, will draw up, not later than April 1993,
         a list of wastes belonging to the categories listed in Annex I. This list will be periodically reviewed and, if necessary,
         revised by the same procedure’.
         
            
 Article of that directive lists the exclusions from its scope.
         
            
 Under Article of the Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Republic of Austria, the Republic of Finland and
         the Kingdom of Sweden and the adjustments to the Treaties on which the European Union is founded (OJ C 241, p. 21, and
         OJ L 1, p. 1), the national measures transposing Directive 75/were to be brought into force as from the date of accession,
         January 1995.
         
            
 Commission Decision 94/3/EC of December establishing a list of wastes pursuant to Article 1(a) of Directive 75/(OJ L 5, p. 15) established a list of wastes called the European Waste Catalogue (EWC). That decision was addressed to
         the Member States. The introductory note to the EWC reads as follows:
         ‘1.     Article 1(a) of Directive 75/442/EEC defines the term “waste” as: “any substance or object in the categories set out in Annex
         I which the holder discards or intends or is required to discard”.
          2.       The second indent of Article 1(a) requires the Commission, acting in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 18,
         to draw up a list of waste belonging to the categories listed in Annex I. This list is commonly referred to as the European
         Waste Catalogue (EWC), and applies to all wastes, irrespective of whether they are destined for disposal or for recovery operations.
          3.       The EWC is a harmonised, non-exhaustive list of wastes, that is to say, a list which will be periodically reviewed and if
         necessary revised in accordance with the committee procedure.
          However, the inclusion of a material in the EWC does not mean that the material is a waste in all circumstances. The entry
         is only relevant when the definition of waste has been satisfied.
          4.       The waste featuring in the EWC is subject to the provisions of the Directive unless Article 2(1)(b) of this Directive applies.
          5.       The EWC is to be a reference nomenclature providing a common terminology throughout the Community with the purpose to improve
         the efficiency of waste management activities. In this respect the European Waste Catalogue should constitute the basic reference
         for the Community programme on waste statistics launched pursuant to the Council resolution of May on waste management
         policy … .
          6.       The EWC will be subject to adaptation to scientific and technical progress in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article
         of the Directive.
          7.       The reading of an individual code of waste in the EWC should not be isolated from its heading.
          8.       The EWC does not prejudge the list of “hazardous wastes” as required by Article 1(4) of Council Directive 91/689/EEC of December on hazardous waste …’
         
            
 Under Article 1(4) of Directive 91/689, ‘“hazardous waste” means:
         
–
wastes featuring on a list to be drawn up in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article of Directive 75/442/EEC
               on the basis of Annexes I and II to this Directive, not later than six months before the date of implementation of this Directive.
               These wastes must have one or more of the properties listed in Annex III. The list shall take into account the origin and
               composition of the waste and, where necessary, limit values of concentration. This list shall be periodically reviewed and
               if necessary [revised] by the same procedure,
            
–
any other waste which is considered by a Member State to display any of the properties listed in Annex III. Such cases shall
               be notified to the Commission and reviewed in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article of Directive 75/442/EEC
               with a view to adaptation of the list.’
            
            
 Council Decision 94/904/EC of December establishing a list of hazardous waste pursuant to Article 1(4) of Directive
         91/(OJ L 356, p. 14) was addressed to the Member States. The introduction to the list of hazardous waste reads as
         follows:
         ‘1.     The different types of waste in the list are fully defined by the six-digit code for the waste and the respective two-digit
         and four-digit chapter headings.
          2.       Inclusion in the list does not mean that the material or object is a waste in all circumstances. The entry is only relevant
         when the definition of waste according to Article 1(a) of Directive 75/442/EEC has been satisfied, unless Article 2(1)(b)
         of the Directive applies.
          3.       The waste featuring on the list is subject to the provisions of Council Directive 91/689/EEC on hazardous waste, unless Article
         1(5) of the Directive applies.
          4.       In accordance with Article 1(4), second indent of Directive 91/689/EEC, any waste other than the ones listed below which is
         considered by a Member State to display any of the properties listed in Annex III to Council Directive 91/689/EEC on hazardous
         waste is hazardous. All such cases will be notified to the Commission and will be examined with a view to amending the list
         in accordance with Article of Directive 75/442/EEC.’
         
            
 Under Article 10(1) of Directive 91/689, the Member States were to bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative
         provisions necessary to comply with that directive before June 1995. 
         
National legislation
            
 Paragraph 2(1) of the Bundesgesetz über die Vermeidung und Behandlung von Abfällen, also known as the Abfallwirtschaftsgesetz
         (Federal Law on the prevention and treatment of waste), of June (BGBl. 325/1990, in the version published in BGBl.
         I 151/1998, ‘the AWG’) defines ‘waste’ as follows:
         ‘… movable objects
          1.       which the owner or possessor wishes to discard or has discarded, or
          2.       whose classification and treatment as waste is necessary in the public interest (Paragraph 1(3)).
          Classification and treatment as waste in the public interest may also be required where payment may be obtained for a movable
         object.’
         
            
 Paragraph 1(3) of the AWG lists the circumstances in which the public interest requires the collection, storage, transport
         and treatment of those objects as waste.
         
            
 Under Paragraph 2(5) of the AWG, the Bundesminister für Umwelt, Jugend und Familie (Federal Minister for the Environment,
         Youth and the Family) is obliged to determine by regulation the waste which is to be regarded as hazardous for the protection
         of the public interest within the meaning of Paragraph 1(3) of the AWG and the conditions under which that waste may be classified
         as non-hazardous in a particular case. Paragraph 2(5) contains a list of points which agrees with Annex III to Directive
         91/689, listing all the properties relevant for assessing risks. The last indent of Paragraph 2(5) prescribes that that list
         of hazardous waste is to include all the categories of waste ‘which correspond to those in the list of hazardous waste within
         the meaning of Article 1(4) of [Directive 91/689]. Austrian standards may be declared binding for specifying the relevant
         properties and determining the list of hazardous waste. Only waste covered by the regulation is regarded as hazardous’.
         
            
 Austrian standard S of September contains the national catalogue of waste. That catalogue includes both hazardous
         and non-hazardous waste, all listed and classified according to the catalogue’s own method.
         
            
 Pursuant to Paragraph 2(5) of the AWG, the Minister for the Environment, Youth and the Family made a regulation in on
         the determination of hazardous waste and problem substances (BGBl. II 227/1997). Until June 2000, Paragraph 3(2) of that
         regulation provided as follows:
         ‘As from July waste covered by the decision concerning a list of hazardous waste on the basis of Article 1(4) of [Directive
         91/689] is regarded as hazardous. The Federal Ministry of the Environment, Youth and the Family will publish this list in
         the Bundesgesetzblatt before July 2000.’
         
            
 A regulation amending the above regulation was published on June (BGBl. II 178/2000). It repealed Paragraph 3(2) of
         the regulation and introduced a provision stating that the regulation as amended transposed Directive 91/and Decision
         94/904.
         
Pre-litigation procedure
            
 By letter of July 1999, the Commission informed the Republic of Austria that it considered, on the basis of the examination
         of the national transposition measures it had carried out following a complaint, that the above provisions did not correspond
         in a number of points to the requirements of Directives 75/and 91/689. The Commission set out its criticisms of the Austrian
         legislation and gave the Republic of Austria formal notice to submit its observations within two months.
         
            
 By fax of October 1999, the Republic of Austria replied to the letter of formal notice, disputing the correctness of the
         Commission’s conclusions.
         
            
 As it was not convinced by the arguments put forward in the reply, the Commission on July sent the Republic of Austria
         a reasoned opinion. It invited it to take the necessary measures to comply with the opinion within two months from its notification.
         
            
 The Republic of Austria replied by fax of November 2000. It maintained its position that the directives in question were
         correctly transposed into national law. It stated, however, that an amendment to the AWG was about to be enacted.
         
            
 Since it found that the Republic of Austria had not complied with the reasoned opinion within the prescribed period and considered
         that the legal argument presented by the Republic of Austria could not be accepted, the Commission decided to bring the present
         action.
         
The action
            
 At the hearing on May the Commission expressly abandoned some of the heads of claim it had made in support of its
         action, thus agreeing to take account of the amendments to the legislation which were formally notified to it by the Republic
         of Austria after the closure of the written procedure in the present case. However, the Commission stated that it wished to
         maintain three of the complaints it had raised against the measures taken by the Republic of Austria to transpose Directives
         75/and 91/698. Consequently, the subject-matter of the present action is now limited to the complaints, first, of incorrect
         transposition of the EWC established by Decision 94/3, second, of incorrect transposition of the list of hazardous waste established
         by Decision 94/904, and, finally, of incorrect transposition of Annexes I and II to Directive 91/689.
         
The complaint of incorrect transposition of the EWC
            
 The Commission essentially asks the Court to declare that, by failing to transpose correctly the EWC established by Decision
         94/pursuant to Article 1(a) of Directive 75/442, the Republic of Austria has failed to fulfil its obligations under that
         directive. As may be seen from the application, the Commission criticises the Republic of Austria more precisely for failing
         to transpose that list of waste into national law. The defendant submits that it has fulfilled its obligations and contends
         that the Commission’s claim should be rejected.
         
 Arguments of the parties
         
            
 According to the Commission, the Republic of Austria has failed to fulfil its obligation to transpose into national law the
         EWC established by Decision 94/3. It observes, first, that under the fourth paragraph of Article EC the decision is binding
         on the addressees listed in Article 2, in other words the Member States. It then points out that the EWC is closely linked
         to Annex I mentioned in Article 1(a) of Directive 75/442, since it constitutes ‘a list of wastes belonging to the categories
         listed in Annex I’. The Commission refers, finally, to point of the introductory note to the EWC, from which it is apparent
         that the EWC ‘is to be a reference nomenclature providing a common terminology throughout the Community with the purpose to
         improve the efficiency of waste management activities’. It is therefore essential to apply the EWC at national level in order
         to ensure the effectiveness of the European waste management policy on the basis of terminology harmonised at Community level.
         
            
 The Commission acknowledges that, as stated in point of the introductory note to the EWC, the EWC is not an exhaustive list.
         However, that does not exclude its binding nature, in that it is apparent from points 1, and of the introductory note
         that substances or objects in the EWC are subject to the provisions of Directive 75/if they satisfy the definition of
         ‘waste’, with the exception of the cases provided for in Article 2(1)(b) of that directive.
         
            
 Point of the introductory note does not support the Austrian Government’s view that the role of the EWC is solely to serve
         as a common reference for the purposes of Council Regulation (EEC) No 259/of February on the supervision and control
         of shipments of waste within, into and out of the European Community (OJ L 30, p. 1) or of a regulation concerning statistics
         on waste. As regards compliance with the Republic of Austria’s obligations under Regulation No 259/93, the Commission states
         that its application does not relate to those obligations but to those under Directive 75/read together with Decision
         94/3.
         
            
 The Republic of Austria cannot avoid the latter obligations by claiming that the national catalogue is better able to improve
         the effectiveness of waste management and protection of the environment. The measures taken by the Community pursue that objective
         precisely by means of a common reference nomenclature. Consequently, submits the Commission, the Member States are not entitled
         to depart from the EWC on the ground that their national provisions are of better quality than the Community provisions. The
         Commission points out, moreover, that the EWC was the subject of a favourable opinion from the committee set up by Article
         of Directive 75/442. The argument that the non-transposition into Austrian law of the EWC does not harm the proper functioning
         of the internal market cannot be accepted either, since a finding of a failure to fulfil obligations does not depend on a
         finding of damage caused by the Member State (Case C-263/Commission v Belgium [1997] ECR I-7453, paragraph 30).
         
            
 At the hearing, the Commission added that the obligation to transpose the EWC was confirmed by the Court in its judgment in
         Case C-196/Commission v Luxembourg [2002] ECR I-569. It also referred to Article of Commission Decision 2000/532/EC of May replacing Decision 94/and Decision 94/(OJ L 226, p. 3), which provides that Member States are to take the measures necessary to comply
         with that decision by January at the latest. According to the Commission, that article explicitly imposes an obligation
         to transpose on the Member States. Such an obligation is already implicit in Decisions 94/and 94/904.
         
            
 The Commission further considers that the divergences between the system of classification used by the Austrian waste catalogue
         and that used by the EWC are harmful to Austrian operators in their commercial relations with operators from other Member
         States. In its view, Austrian operators know and apply only the national catalogue, since no binding provision in Austria
         requires them to apply the Community lists of waste. The use of the Community lists is, however, prescribed by Commission
         Decision 94/774/EC of November concerning the standard consignment note referred to in Regulation No 259/(OJ L 310, p. 70), which prescribes that the consignment note must mention the national code and the Community code of the waste
         in question.
         
            
 The Austrian Government for its part submits that Community law does not impose an obligation on Member States to reproduce
         the EWC word for word in a national legislative act.
         
            
 First, the Government expresses doubt as to the existence of a formal obligation to transpose that list in the context of
         the obligation to transpose the concept of ‘waste’ laid down by Directive 75/442.  It is apparent from points and of the
         introductory note to the EWC that the EWC does not form part of that concept of ‘waste’ but constitutes a non-exhaustive list
         of substances which is intended to serve as a reference nomenclature, in particular for the purposes of Regulation No 259/or of a regulation relating to statistics on waste.
         
            
 According to the Austrian Government, that view of the legal nature and objective of the EWC was originally shared by the
         Commission itself. It observes, moreover, that because of practical difficulties the use of the EWC is not mandatory even
         in the field of statistics for which it was created. In those circumstances, mandatory use of the EWC in other fields requires
         an additional obligation laid down by Community law. That is the case with the obligation under Commission Decision 96/302/EC
         of April establishing a format in which information is to be provided pursuant to Article 8(3) of Directive 91/(OJ L 116, p. 26) and with that laid down in point of the model of the standard consignment note annexed to Decision
         94/774.
         
            
 In those fields the Republic of Austria of course uses the EWC reference nomenclature. As regards waste shipments governed
         by Regulation No 259/93, the EWC or the list of hazardous waste is also used in addition to the national list. The Austrian
         Government therefore submits that a finding of a failure to fulfil obligations under Community law is not possible, nor, a
         fortiori, is a finding of an obstacle to the working of the internal market. It also points out that, as regards the shipment
         of waste mentioned in Annex II to Regulation No 259/93, it suffices, in accordance with Article of that regulation, to
         indicate the usual commercial description of the waste. Moreover, in the context of the application of that regulation, the
         determining system of classifying waste is that of the regulation, not the EWC system.
         
            
 The Austrian Government submits, second, that the waste mentioned in the EWC also appears in the national catalogue in Austrian
         standard S 2100, which constitutes a list of waste which is more detailed than the EWC and contains additional information.
         
            
 At the hearing, the Austrian Government observed that, unlike the situation examined by the Court in Commission v Luxembourg, the Republic of Austria always maintained that the national catalogue is an adequate transposition, materially, of the requirements
         of the Community lists of waste. The mandatory nature of those provisions was thus acknowledged and implemented by the national
         catalogue, which is itself mandatory. The Austrian Government further maintained that from the point of view of rational and
         ecological management of waste, which constitutes the objective of the Community legislation, the Austrian catalogue has advantages
         over the EWC which facilitate its application by operators and by the competent authorities. Moreover, where the Community
         legislation prescribes the use of the EWC, the codes of the reference nomenclature are applied directly by the Austrian authorities.
         The Republic of Austria therefore complies with its obligations with respect to the relevant Community provisions.
         
 Findings of the Court
         
            
 According to settled case-law, in an action for failure to fulfil obligations it is for the Commission to prove the allegation
         that the obligation has not been fulfilled. It is the Commission which must provide the Court with the evidence necessary
         for the Court to establish that the obligation has not been fulfilled, and it may not rely on any presumption (see, inter
         alia, Case 96/Commission v Netherlands [1982] ECR 1791, paragraph 6; Case C-404/Commission v Spain [2003] ECR I-6695, paragraph 26; and Case C-434/Commission v United Kingdom [2003] ECR I-0000, paragraph 21).
         
            
 In the present context, it is for the Commission to show that the national provisions relied on by the Republic of Austria
         to contest the failure to fulfil obligations, namely the catalogue of waste in Austrian standard S 2100, do not ensure adequate
         implementation of the EWC.
         
            
 It is apparent from the arguments of the parties that the Commission does not dispute that all the substances and objects
         listed as waste in the EWC appear also in the Austrian catalogue of waste. However, the Commission submits that the Republic
         of Austria has failed to transpose the EWC, and relies on the fact that the national catalogue does not reproduce faithfully
         the waste nomenclature and classification system used in the Community catalogue. The Commission’s position must therefore
         be understood as an assertion that it follows from Directive 75/and Decision 94/that the Member States are obliged to
         reproduce the EWC word for word in a domestic legal act and that only the adoption of such an act constitutes correct and
         complete transposition of the concept of ‘waste’ in Article 1(a) of that directive.
         
            
 It must be stated that that provision, which defines the concept of ‘waste’ for the purposes of Directive 75/442, does indeed
         refer to the list of waste which was subsequently drawn up by Decision 94/3. However, no provision of Directive 75/expressly
         imposes an obligation on the Member States to reproduce that list of waste word for word in a domestic legal act. Moreover,
         an obligation to reproduce the EWC word for word cannot necessarily be derived from the obligation of the Member States to
         bring into force the necessary measures to comply with Directive 75/442, which currently appears in Article 19. It should
         be recalled that under the third paragraph of Article EC a directive is binding on each Member State to which it is addressed
         as to the result to be achieved, but leaves the choice of form and methods to the national authorities.
         
            
 It must also be recalled that, according to settled case-law, each of the Member States to which a directive is addressed
         is obliged to adopt, in its national legal system, all the measures necessary to ensure that the directive is fully effective,
         in accordance with the objective it pursues (see, inter alia, Case C-478/Commission v Sweden [2002] ECR I-4147, paragraph 15, and Case C-72/Commission v Portugal [2003] ECR I-6597, paragraph 18).
         
            
 The obligation to ensure the full effectiveness of the directive, in accordance with its objective, cannot be interpreted
         as meaning that the Member States are released from adopting transposing measures where they consider that their national
         provisions are better than the Community provisions concerned and that the national provisions are therefore better able to
         ensure that the objective pursued by the directive is achieved. According to the Court’s case-law, the existence of national
         rules may render transposition by specific legislative or regulatory measures superfluous only if those rules actually ensure
         the full application of the directive by the national authorities and, where the relevant provision of the directive seeks
         to create rights for individuals, the legal situation arising from those national rules is sufficiently precise and clear
         and the persons concerned are in a position to know the full extent of their rights and obligations and, where appropriate,
         to rely on them before the national courts (see, to that effect, Case C-296/Commission v France [2003] ECR I-0000, paragraph 55, and the case-law cited).
         
            
 In the present case, the Austrian Government referred on several occasions to the advantages from the point of view of waste
         management which the national catalogue of waste is said to have over the EWC. It also said that the latter appeared to it
         to be inadequate in several respects. In so far as this argument is aimed at challenging the Commission’s decision to adopt
         the EWC, and hence at providing justification for the failure to transpose that decision in the Austrian legal order, the
         Court can only reject it.
         
            
 The Republic of Austria cannot, outside the period laid down by Article EC, contest the lawfulness of an act adopted by
         the Community legislature which has become final with respect to it. It is settled case-law that a Member State cannot properly
         plead the unlawfulness of a directive or decision addressed to it as a defence in an action for a declaration that it has
         failed to fulfil its obligations arising out of its failure to implement that decision or comply with that directive (see,
         inter alia, Case C-74/Commission v Germany [1992] ECR I-5437, paragraph 10, and Case C-154/Commission v Greece [2002] ECR I-3879, paragraph 28).
         
            
 As regards Decision 94/3, it is not in dispute that that decision is, by virtue of the fourth paragraph of Article EC,
         binding in its entirety on those to whom it is addressed, nor that it was addressed to all the Member States. The question
         nevertheless arises of whether the decision imposes an obligation on them to reproduce the EWC word for word in an act of
         domestic law.
         
            
 On this point, it must be observed that, as point of the introductory note to the EWC states, the EWC is intended to be
         a reference nomenclature providing a common terminology throughout the Community with the purpose of improving the efficiency
         of waste management activities. Point states, however, that the EWC ‘should constitute the basic reference for the Community
         programme on waste statistics ...’. Moreover, according to point of the introductory note, the EWC is a non-exhaustive list
         of wastes. However, point also states that the inclusion of a material in the EWC does not mean that the material is a waste
         in all circumstances.
         
            
 Since neither Directive 75/nor Decision 94/or the introductory note to the EWC provides any further indications as to
         the content of the obligations imposed on the Member States by that decision, it is not possible to conclude on that basis
         that the Republic of Austria is bound to reproduce the EWC word for word in a domestic legal act. The binding nature of Decision
         94/for Member States allows only the conclusion that they are obliged to guarantee the use and application of the EWC as
         a reference nomenclature, since it provides a common terminology valid within the Community. The Republic of Austria has asserted,
         without being contradicted by the Commission on this point, that its competent authorities ensure the use of that reference
         nomenclature where that is required by Community legislation, for example where the code attributed by the EWC to a particular
         type of waste has to be stated on the uniform consignment note referred to in Regulation No 259/93.
         
            
 Nor does the judgment in Commission v Luxembourg allow the conclusion that Community law requires the national waste nomenclature used by a Member State to be replaced by
         a domestic legal act reproducing the EWC word for word. Paragraphs and of that judgment show that the Luxembourg Government
         admitted that the introduction of a purely national nomenclature which differed from the EWC and had the effect of excluding
         the use of the latter for a large number of operations did not ensure integral and accurate use of the EWC. In the present
         case, the Austrian Government submits that the existence of a national catalogue of waste does not prevent the use of the
         EWC where its use is prescribed by Community law.
         
            
 In this connection, it must be pointed out that the existence of a national waste nomenclature is not in itself incompatible
         with the application of the relevant Community legislation. Both the Austrian Government and the Commission noted that the
         model of the standard consignment note adopted by Decision 94/provides for the mention not only of the code corresponding
         in the EWC to the waste to be shipped but also of the respective code in the national catalogue. The mere coexistence of the
         EWC and the Austrian waste catalogue does not therefore allow it to be established that the Republic of Austria has failed
         to fulfil its obligations under Directive 75/and Decision 94/3.
         
            
 Admittedly, it is not impossible that the differences between a national list of waste and the EWC may be such as to create
         difficulties and a state of uncertainty for the operators concerned, who would not then be in a position to know the extent
         of their rights and obligations in a field governed by Community law. However, even after being expressly invited by the Court
         to give an account of those difficulties, the Commission did not sufficiently identify the actual difficulties for operators
         and the competent authorities which derive from the fact that the Austrian catalogue follows a different system of classification
         of waste from the EWC. The Republic of Austria asserted that the two systems, despite their differences, are not incompatible,
         while the Commission did no more than submit that, in so far as the Austrian waste catalogue does not reproduce faithfully
         the system of the EWC, it does not constitute an appropriate transposing measure.
         
            
 Since the Commission has not shown that the differences between the Austrian waste catalogue and the EWC are such as to harm
         the interests of the operators concerned and affect the principle of legal certainty, the complaint of incorrect transposition
         of the EWC cannot be upheld.
         
            
 In the light of the foregoing, it cannot be held in the present case that the Republic of Austria has failed to fulfil its
         obligations under Directive 75/442.
         
The complaint of incorrect transposition of the list of hazardous waste established by Decision 94/Arguments of the parties
         
            
 The Commission complains that the Republic of Austria has failed to fulfil its obligations under Directive 91/in that
         it has not correctly transposed the list of hazardous waste (‘LHW’) established by Decision 94/pursuant to that directive.
         
            
 It considers that the definition of ‘hazardous waste’ in Article 1(4) of Directive 91/is essential for the application
         of that directive. The definition refers to Annexes I to III to Directive 91/and to the LHW established in accordance
         with the procedure laid down in Article of Directive 75/442. Furthermore, according to the fifth recital in the preamble
         to Directive 91/689, it is necessary to use a precise and uniform definition of hazardous waste in order to improve the effectiveness
         of the management of hazardous waste in the Community. It follows that Annexes I to III to Directive 91/and the LHW adopted
         by Decision 94/904, which supplements that directive (Case C-318/Fornasar and Others [2000] ECR I-4785, paragraph 44) constitute the foundation on which the measures taken by the Member States to implement
         that directive must be based.
         
            
 The Commission observes that the Republic of Austria has still not yet adopted the necessary measures to transpose the LHW
         established by Decision 94/904. It states that the ministerial regulation of on the determination of hazardous waste
         and problem substances provided for recognising the relevance of the list adopted by Decision 94/only from July 2000,
         and that provision was simply repealed in the meantime without being replaced. The amending regulation made in introduced
         for the first time, in the new subparagraph added to Paragraph of the regulation, a reference to the transposition
         of Directive 91/and Decision 94/904.
         
            
 The Commission acknowledges that both Directive 91/and the list adopted by Decision 94/are non-exhaustive. The Member
         States may thus classify waste other than that in Annexes I and II to that directive or on the list of hazardous waste as
         hazardous, and thus take more stringent protective measures in order to prohibit the abandonment, dumping and uncontrolled
         disposal of such waste (Fornasar and Others, paragraphs to 51). It observes, however, that if they do so they must notify those cases to the Commission in accordance
         with Article EC and the second indent of Article 1(4) of Directive 91/(Fornasar and Others, paragraph 51).
         
            
 The Commission stresses that the possibility left to Member States of taking more stringent protective measures in the environmental
         fields harmonised by Community legislation cannot be equated to the freedom not to transpose those harmonising measures. It
         submits that the Member States are obliged to transpose Directive 91/in its entirety, including Annexes I and II and the
         supplement represented by Decision 94/904, and that they may go further only on certain conditions and in compliance with
         the procedure.
         
            
 According to the Commission, the latitude which the Member States have in transposing directives does not, in the case of
         the transposition of a list of hazardous waste which supplements a basic definition in a directive and follows a precise and
         defined system allocating specific codes to substances and objects, allow the national measures adopted to confine themselves
         to including the same substances and objects and classifying them as hazardous. The Commission therefore submits that the
         national transposing measures must follow precisely the system laid down at Community level.
         
            
 It observes in this respect that Decision 94/is mandatory for the Member States and is so closely linked with Directive
         91/that the deadline for transposition of that directive was postponed by Directive 94/in order to take account of
         the delay in adopting the LHW. It further observes that point of the introduction to that list provides that the different
         types of waste are fully defined by their respective codes and that it is not disputed that, by referring to the Austrian
         standards, the national legislation in force makes use of a different system and other codes.
         
            
 The criticisms which the Austrian Government makes of the content and insufficient quality of the list adopted by Decision
         94/cannot, according to the Commission, justify the failure to fulfil the obligation of transposition. While it is undeniable
         that the LHW is open to improvement, the Commission notes that the Community legislature itself provided for that purpose
         a procedure for adaptation in Article of Directive 91/689. Moreover, it submits that a Member State may not rely on Article
         EC as a defence to an action for failure to fulfil obligations brought against it on the ground of incorrect transposition
         of a directive, if it has not complied with the procedure laid down by that provision of the Treaty. The Republic of Austria
         did not rely on Article EC when it notified the regulation on the determination of hazardous waste and problem substances
         adopted in 1997.
         
            
 The Austrian Government submits that it transposed Directive 91/and the LHW by the regulation on the determination of
         hazardous waste and problem substances adopted in 1997, most recently amended in 2000, in conjunction with the provisions
         of Austrian standard S 2100.
         
            
 It points out that under Article 1(4) of Directive 91/the Member States may, under certain conditions, declare other waste
         hazardous. In view of the fact that the LHW was drawn up pursuant to that provision, the Austrian Government considers that
         the objective of the directive has been achieved by the national transposing measure. It notes that the third paragraph of
         Article EC leaves it to the Member States to decide the form and methods for achieving the intended result of a directive.
         It submits that the provisions of the regulation in conjunction with Austrian standard S have the result that all
         waste declared to be hazardous by Directive 91/and the LHW is also regarded as hazardous in national law.
         
            
 With the regulation, the Republic of Austria made use of the possibility given to it by Article 1(4) of Directive 91/and point of the introduction to the list established by Decision 94/of declaring wastes other than that on that list
         to be hazardous, since it considered that they had one of the properties of hazardousness. That regulation was formally notified
         to the Commission as a transposing measure.
         
            
 The Austrian Government considers that it demonstrated, in the letter accompanying the formal notification of that regulation,
         that the regulation transposed in its entirety the content of the list adopted by Decision 94/904. The Republic of Austria
         made sure that all the waste on that list was classified under a hazardous waste code of Austrian standard S and that
         there was complete concordance between the two lists.
         
            
 According to the Austrian Government, the fact that under the fourth paragraph of Article EC a decision is binding in
         its entirety on those to whom it is addressed does not entail an obligation to reproduce word for word the list of hazardous
         waste annexed to Decision 94/904.
         
            
 It observes that, while the binding nature of that list for the Member States is not in doubt, the obligation to transpose
         the list into national law derives in turn from the general obligation to transpose Directive 91/and the concept of ‘hazardous
         waste’ it defines. In this context of transposition into national law, the list of hazardous waste is binding only as regards
         determination of the waste which is to be considered as hazardous, and it is for the Member States to choose the form and
         methods for achieving that result.
         
            
 As regards the relationship between the LHW and the national waste catalogue, the Austrian Government states that Austrian
         standard S contains a more precise enumeration and lays down stricter criteria than the Community list. It observes that
         the Republic of Austria is cooperating actively in the revision of the LHW. However, since that revision cannot yet be regarded
         as completed, it is necessary to maintain the national waste catalogue in force in order to guarantee the high level of protection
         provided by Austrian law.
         
            
 The Austrian Government observes that Community law does not intend to carry out a complete harmonisation in the environmental
         field and that both Article EC and Directive 91/provide for the possibility of Member States adopting more stringent
         protective measures. In that context, maintenance of the Austrian provisions with their stricter content is justified.
         
            
 The Community list is unsatisfactory in that, first, it is strongly influenced by the origin of the waste and, second, it
         is not exhaustive. Consequently, numerous wastes are not mentioned if they come from a particular sector, whereas they are
         classified as hazardous in another field of application. The fact that numerous wastes may in principle be classified under
         several different codes also creates a problem. The Austrian Government illustrates those problems with the aid of an example,
         comparing the classification of residues of cables containing PCBs under the Community list and the Austrian list, to show
         that the application of the stricter national criteria means that the waste in question can always be classified as hazardous.
         
            
 The Austrian Government then states that the Austrian list is altogether consistent with the case-law of the Court, under
         which the determining criterion for declaring waste hazardous is the properties of the waste rather than its origin (Fornasar and Others, paragraph 56). It also refers to reflections in the context of the current revision of the Community list and to other initiatives
         relating to the criteria for determining hazardous waste and possible contamination. It concludes that the codes and descriptions
         in the Community lists, whether the LHW or the EWC, are not sufficient to guarantee protection of the environment, especially
         in the case of recovery of waste, and that taking those lists over directly in national law would mean a deterioration of
         the ecological standards in force in Austria without the functioning of the internal market being thereby improved.
         
            
 Having regard to the advantages of the national system of classification of waste, the Austrian Government submits that the
         use of the national list, while ensuring coordination with the LHW, is consistent with the objectives and principles of the
         Community legislation on waste management.
         
 Findings of the Court
         
            
 The arguments put forward by the parties in the context of this complaint are largely analogous to those put forward in the
         context of the first complaint. It therefore suffices, as regards these arguments, to recall the essential aspects of the
         Court’s assessment of the points already raised by the parties.
         
            
 Thus, for the reasons stated in paragraphs to above, all the arguments put forward by the Republic of Austria to show
         that its national provisions are better than the LHW adopted by the Council and that they ensure protection of the environment
         at a higher level than that guaranteed by the Community legislation must be rejected at the outset.
         
            
 As regards the latitude enjoyed by the Member States in adopting measures to transpose the LHW into national law, it must
         be examined whether, as the Commission submits, Directive 91/and Decision 94/limit the exercise of that competence
         to the adoption of an internal transposition measure reproducing word for word the codes and classification system of the
         Community list.
         
            
 It is common ground that the LHW was established pursuant to Article 1(4) of Directive 91/689, which defines the concept of
         ‘hazardous waste’ for the purposes of that directive, and that Decision 94/is binding on the Member States. It is also
         common ground that, as is apparent from the second indent of Article 1(4) of Directive 91/and also from point of the
         introduction to the LHW, that list is not exhaustive. Nevertheless, it would appear that the Commission and the Republic of
         Austria have contrary views on the possibility for a Member State to regard waste other than that listed in the LHW as hazardous
         waste, and in particular on the procedure to be followed in making use of that possibility.
         
            
 The Commission rightly points out that, under the second indent of Article 1(4) of Directive 91/689, the Member States concerned
         must notify the Commission of cases in which it classifies waste other than that in the LHW as hazardous (Fornasar and Others, paragraph 51). It has not, however, replied to the argument of the Republic of Austria that it complied with that obligation
         when it formally notified the Commission of the regulation transposing the LHW.
         
            
 Nor has the Commission disputed that the Austrian catalogue of waste classifies as hazardous all the waste in the LHW. It
         has not therefore shown that, by adopting a list classifying other waste as hazardous, the Republic of Austria is in breach
         of its obligations under Directive 91/and Decision 94/904.
         
            
 The Commission cannot, moreover, rely on point of the introduction to the LHW, which merely explains the system of codes
         used in that list, to insist that Member States follow that system precisely, which would amount to doing away with any latitude
         enjoyed by them. Nor do the close link between Directive 91/and the LHW and the fact that the LHW is intended to complement
         a fundamental concept of that directive allow the conclusion that the Republic of Austria had to confine itself to reproducing
         the list in question word for word in an act of national law, having regard to the provisions of the third paragraph of Article
         EC.
         
            
 In those circumstances, and since the Commission has not sufficiently identified the specific difficulties for operators and
         the competent authorities caused by the fact that the Austrian catalogue follows a different waste classification system from
         that of the LHW (see paragraphs and above), it must be considered that the Commission has not provided the Court with
         the evidence necessary for the Court to establish the alleged failure to fulfil an obligation (see paragraph above).
         
            
 The complaint of incorrect transposition of the LHW must therefore be rejected.
         
The complaint of incorrect transposition of Annexes I and II to Directive 91/The Commission also criticises the Republic of Austria for not having transposed Annexes I and II to Directive 91/689, which
         it considers form an integral part of the provisions of that directive and are covered by the obligation to transpose the
         directive. The Austrian Government submits that the Member States are not required to transpose those annexes into national
         law, as they are intended to define a mandatory framework for the decision-making process described in Article of Directive
         75/and that decision-making process falls outside the obligation to transpose directives.
         
            
 It should be observed here that Annexes I and II to Directive 91/are mentioned only in the first indent of Article 1(4)
         of that directive. According to that provision, a list of hazardous waste was to be drawn up in accordance with Article of Directive 75/on the basis of those annexes, not later than six months before the date of implementation of Directive
         91/689. The Republic of Austria is therefore correct in considering that, in view of that wording, Annexes I and II to Directive
         91/are instruments which were to be used in the process of establishing the LHW.
         
            
 Moreover, the Commission has not put forward any argument to show that there was any need to transpose those annexes into
         national law or that the absence of transposition jeopardised the application of the Community legislation on the management
         of hazardous waste. It confined itself to submitting that Annexes I and II, as an integral part of Directive 91/689, had to
         be the subject of transposition measures on the same basis as the other provisions of the directive.
         
            
 It follows from the foregoing that the Commission has not shown that the Republic of Austria was obliged to adopt measures
         transposing Annexes I and II to Directive 91/689. The complaint of incorrect transposition of those annexes cannot therefore
         be upheld.
         
            
 Since the Court has not considered any of the complaints maintained by the Commission against the Republic of Austria (see
         paragraph above) to be well founded, the application must consequently be dismissed.
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Republic of Austria has applied for costs against the Commission
         and the Commission has been unsuccessful, it must be ordered to pay the costs.
         
On those grounds,
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
 hereby:
         
 
1.
Dismisses the application;
 
2.
Orders the Commission of the European Communities to pay the costs.
Jann
Rosas
von Bahr
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on April 2004.
         
R. Grass
V. Skouris
Registrar
President
 –
            
Language of the case: German.
Top  
 