
Joined Cases C-4/and C-27/Bureau national interprofessionnel du Cognac
v
Gust. Ranin Oy
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Korkein hallinto-oikeus)
(Regulation (EC) No 110/– Geographical indications of spirit drinks – Temporal application – Trade mark incorporating a geographical indication – Use leading to a situation which may adversely affect the geographical indication – Refusal of registration or invalidation of such a mark – Direct applicability of a regulation)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Approximation of laws – Uniform legislation – Definition, description, presentation, labelling and protection of geographical
            indications of spirit drinks – Regulation No 110/– Temporal application
(European Parliament and Council Regulation No 110/2008, Arts and 23(1) and (2))
2.        Approximation of laws – Uniform legislation – Definition, description, presentation, labelling and protection of geographical
            indications of spirit drinks – Regulation No 110/– Relationship between trade marks and geographical indications
(European Parliament and Council Regulation No 110/2008, Arts and 23(1) and (2))
3.        Approximation of laws – Uniform legislation – Definition, description, presentation, labelling and protection of geographical
            indications of spirit drinks – Regulation No 110/– Protection of geographical indications
(European Parliament and Council Regulation No 110/2008, Art. 16(a) and (b))
1.        Regulation No 110/on the definition, description, presentation, labelling and the protection of geographical indications
         of spirit drinks and repealing Regulation No 1576/is applicable to the assessment of the validity of the registration of
         a trade mark containing a geographical indication protected by that regulation, when the registration took place before the
         regulation entered into force.
      
Under Article 23(1) of Regulation No 110/2008, registration of a trade mark which contains a geographical indication registered
         in Annex III is to be refused or invalidated if its use would lead to any of the situations referred to in Article of that
         regulation. Thus, in addition to the option of refusing the registration of such a mark, that provision clearly makes it possible
         to invalidate, on the same grounds, a mark which has already been registered, and makes no reference to a time-frame imposing
         any sort of temporal restriction as regards the date of registration. It is clear from the wording that Article 23(1) of Regulation
         No 110/is intended to apply to marks registered before that regulation entered into force.
      
That interpretation is supported by the rule laid down in Article 23(2) of Regulation No 110/2008, which authorises, by way
         of derogation, the continued use of a mark when such use corresponds to one of the situations referred to in Article of
         that regulation, so long as that mark was registered or acquired before the date of entry into force of the protection of
         the geographical indication concerned in the country of origin or before January 1996. Therefore, apart from marks falling
         within the temporal limits of the derogation expressly provided for in Article 23(2) of Regulation No 110/2008, marks registered
         before the entry into force of that regulation may be invalidated in accordance with Article 23(1).
      
(see paras 27-31, 37, operative part 1)
2.        The competent national authorities must, on the basis of Article 23(1) of Regulation No 110/on the definition, description,
         presentation, labelling and protection of geographical indications of spirit drinks, refuse or invalidate the registration
         of a mark which contains a protected geographical indication and is not covered by the temporary derogation provided for in
         Article 23(2) of that regulation, when the use of that mark would lead to one of the situations referred to in Article thereof.
      
(see para. 45, operative part 2)
3.        A situation such as the registration of a mark containing a geographical indication, or a term corresponding to that indication
         and its translation, in respect of spirit drinks which do not meet the specifications set for that indication falls within
         the situations referred to in Article 16(a) and (b) of Regulation No 110/2008, on the definition, description, presentation,
         labelling and protection of geographical indications of spirit drinks without prejudice to the possible application of other
         rules laid down in Article 16. 
      
As regards the situations referred to in Article of that Regulation, it should be observed that point (a) of that provision
         refers, inter alia, to the direct or indirect commercial use of a geographical indication for products not covered by the
         registration, in so far as those products are comparable to the registered spirit drink. 
      
In the situation referred to in Question 2, in which the products not covered by a geographical indication are spirit drinks,
         it seems reasonable to hold that that situation may concern products comparable to the spirit drink registered under that
         geographical indication. Regardless of their various categories, ‘spirit drinks’ covers drinks which have common objective
         characteristics and which are consumed, from the point of view of the relevant public, on occasions which are broadly identical.
         Furthermore, they are frequently distributed through the same channels and subject to similar marketing rules.
      
As regards the concept of ‘evocation’, as referred to in Article 16(b) of Regulation No 110/2008, this covers a situation
         in which the term used to designate a product incorporates part of a protected designation, so that when the consumer is confronted
         with the name of the product, the image triggered in his mind is that of the product whose designation is protected. More
         specifically, the Court has held that that could be the position in the case of products with visual similarities and sales
         names which are phonetically and visually alike.
      
It seems reasonable to transpose those findings to the situation concerning the registration of a mark containing a geographical
         indication, or a term corresponding to that indication and its translation, with respect to spirit drinks which do not meet
         the specifications required by that indication.
      
(see paras 53-58, 61, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Regulation (EC) No 110/– Geographical indications of spirit drinks – Temporal application – Trade mark incorporating a geographical indication – Use leading to a situation which may adversely affect the geographical indication – Refusal of registration or invalidation of such a mark – Direct applicability of a regulation)
In Joined Cases C‑4/and C‑27/10,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the Korkein hallinto-oikeus (Finland), made by decisions of
         December 2009, received at the Court on and January respectively, in the proceedings brought by
      
Bureau national interprofessionnel du Cognac,
intervening party:
Gust. Ranin Oy,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of A. Tizzano, President of the Chamber, M. Ilešič, E. Levits, M. Safjan and M. Berger (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: E. Sharpston,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        the Bureau national interprofessionnel du Cognac, by P. Siitonen, asianajaja,
–        the French Government, by G. de Bergues and B. Cabouat, acting as Agents,
–        the Italian Government, by G. Palmieri, acting as Agent, and S. Fiorentino, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Portuguese Government, by L. Inez Fernandes, acting as Agent,
–        the United Kingdom Government, by S. Ossowski, acting as Agent,
–        the European Commission, by E. Paasivirta, and F. Bulst and M. Vollkommer, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
These references for a preliminary ruling concern the interpretation of Articles and of Regulation (EC) No 110/of the European Parliament and of the Council of January on the definition, description, presentation, labelling and
         the protection of geographical indications of spirit drinks and repealing Council Regulation (EEC) No 1576/(OJ L 39,
         p. 16) and of First Council Directive 89/104/EEC of December to approximate the laws of the Member States relating
         to trade marks (OJ L 40, p. 1).
      
The references have been made in proceedings brought by the Bureau national interprofessionnel du Cognac (‘the BNIC’) concerning
         the registration in Finland, by the Patentti- ja rekisterihallitus (National Board of Patents and Registration), of two figurative
         marks for spirit drinks.
      
 Legal context
 European Union (‘EU’) law
 Regulation No 110/According to the second sentence in recital in the preamble to Regulation No 110/2008: ‘[g]eographical indications should
         be registered, identifying spirit drinks as originating in the territory of a country, or a region or locality in that territory,
         where a given quality, reputation or other characteristic of the spirit drink is essentially attributable to its geographical
         origin’.
      
Paragraph of Article of Regulation No 110/2008, which concerns the use of language in the description, presentation and
         labelling of spirit drinks, provides:
      
‘… the geographical indications registered in Annex III shall not be translated on the label nor in the presentation of the
         spirit drink.’
      
Article of the regulation, entitled ‘Geographical indications’, provides:
      
‘1.       For the purpose of this Regulation a geographical indication shall be an indication which identifies a spirit drink as originating
         in the territory of a country, or a region or locality in that territory, where a given quality, reputation or other characteristic
         of that spirit drink is essentially attributable to its geographical origin.
      
2.       The geographical indications referred to in paragraph are registered in Annex III.
3.       The geographical indications registered in Annex III may not become generic.
Names that have become generic may not be registered in Annex III.
…
4.       Spirit drinks bearing a geographical indication registered in Annex III shall comply with all the specifications of the technical
         file provided for under Article 17(1).’
      
Article of Regulation No 110/2008, which concerns the protection of geographical indications, provides:
      
‘… the geographical indications registered in Annex III shall be protected against: 
(a)      any direct or indirect commercial use in respect of products not covered by the registration in so far as those products are
         comparable to the spirit drink registered under that geographical indication or insofar as such use exploits the reputation
         of the registered geographical indication;
      
(b)      any misuse, imitation or evocation, even if the true origin of the product is indicated or the geographical indication is
         used in translation or accompanied by an expression such as “like”, “type”, “style”, “made”, “flavour”, or any other similar
         term;
      
(c)      any other false or misleading indication as to the provenance, origin, nature or essential qualities on the description, presentation
         or labelling of the product, liable to convey a false impression as to its origin;
      
(d)      any other practice liable to mislead the consumer as to the true origin of the product.’
Paragraphs and of Article of Regulation No 110/2008, which is entitled ‘Relation between trade marks and geographical
         indications’, are worded as follows:
      
‘1.      The registration of a trade mark which contains or consists of a geographical indication registered in Annex III shall be
         refused or invalidated if its use would lead to any of the situations referred to in Article 16.
      
2.      With due regard to Community law, a trade mark the use of which corresponds to one of the situations referred to in Article
         which has been applied for, registered, or established by use, if that possibility is provided for by the legislation concerned,
         in good faith within the territory of the Community, before either the date of protection of the geographical indication in
         the country of origin or before January 1996, may continue to be used notwithstanding the registration of a geographical
         indication …’
      
Annex III to the same regulation mentions ‘Cognac’ as a geographical indication identifying products in Category No – that
         is to say, in the wine spirit category – having France as the country of origin. 
      
In accordance with Article thereof, Regulation No 110/entered into force on February 2008.
      
 Regulation (EEC) No 1576/Regulation No 110/replaced Council Regulation (EEC) No 1576/of May laying down general rules on the definition,
         description and presentation of spirit drinks (OJ L 160, p. 1), which was in force from June 1989. In Annex II thereto,
         Regulation No 1576/mentioned ‘Cognac’ among the protected geographical designations.
      
 Regulation (EC) No 3378/Regulation (EC) No 3378/of the European Parliament and of the Council of December amending Regulation No 1576/(OJ L 366, p. 1) inserted in Regulation No 1576/89, with effect from January 1996, Article 11a, the first subparagraph
         of paragraph of which provided:
      
‘Member States shall adopt all measures necessary to permit those concerned to prevent, under the conditions laid down in
         Articles and of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, the use within the Community
         of a geographical designation identifying products covered by this Regulation for products which do not originate in the place
         referred to by the geographical designation in question, including in cases where the actual origin of the product is indicated
         or where the geographical designation is given in translation or accompanied by expressions such as “like”, “type”, “style”,
         “imitation” or other.’
      
 Directive 89/Paragraphs (1)(g) and (2)(a) of Article of Directive 89/104, which concerns grounds for refusal or invalidity which may
         be relied upon in order to oppose the registration of a mark, provided:
      
 ‘The following shall not be registered or if registered shall be liable to be declared invalid:
…
(g)      trade marks which are of such a nature as to deceive the public, for instance as to the nature, quality or geographical origin
         of the goods or service;
      
…
2.      Any Member State may provide that a trade mark shall not be registered or, if registered, shall be liable to be declared invalid
         where and to the extent that:
      
(a)      the use of that trade mark may be prohibited pursuant to provisions of law other than trade mark law of the Member State concerned
         or of the Community.’
      
Directive 89/was replaced with effect from November by Directive 2008/95/EC of the European Parliament and of
         the Council of October to approximate the laws of the Member States relating to trade marks (OJ L 299, p. 25).
         The provisions of Article 3(1)(g) and (2)(a) have remained unchanged. 
      
 The TRIPS Agreement
In the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (‘the TRIPS Agreement’), which constitutes Annex
         C to the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation (WTO), signed in Marrakesh on April and approved by
         Council Decision 94/800/EC of December concerning the conclusion on behalf of the European Community, as regards matters
         within its competence, of the agreements reached in the Uruguay Round multilateral negotiations (1986-1994) (OJ L 336,
         p. 1), paragraphs and of Article 23, which is entitled ‘Additional Protection for Geographical Indications for Wines and
         Spirits’, are worded as follows:
      
‘1.       Each Member shall provide the legal means for interested parties to prevent use of a geographical indication identifying …
         spirits for spirits not originating in the place indicated by the geographical indication in question, even where the true
         origin of the goods is indicated or the geographical indication is used in translation or accompanied by expressions such
         as “kind”, “type”, “style”, “imitation” or the like.
      
2.      The registration of a trademark for wines which contains or consists of a geographical indication identifying wines or for
         spirits which contains or consists of a geographical indication identifying spirits shall be refused or invalidated, ex officio if a Member’s legislation so permits or at the request of an interested party, with respect to … spirits not having this
         origin.’
      
Article 24(5) of the TRIPS Agreement states:
      
‘Where a trademark has been applied for or registered in good faith, or where rights to a trademark have been acquired through
         use in good faith either:
      
(a)      before the date of application of these provisions in that Member as defined in Part VI; or 
(b)      before the geographical indication is protected in its country of origin; 
measures adopted to implement this Section shall not prejudice eligibility for or the validity of the registration of a trademark,
         or the right to use a trademark, on the basis that such a trademark is identical with, or similar to, a geographical indication.’
      
The facts and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Gust. Ranin Oy, a company incorporated under Finnish law, applied on December to the Patentti- ja rekisterihallitus
         for registration of two figurative marks in the form of a bottle label. For the ‘Konjakit [Cognacs]’ in Class of the Nice
         Agreement Concerning the International Classification of Goods and Services for the Purposes of the Registration of Marks
         of June 1957, as revised and amended, the figurative element which was the subject of the application includes the endorsement:
         ‘COGNAC L & P HIENOA KONJAKKIA Lignell & Piispanen Product of France 40% Vol ml’. For the ‘liqueurs containing “konjakki”’
         in Class 33, the figurative element included the endorsement ‘KAHVI-KONJAKKI Café Cognac Likööri – Likör – Liqueur 21% Vol
         Lignell & Piispanen ml’.
      
By decision of January 2003, the Patentti- ja rekisterihallitus registered the two marks, the first under No (Case
         C-4/10) and the second under No (Case C-27/10).
      
The BNIC opposed the registration of those marks. 
      
By decision of September 2004, the Patentti- ja rekisterihallitus dismissed the BNIC’s opposition and confirmed the validity
         of the mark registered under No 226350. By the same decision, however, it upheld the opposition in so far as it was directed
         against the mark registered under No and cancelled that registration.
      
By decision of October 2007, the Patentti- ja rekisterihallituksen valituslautakunta (Board of Appeal of the Patentti-
         ja rekisterihallitus) dismissed the BNIC’s appeal and upheld the decision of September confirming the registration
         of mark No 226350. It also upheld the appeal brought by Gust. Ranin Oy and set aside the decision cancelling the registration
         of mark No 226351.
      
In the proceedings before the Korkein hallinto-oikeus (Supreme Administrative Court), the BNIC seeks primarily the annulment
         of the decision of October or, failing which, the referral of the case back to the Patentti- ja rekisterihallitus
         in order for it to undertake a fresh examination of the case.
      
In those circumstances, the Korkein hallinto-oikeus decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions –
         framed in identical terms in Case C‑4/and Case C‑27/– to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Is Regulation [No 110/2008] applicable to the assessment of the conditions for registration of a trade mark, containing a
         geographical indication protected by that regulation, which was applied for on December and registered on January
         2003?
      
2.      If the answer to Question is affirmative, is a trade mark which inter alia contains a geographical indication of origin
         which is protected by that regulation, or such an indication in the form of a generic term and a translation, and which is
         registered for spirit drinks which, inter alia in terms of their manufacturing method and alcohol content, do not meet the
         requirements set for the use of the geographical indication of origin in question, to be refused as contrary to Articles and of Regulation No 110/2008?
      
3.      Regardless of the answer to Question 1, is a trade mark of the type described in Question to be regarded as liable to mislead
         the public for instance as to the nature, quality or geographical origin of the goods or services, in the way referred to
         in Article 3(1)(g) of [Directive 89/104], which has now been replaced by [Directive 2008/95]?
      
4.      Regardless of the answer to Question 1, if a Member State has, on the basis of Article 3(2)(a) of Directive 89/104, provided
         that a trade mark is not to be registered or, if registered, is to be liable to be declared invalid, if the use of the trade
         mark can be prohibited by virtue of legislation other than the trade mark law of the Member State in question or of the Community,
         is the view to be taken that, if the trade mark registration contains elements which infringe Regulation No 110/2008, on the
         basis of which the use of the trade mark can be prohibited, such a trade mark is not to be registered?’
      
By order of the President of the Court of March 2010, Cases C‑4/and C‑27/were joined for the purposes of the written
         and oral procedure and of the judgment.
      
 Consideration of the questions referred
 Question By Question 1, the referring court is essentially asking whether Regulation No 110/is applicable to the assessment of
         the validity of the registration of a trade mark containing a geographical indication protected by that regulation, where
         registration took place before the regulation entered into force.
      
It is settled law that, as a general rule, the principle of legal certainty precludes an EU measure from taking effect from
         a point in time before its publication, but it may exceptionally be otherwise where the purpose to be achieved so demands
         and where the legitimate expectations of those concerned are duly respected (see, inter alia, Joined Cases C‑74/P and C‑75/P
         Falck and Acciaierie di Bolzano v Commission [2002] ECR I‑7869, paragraph 119, and Case C‑120/Bavaria [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 40). 
      
In that regard, in order to ensure observance of the principles of legal certainty and the protection of legitimate expectations,
         the substantive rules of EU law must be interpreted as applying to situations existing before their entry into force only
         in so far as it clearly follows from their terms, objectives or general scheme that such effect must be given to them (see,
         inter alia, Falck and Acciaierie di Bolzano v Commission, paragraph 119; Bavaria, paragraph 40; and Case C‑369/P ISD Polska and Others v Commission [2011] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 98).
      
Under Article 23(1) of Regulation No 110/2008, the registration of a trade mark which contains a geographical indication registered
         in Annex III is to be refused or invalidated if its use would lead to any of the situations referred to in Article of that
         regulation.
      
Thus, in addition to the option of refusing the registration of such a mark, that provision clearly makes it possible to invalidate,
         on the same grounds, a mark which has already been registered, and makes no reference to a time-frame imposing some sort of
         temporal restriction as regards the date of registration. As the French and Portuguese Governments and the European Commission
         have observed, it is clear from the wording that Article 23(1) of Regulation No 110/is intended to apply to marks registered
         before that regulation entered into force.
      
That interpretation is supported by the rule laid down in Article 23(2) of Regulation No 110/2008.
      
Article 23(2) of Regulation No 110/authorises, by way of derogation, the continued use of a mark where such use corresponds
         to one of the situations referred to in Article of that regulation, so long as that mark was registered or acquired before
         the date of entry into force of the protection of the geographical indication concerned in the country of origin or before
         January 1996. As the Italian and United Kingdom Governments and the Commission have observed, it must be concluded from
         that rule that, apart from the marks falling within the temporal limits of the derogation expressly provided for in Article
         23(2) of Regulation No 110/2008, marks registered prior to the entry into force of that regulation may be invalidated in accordance
         with Article 23(1).
      
It follows that Article 23(1) of Regulation No 110/must be interpreted as meaning that it is applicable to marks registered
         before the entry into force of that regulation.
      
As regards the assessment of the compatibility of such a temporal application with the principles of legal certainty and the
         protection of legitimate expectations, it should be noted that the protection provided to geographical indications by Regulation
         No 100/is a continuation of the protection already ensured by Regulation No 3378/94, which had inserted Article 11a into
         Regulation No 1576/with effect from January 1996.
      
Under Article 11a(1), the Member States were required to take all the measures necessary to permit those concerned to prevent,
         under the conditions laid down in Articles and of the TRIPS Agreement, the use within the Community of a geographical
         designation for products which do not originate in the place referred to by the geographical designation in question. Article
         23(2) of that agreement provides that the registration of a mark which contains or consists of a geographical indication identifying
         spirits must be refused or invalidated with respect to spirits which do not have that origin, while Article 24(5) of that
         agreement provides for a derogation for marks registered or acquired in good faith before the entry into force of the agreement
         itself or before the geographic indication was protected.
      
It must therefore be held that, from January – the date on which Regulation No 3378/entered into force – the rules
         laid down in the TRIPS Agreement for the protection of geographic indications had been incorporated into EU law, even though
         competence for defining the implementing measures had been entrusted to the Member States.
      
In those circumstances, Article 23(1) of Regulation No 110/2008, under which the registration of a mark which contains a protected
         geographic indication is to be refused or invalidated if its usage corresponds to one of the cases of misuse referred to in
         Article of that regulation, merely lays down the uniform conditions for the implementation of a rule of EU law which was
         already in force, whereas Article 23(2) maintains the temporary derogations already recognised under EU law.
      
It follows that the application of those provisions does not undermine the principle of legal certainty; nor does it undermine
         the principle of the protection of the legitimate expectations of the persons concerned.
      
In consequence, the answer to Question is that Regulation No 110/is applicable to the assessment of the validity of
         the registration of a trade mark containing a geographical indication protected by that regulation, where registration took
         place before the regulation entered into force.
      
 Question By Question 2, the referring court asks essentially whether Articles and of Regulation No 110/preclude the registration
         of a mark which contains a protected geographical indication of origin, or such an indication in the form of a generic term
         and a translation of the latter, and which is registered for spirit drinks which do not satisfy the conditions for the use
         of that geographical indication.
      
In order to answer that question, it is appropriate to examine in turn the conditions for the application of Articles and
         of that regulation.
      
 The conditions for the application of Article of Regulation No 110/It should be recalled at the outset that, under the second paragraph of Article TFEU, regulations have general application
         and are directly applicable in all Member States. Accordingly, owing to their very nature and their place in the system of
         sources of EU law, regulations have immediate effect and operate to confer rights on individuals which the national courts
         have a duty to protect (see, inter alia, Case 34/Variola [1973] ECR 981, paragraph 8, and Case C‑253/Muñoz and Superior Fruiticola [2002] ECR I‑7289, paragraph 27).
      
The clear and unconditional wording of Article 23(1) of Regulation No 110/2008, under which the registration of a mark which
         contains a geographical indication registered in Annex III is to be refused or invalidated if its use would lead to any of
         the situations referred to in Article of that regulation, requires the national authorities to refuse or to invalidate
         the registration of a mark if it is used in such circumstances.
      
Admittedly, Article 23(2) of Regulation No 110/provides for a limited derogation for marks registered or acquired in
         good faith before the date of entry into force of the protection of the geographical indication concerned in the country of
         origin or before January 1996.
      
In that connection, it should be observed that the term ‘Cognac’, included in the marks whose registration gave rise to the
         disputes in the main proceedings, appears both in Annex III to Regulation No 110/and in Annex II to Regulation No 1576/as a geographical indication identifying a spirit drink originating from France. Independently of the protection it enjoys
         under French law, the term ‘Cognac’ has therefore been protected as a geographical indication under EU law since June 1989,
         the date on which Regulation No 1576/entered into force.
      
That finding is sufficient to establish that the marks at issue in the main proceedings, which – according to the orders for
         reference – were registered on January 2003, cannot benefit from the derogation provided for in Article 23(2) of Regulation
         No 110/2008.
      
In those circumstances, the answer to the first part of Question is that the competent national authorities must, on the
         basis of Article 23(1) of Regulation No 110/2008, refuse or invalidate the registration of a mark which contains a protected
         geographical indication and which is not covered by the temporary derogation provided for in Article 23(2) of that regulation,
         where the use of that mark would lead to one of the situations referred to in Article thereof. 
      
 The conditions for the application of Article of Regulation No 110/Points (a) to (d) of Article of Regulation No 110/refer to various situations in which the marketing of a product
         is accompanied by an explicit or implicit reference to a geographic indication in circumstances liable to mislead the public
         as to the origin of the product or, at the very least, to set in train in the mind of the public an association of ideas regarding
         that origin, or to enable the trader to take unfair advantage of the reputation of the geographical indication concerned.
      
The protection thus conferred on geographical indications by Article of Regulation No 110/must be interpreted in the
         light of the objective pursued through the registration of those indications, namely – as is clear from recital to that
         regulation – to enable the identification of spirit drinks as originating in a particular area, where a given quality, reputation
         or other characteristic of those drinks is essentially attributable to its geographical origin.
      
Specifically, the extent of that protection must be assessed in the light of the fundamental rule laid down in Article 15(4)
         of Regulation No 110/2008, in accordance with which a geographical indication registered in Annex III to that regulation may
         be borne only by spirit drinks which meet all the specifications in the technical file provided to the Commission by the Member
         State of origin, pursuant to Article of Regulation No 110/2008, when the application for registration of the indication
         concerned is made. 
      
The question whether a particular spirit drink meets all the specifications applicable to a protected geographical indication
         is a question of fact which is a matter to be determined by the competent national authorities and which must be decided before
         the examination as to whether Article of Regulation No 110/may be applicable.
      
Question specifically refers to the situation in which a mark containing a geographical indication, or a generic term and
         its translation, has been registered for spirit drinks which do not meet the specifications set for that indication. It is
         on the basis of that premiss, therefore, that an indication must be given to the referring court as to whether such a situation
         may be among those referred to in Article of Regulation No 110/2008. 
      
In so far as that question refers to a mark containing the generic term corresponding to a protected geographical indication
         and its translation, the first point to note is that, pursuant to the first subparagraph of Article 15(3) of Regulation No
         110/2008, the geographical indications registered in Annex III thereto cannot become generic. Conversely, the second subparagraph
         of Article 15(3) states that names which have become generic may not be registered in Annex III. It follows that, for the
         purposes of determining the validity of the registration of the marks at issue in the main proceedings, it cannot be argued
         that the indication ‘Cognac’, registered in Annex III, has become generic.
      
It should be added that, in accordance with Article 14(2) of Regulation No 110/2008, the geographical indications registered
         in Annex III thereto, such as ‘Cognac’, cannot be translated either on the label or in the presentation of a spirit drink.
      
As regards the situations referred to in Article of Regulation No 110/2008, it should be observed that point (a) of that
         provision refers, inter alia, to the direct or indirect commercial use of a geographical indication in respect of products
         which are not covered by the registration, in so far as those products are comparable to the registered spirit drink.
      
In the situation referred to in Question 2, in which the products not covered by a geographical indication are spirit drinks,
         it seems reasonable to hold that that situation may concern products comparable to the spirit drink registered under that
         geographical indication: regardless of their various categories, ‘spirit drinks’ covers drinks which have common objective
         characteristics and which are consumed, from the point of view of the relevant public, on occasions which are largely identical.
         Furthermore, they are frequently distributed through the same channels and subject to similar marketing rules.
      
It follows that, in such a situation, it would have to be held that the use of a mark containing a geographical indication,
         or a term corresponding to that indication and its translation, with respect to spirit drinks which do not meet the relevant
         specifications constitutes, for the purposes of Article 16(a) of Regulation No 110/2008, a direct commercial use of a geographical
         indication in respect of products which are comparable to the spirit drink registered under that indication, but which are
         not covered by the registration.
      
As regards the concept of ‘evocation’, as referred to in Article 16(b) of Regulation No 110/and to which the order for
         reference in Case C-4/refers, it is appropriate to point out that that concept covers a situation in which the term used
         to designate a product incorporates part of a protected designation, so that when the consumer is confronted with the name
         of the product, the image triggered in his mind is that of the product whose designation is protected (see Case C‑87/Consorzio per la tutela del formaggio Gorgonzola [1999] ECR I-1301, paragraph 25, and Case C-132/Commission v Germany [2008] ECR I-957, paragraph 44).
      
More specifically, the Court has held that that could be the position in the case of products with visual similarities and
         sales names which are phonetically and visually alike (Consorzio per la tutela del formaggio Gorgonzola, paragraph 27, and Commission v Germany, paragraph 46).
      
It seems reasonable to transpose those findings to the situation, referred to in Question 2, concerning the registration of
         a mark containing a geographical indication, or a term corresponding to that indication and its translation, with respect
         to spirit drinks which do not meet the specifications required by that indication. The use of a mark containing the element
         ‘Cognac’ for spirit drinks which do not meet the relevant specifications may therefore be categorised as an ‘evocation’ for
         the purposes of Article 16(b) of Regulation No 110/2008.
      
It should be added that, in accordance with that provision, the mention of the actual origin of the product or the use of
         the geographical indication in translation or accompanied by an expression such as ‘like’, ‘type’, ‘style’, ‘made’, ‘flavour’,
         or any other similar term, would not alter that categorisation.
      
To the extent that the referring court considered it useful, it would be for that court, for the purposes of ascertaining
         whether the situations referred to in Article 16(c) and (d) of Regulation No 110/existed, to determine, by taking account
         of the interpretative guidance already provided by the Court, whether the use of a mark containing a geographical indication,
         or a term corresponding to that indication and its translation, with respect to spirit drinks which do not meet the specifications
         set for that indication is such as to give rise to a false impression as to the origin of those drinks or to mislead the consumer
         as to their true origin.
      
The answer to the second part of Question is that a situation such as that referred to in that question – that is to say,
         the registration of a mark containing a geographical indication, or a term corresponding to that indication and its translation,
         in respect of spirit drinks which do not meet the specifications set for that indication – falls within the situations referred
         to in Article 16(a) and (b) of Regulation No 110/2008, without prejudice to the possible application of other rules laid down
         in Article 16. 
      
 Questions and By Question 3, the referring court asks essentially whether Article 3(1)(g) of Directive 89/must be interpreted as meaning
         that a trade mark containing a geographical indication, or the generic term corresponding to that indication and its translation,
         with respect to spirit drinks which do not meet the specifications set for that indication must be regarded as liable to mislead
         the public.
      
By Question 4, the referring court asks essentially whether Article 3(2)(a) of Directive 89/must be interpreted as meaning
         that where, on the basis of that provision, a Member State has provided that a trade mark must be declared invalid if and
         to the extent that it is contrary to legislation other than trade mark law, registration of a mark in breach of Regulation
         No 110/must be refused. 
      
In the light of the answer to Question 2, there is no need to reply to those two questions. 
      
It is clear from that answer that the registration of a mark containing a geographical indication, or the generic term corresponding
         to that indication and its translation, with respect to spirit drinks which do not meet the specifications set for that indication
         falls, at the very least, within the situations referred to in Article 16(a) and (b) of Regulation No 110/and that the
         competent national authorities must, on the basis of Article 23(1) of Regulation No 110/2008, refuse or invalidate the registration
         of such a mark.
      
In that connection, it should be recalled that the direct application of a regulation means that its entry into force and
         its application in favour of or against those subject to it are independent of any measure of reception into national law,
         strict compliance with that obligation being an indispensable condition for the simultaneous and uniform application of regulations
         throughout the European Union (see, to that effect, Variola, paragraph 10). Accordingly, Regulation No 110/must apply independently of the rules transposing Directive 89/into
         the national legal order.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Regulation (EC) No 110/of the European Parliament and of the Council of January on the definition, description,
            presentation, labelling and the protection of geographical indications of spirit drinks and repealing Council Regulation (EEC)
            No 1576/is applicable to the assessment of the validity of the registration of a trade mark containing a geographical indication
            protected by that regulation, where registration took place before the regulation entered into force.
2.      Articles and of Regulation No 110/must be interpreted as meaning that:
–        the competent national authorities must, on the basis of Article 23(1) of Regulation No 110/2008, refuse or invalidate the
            registration of a mark which contains a protected geographical indication and which is not covered by the temporary derogation
            provided for in Article 23(2) of that regulation, where the use of that mark would lead to one of the situations referred
            to in Article thereof;
–        a situation such as that referred to in the second question referred for a preliminary ruling – that is to say, the registration
            of a mark containing a geographical indication, or a term corresponding to that indication and its translation, in respect
            of spirit drinks which do not meet the specifications set for that indication – falls within the situations referred to in
            Article 16(a) and (b) of Regulation No 110/2008, without prejudice to the possible application of other rules laid down in
            Article 16.
[Signatures]
** Language of the case: Finnish.
Top  
 