
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber) 
November Case C-10/P
Rafael de Bustamente Tello
v
Council of the European Union
(Appeal – Officials – Remuneration – Expatriation allowance – Condition laid down by Article 4(1)(a), second indent, of Annex VII to the Staff Regulations – Concept of ‘work done for another State’)
Appeal: against the judgment of the Court of First Instance of October in Case T-368/De Bustamente Tello v Council  [2005] ECR-SC I‑A‑and II‑1439, seeking the annulment of that judgment. 
      
Held: Appeal dismissed.
      
Summary
1.        Appeals – Grounds – Mere repetition of the pleas and arguments put forward before the Court of First Instance – Error of law
            relied on not identified – Inadmissibility – Challenge to the interpretation or application of Community law by the Court
            of First Instance – Admissibility 
(Art. EC)
2.        Officials – Remuneration – Expatriation allowance – Conditions for granting 
Staff Regulations of Officials, Annex VII, Art. 4(1)(a))
1.        An appeal is inadmissible if, without even including an argument specifically identifying the error of law allegedly vitiating
         the decision under appeal, it merely repeats or reproduces verbatim the pleas in law and arguments previously submitted to
         the Court of First Instance. By contrast, provided that the appellant challenges the interpretation or application of Community
         law by the Court of First Instance, the points of law examined at first instance may be discussed again in the course of an
         appeal. Indeed, if an appellant could not thus base his appeal on pleas in law and arguments already relied on before the
         Court of First Instance, an appeal would be deprived of part of its purpose. 
      
2.        Even if the distribution of responsibilities at intra-State level varies according to the institutional make-up of each State,
         that State must be considered to be a unitary subject of public international law. In the light of that approach, it is essential
         that the State be represented, vis-à-vis other States and international organisations, by a system of a single diplomatic
         representation, which reflects the unitary nature of the State concerned, at international level.
      
Although it is not essential, in order for the official concerned to be considered to have worked for ‘another State’, that
         he should have been employed by the central administration of that State, his functional integration within the permanent
         representation of that State constitutes a decisive factor.
      
In that regard, both those who work for a State through the intermediary of its central administration and those who work
         for an autonomous community through its administration must be considered to be in a situation of expatriation within the
         meaning of Article 4(1) of Annex VII to the Staff Regulations, as long as they are formally integrated into the permanent
         representation of that State.
      
Accordingly, for the purposes of interpreting the expression ‘work done for another State’ used in the second indent of Article
         4(1)(a) of Annex VII to the Staff Regulations, the only fact to be considered relevant is that the work is done within a permanent
         representation of a State. Therefore, work done for governments of political subdivisions of States cannot be regarded as
         work done for a State if the person concerned has not been formally integrated into the permanent representation of the State.
      
Top  
 