
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-170/Staatssecretaris van Financiën
v
J.H.M. Feron
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden)
(Regulation (EEC) No 918/– Relief from customs duties – Meaning of ‘personal property’ and ‘possession’ – Motor vehicle made available to a person by his employer)
Opinion of Advocate General Poiares Maduro delivered on May Judgment of the Court (First Chamber), March 2005. 
Summary of the Judgment
Common Customs Tariff – Relief from import duty – Concept of personal property – Passenger vehicle made available to a natural
            person by his employer and used for both business and private purposes – Included
(Council Regulation No 918/83, Arts 1(2)(c), and 3)
Articles 1(2)(c), and of Regulation No 918/setting up a Community system of reliefs from customs duty must be interpreted
         as meaning that a passenger vehicle which is made available to a natural person by his employer and is used by that person
         for both business and private purposes may be regarded as an item of personal property capable of benefiting from a relief
         from customs duty under Articles and of that regulation.
      
A combined reading of those provisions shows that, in order to qualify for relief from customs duty, the item of personal
         property must in particular have been in the possession of, and used by, the person concerned, as personal property, for at
         least six months before the date on which he ceased to have his normal place of residence in the country of origin.
      
First, in the absence of an express provision to that effect, exclusive personal use cannot be considered necessary in all
         circumstances for an item of property to be regarded as personal property, so that a passenger vehicle used both for private
         and business purposes must be capable of being regarded as such an item of personal property.
      
Secondly, the term ‘possession’ in Article of the regulation implies that the relief need not be limited to property forming
         part of the assets of the person concerned for at least six months before his transfer of residence but also concerns other
         assets over which the person concerned exercises, effective and genuine control throughout the same period.
      
(see paras 14, 21-22, 27, 29, 32, operative part)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)March 2005(1)
(Regulation (EEC) No 918/–  Relief from customs duties  –  Meaning of ‘personal property’ and ‘possession’  –  Motor vehicle made available to a person by his employer)
 In Case C-170/03,REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden (Netherlands), made by decision
            of April 2003, received at the Court on  April 2003, in the proceedings
            
Staatssecretaris van Financiën
v
J.H.M. Feron,
THE COURT (First Chamber),,
 composed of P. Jann, President of the Chamber,  A. Rosas, K. Lenaerts, S. von Bahr (Rapporteur) and K. Schiemann, Judges,
            
 Advocate General: M. Poiares Maduro,Registrar:   M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator,
             having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on March 2004,after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
            
–
 the Netherlands Government, by S. Terstal, acting as Agent,
            
–
 the Commission of the European Communities, by R. Lyal and H. van Vliet, acting as Agents, 
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on May 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles 1(2)(c) and 3(a) of Council Regulation (EEC)
         No 918/of March setting up a Community system of reliefs from customs duty (OJ L 105, p. 1).
         
            
 The reference was made in proceedings between Mr Feron and the Staatssecretaris van Financiën (State Secretary for Finance),
         who refused to grant Mr Feron an exemption from duty in respect of a car made available to him by his employer.
         
The dispute in the main proceedings and the legal framework 
            
 According to the decision making the reference, Mr Feron worked in Austria as an employee of Océ Österreich GmbH (‘the employer’).
         From October to December the employer put a car at the exclusive disposal of Mr Feron both for private use
         and in connection with his work for that employer. During that period the employer was the owner of the car. However, in connection
         with his transfer to the Netherlands, Mr Feron, on December 1997, exercised an option granted to him when the car was delivered
         to him and bought the car from his employer. In January 1998, Mr Feron left his place of residence in Austria and, on February
         1998, registered as a resident of the municipality of Venlo (Netherlands). The Netherlands authorities refused to grant him
         exemption from the duty on cars and motorcycles (‘belasting van personenauto’s en motorrijwielen’; ‘BPM’) in respect of the
         car. The Gerechtshof te ’s‑Hertogenbosch (Regional Court of Appeal, Hertogenbosch), which heard his appeal, annulled the decision
         refusing exemption and granted Mr Feron exemption from the BPM. The Staatssecretaris van Financiën appealed in cassation to
         the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden (Supreme Court of the Netherlands).
         
            
 The Hoge Raad states that, by virtue of Article 1(2) of the Wet op de belasting van personenauto’s en motorrijwielen (Law
         on duty on cars and motorcycles) of December 1992, the BPM is payable on registration of cars and motorcycles in the register
         of registration numbers kept under the Wegenverkeerswet (Road Traffic Law) of 1994. It follows from the provisions of Article
         of that law, in conjunction with Articles 2(2) and 4(1) and (4) of the Uitvoeringsbesluit belasting van personenauto’s
         en motorrijwielen (Decree implementing the duty on cars and motorcycles) of December 1992, as amended by the Decree of
         November 1997, that relief from the duty payable on registration of cars and motorcyles originating abroad, and in particular
         in another Member State, is granted where the vehicle, at the time of its release for free circulation, was entitled to relief
         from customs duty under Regulation No 918/83.
         
            
 The referring court observes that, pursuant to Article of that regulation, exemption from the BPM is granted in respect
         of a private motor vehicle, within the meaning of Article 1(2)(c) of the regulation, which is imported from abroad by a natural
         person who is transferring his normal place of residence to the Netherlands, provided that the vehicle has been in possession
         of and used by the person concerned for a minimum of six months before the date on which the person ceased to have his normal
         place of residence in the country of origin, as provided for in Article 3(a) of Regulation No 918/83, and provided that the
         vehicle in question is intended to be used for the same purpose at the new normal place of residence of the person concerned,
         in accordance with Article 3(b) of the regulation.
         
            
 According to the Hoge Raad, the combined effect of Articles and of Regulation No 918/is that the exemption applies
         to property which has been in the possession of the person concerned, as that person’s personal property, for a minimum of
         six months.
         
            
 The national court considers the question arises, first, as to whether property used for both professional and private purposes
         is to be regarded as personal property. 
         
            
 It notes that a question also arises as to the significance to be attached to the notion of ‘possession’ within the meaning
         of Article 3(a) of Regulation No 913/83. It asks, inter alia, whether that notion includes the case in which the property
         concerned may be used by one person pursuant to a legal arrangement with another person, who is the owner of the property
         and who has made it available in the context of his business at the same time as authorising private use of it.
         
The questions referred for a preliminary ruling 
            
 By decision of April 2003, the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden stayed the proceedings and referred the following questions to
         the Court for a preliminary ruling:
         
‘(1)
Must a car which is made available to a natural person by his employer and is used by him for both business and private purposes
               be regarded as personal property within the meaning of Article 1(2)(c) of … Regulation No 918/…?
            
(2)
Must Article 3(a) of that regulation, requiring property to have been in the possession of the person concerned at least six
               months before the date on which he gave up his normal place of residence in the country of origin, be interpreted as meaning
               that the person concerned who has had property made available to him, even free of charge, in the context of his employment
               by the owner of the property in question, is to be deemed to have been in possession of the property for the purposes of the
               abovementioned provision?
            
(3)
Is it material to the reply to be given to Question that during the whole period of six months the person concerned had
               the right to buy the car?’
            
Concerning the questions referred to the Court
            
 Regulation No 918/83, to which the questions referred to the Court allude, concerns relief from Community duties on importation
         from third countries and does not apply directly to the case before the national court. The provisions of the regulation apply
         to this case only by reason of Netherlands law, which refers to the Community law provisions. 
         
            
 In that respect, it is sufficient to recall that the Court has repeatedly held that it has jurisdiction to give preliminary
         rulings on questions concerning Community provisions in situations where the facts of the cases being considered by the national
         courts were outside the scope of Community law but where those provisions had been rendered applicable by domestic law (see,
         in particular, Case C-28/Leur-Bloem [1997] ECR I-4161, paragraph 27, Case C-130/Giloy [1997] ECR I-4291, paragraph 23, and Case C‑247/Schoonbroodt [1998] ECR I‑8095, paragraph 14). 
         
            
 Thus, the Court must reply to the questions referred.
         
            
 By its three questions, which it is appropriate to examine together, the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden is asking whether a car
         such as that at issue in the main proceedings can be regarded as personal property, in accordance with Article 1(2)(c) of
         Regulation No 918/83, and thus eligible for relief from customs duty under Articles and of the regulation.
         
            
 A combined reading of those provisions shows that, in order to qualify for relief from customs duty, the personal property
         must, as a general rule, have been in the possession of, and used by, the person concerned, as personal property, for at least
         six months before the date on which he ceased to have his normal place of residence in the country of origin. Furthermore,
         the personal property must be intended to be used for the same purpose at the new normal place of residence of the person
         concerned.
         
            
 Under Article 1(2)(c) of Regulation No 918/83, ‘personal property’ means property intended for the personal use of the persons
         concerned or for meeting their household needs and includes private motor vehicles.
         
            
 In this instance, the car was made available to Mr Feron by his employer from October until December 1997, both
         for his personal use and for the purposes of his work for that employer.
         
            
 The question as to whether property used for both those purposes during a six month period before Mr Feron transferred his
         place of residence can be regarded as personal property is not an issue expressly settled by Regulation No 913/83.
         
            
 Such an eventuality is not incompatible with the scheme and purpose of the regulation.
         
            
 First, Article 1(2)(c) of Regulation No 918/specifically provides that certain property required by the person concerned
         for the pursuit of his trade or profession can be regarded as personal property. 
         
            
 Second, by virtue of the same provision, what is really essential is that the personal property is not such as might indicate,
         by its nature or quantity, that it is being imported for commercial reasons. 
         
            
 In the absence of any express provision to that effect, exclusive personal use cannot therefore be considered necessary in
         all circumstances for property to be regarded as personal property for the purposes of Regulation No 918/83. 
         
            
 A car such as that at issue in the main proceedings which is used for both private and professional purposes must also be
         capable of being regarded as personal property.
         
            
 Moreover, the car at issue in the main proceedings was purchased by Mr Feron from his employer on December and, according
         to the decision making the reference, was used exclusively by him for personal purposes following its importation into his
         new State of residence. 
         
            
 It follows that a car such as that at issue in the main proceedings must be regarded as personal property used by the person
         concerned for a minimum of six months before the date on which that person ceased to have his normal place of residence in
         the country of origin, and intended to be used for the same purpose in that person’s new normal place of residence, for the
         purposes of Regulation No 918/83.
         
            
 It is necessary to consider whether a car such as that at issue in the main proceedings can be regarded as having been in
         the possession of the person concerned for the relevant six month period.
         
            
 It follows from the need for uniform application of Community law and the principle of equality that the terms of a provision
         of Community law which makes no express reference to the law of the Member States for the purpose of determining its meaning
         and scope must normally be given an autonomous and uniform interpretation throughout the Community (Case 327/Ekro [1984] ECR 107, paragraph 11; Case C-287/Linster [2000] ECR I-6917, paragraph 43, and Case C‑357/Yiadom [2000] ECR I‑9265, paragraph 26).
         
            
 Accordingly, the term ‘possession’ in Article of Regulation No 918/must be given an autonomous interpretation.
         
            
 As the Advocate General states at point of his Opinion, in the various legal systems the notion of ‘possession’ is characterised
         by the control exercised by a person over a thing, irrespective of whether the person is its owner.
         
            
 The use of that term in Regulation No 918/implies that the relief need not be limited to property forming part of the assets
         owned by the person concerned for at least six months before his transfer of residence but also concerns other property over
         which the person concerned exercised effective and genuine control throughout the same period.
         
            
 In this instance, the employer had put the car at issue wholly and exclusively at Mr Feron’s disposal and had given him an
         option to purchase the car. 
         
            
 In view of those circumstances, it is clear that Mr Feron was exercising effective and genuine control over the car and that
         it was therefore in his possession for at least six months before the date on which he ceased to have his normal place of
         residence in the country of origin.
         
            
 In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the questions referred must be that a car such as that at issue in the main proceedings
         is to be regarded as personal property within the meaning of Article 1(2)(c) of Regulation No 918/and thus eligible for
         relief from import duty under Articles and of the regulation.
         
            
 In view of the answer to the questions referred, it is not necessary to consider the applicability of Council Directive 83/183/EEC
         of March on tax exemptions applicable to permanent imports from a Member State of the personal property of individuals
         (OJ L 105, p. 64), to which the Commission has alluded.
         
Costs
            
 Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable. 
         
 On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) rules:
         A car such as that at issue in the main proceedings is to be regarded as personal property within the meaning of Article 1(2)(c)
               of Council Regulation (EEC) No 918/of March setting up a Community system of reliefs from customs duty and thus
               eligible for relief from import duty under Articles and of the regulation.[Signatures]
      
 –
            
Language of the case: Dutch.
Top  
 