
Judgment of the Court (Third Chamber) of April – Commission v Greece
(Case C-406/07)
Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Freedom of establishment – Free movement of capital – Direct taxation – Taxation of dividends from shares in companies – Rate of taxation for partnerships
1.                     Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Free movement of capital – Provisions of the Treaty – Scope (Art.
            EC and EC) (see para. 22)
2.                     Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Free movement of capital – Tax legislation – Corporation tax
            (Art. EC and EC; EEA Agreement, Arts and 40) (see paras 25-28, operative part)
3.                     Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Tax legislation (Art. EC; EEA Agreement, Art. 40) (see paras
            39-43, operative part)
Re: 
Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Breach of Articles EC and EC – National rules providing for tax exemption
                  for dividends distributed by national companies but not for dividends distributed by companies whose seat is in another Member
                  State.
               
Operative part
The Court: 
1.
	Declares that, by applying a tax regime for dividends from abroad that is less favourable than that applied to domestic dividends,
                     the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles EC and EC and the corresponding articles of
                     the Agreement on the European Economic Area of May 1992, namely Articles and thereof;
                  
Declares that, by maintaining in force the provisions of the Income Tax Code (Law 2238/1994, as amended by Law 3296/2004),
         by which foreign partnerships in Greece are taxed more heavily than domestic partnerships, the Hellenic Republic has failed
         to fulfil its obligations under Article EC and Article of the Agreement on the European Economic Area;
      
2.
	Orders the Hellenic Republic to pay the costs.
Top  
 