
Avis juridique important
|
61986OOrder of the Court of June 1988.  -  Ireland v Commission of the European Communities.  -  No need to give a decision.  -  Case 242/86.  
European Court reports Page Parties
Grounds
Decision on costs
Operative part
Keywords
++++Procedure - Costs - No need to give a decision  ( Rules of Procedure, Art . ( ) )  
Parties
In Case 242/Ireland, represented by L . J . Dockery, Chief State Solicitor, acting as Agent, assisted by Eoghan P . Fitzsimons, SC, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the Irish Embassy, 28, route d' Arlon,  applicant,  v  Commission of the European Communities, represented by D . Grant Lawrence, a member of its Legal Department, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of G . Kremlis, a member of its Legal Department, Jean Monnet Building, Kirchberg,  defendant,  APPLICATION for the annulment of Commission Decision 86/445/EEC on the clearance of the accounts presented by Ireland in respect of the EAGGF, Guarantee Section, expenditure for 1982,  THE COURT  composed of : Lord Mackenzie Stuart, President, G . Bosco, O . Due and G . C . Rodríguez Iglesias ( Presidents of Chambers ), T . Koopmans, U . Everling, K . Bahlmann, Y . Galmot, C . Kakouris, R . Joliet and F . Schockweiler, Judges,  Advocate General : J . L . da Cruz Vilaça  Registrar : J.-G . Giraud  after hearing the views of the Advocate General,  makes the following  Order  
Grounds
By an application lodged at the Court Registry on September 1986, Ireland brought an application pursuant to the first paragraph of Article of the EEC Treaty for the annulment of Commission Decision 86/445/EEC of July on the clearance of the accounts presented by Ireland in respect of expenditure financed by the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund, Guarantee Section, for ( Official Journal 1986, L 256, p . 34, hereinafter referred to as "the decision "), in so far as the Commission failed to charge to the Fund the sum of IRL 037.relating to refunds on exports to non-member countries .  By a decision of the President of the Court of November 1986, on application by Ireland, the proceedings were suspended pending the delivery of judgment in Case 337/85, since the issue raised in Case 242/was the same as that raised in Case 337/85, which also concerned an application brought by Ireland against the Commission for the annulment of a decision on the clearance of EAGGF accounts for the previous financial year .  In its judgment of October ( Case 337/Ireland v Commission (( )) ECR ), the Court declared that decision void to the extent claimed by Ireland .  The proceedings were then continued by the parties . In a written submission of May Ireland stated that in view of the fact that the Commission had given formal assurance that it would apply the judgment in Case 337/to similar decisions made for subsequent years it would consent to an order to the effect that there was no need for Case 242/to proceed to judgment . In a written submission of May the Commission made no objection to such an order .  There is therefore no need for the case to proceed to judgment .  
Decision on costs
Costs  The Commission claims that the Court should order Ireland to pay the costs . It submits that there was no need whatsoever for Ireland to bring these proceedings, since the Commission had clearly stated in its summary report of January on the clearance of EAGGF accounts for that it would re-examine the correction for the export refunds at issue in the light of the decision to be taken by the Court in Case 337/. That summary report was circulated to all the Member States, including Ireland, early in and was the basis of the discussions of the EAGGF Committee in March . Ireland was therefore informed of the Commission' s intentions as early as March . Those intentions were, moreover, reaffirmed in general terms in the last recital in the preamble to the decision challenged in these proceedings .  Ireland, on the other hand, claims that the Court should order the Commission to pay the costs . Although it is true that the attention of the Irish authorities was drawn to an extract from the summary report referred to above, that extract was received by the responsible department only in September 1986, when it was no longer practical to cancel the transmission to the Court of this application . As for the last recital in the preamble to the contested decision, it must be admitted that it is far from clear . It was only by a telex message of October that the Commission gave formal assurance in a way wholly satisfactory to the Irish authorities that it would apply the judgment delivered in Case 337/to the decision challenged in these proceeedings .  In the light of those arguments it must be pointed out that under Article ( ) of the Rules of Procedure, where a case does not proceed to judgment the costs are at the discretion of the Court .  Having regard to the circumstances of the case, the Court considers, particularly in view of the imminent expiry of the period for bringing proceedings laid down in the third paragraph of Article of the EEC Treaty and the conditional nature of the Commission' s statements, prior to the bringing of the proceedings, intended to reassure the Irish Government on the point at issue, that Ireland cannot reasonably be reproached for bringing these proceedings by way of precaution .  Consequently, the Commission must be ordered to pay the costs .  
Operative part
On those grounds,  THE COURT  hereby orders as follows :  ( ) There is no need to give a decision on the application;  ( ) The defendant is ordered to pay the costs .  Luxembourg, June .  
Top  
 