
Case C-38/P
Heuschen & Schrouff Oriëntal Foods Trading BV
v
Commission of the European Communities
(Appeal – Remission of import duties – Commission decision – Article of the Customs Code – Existence of a special situation – Absence of deception – Obvious negligence on the part of the importer)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Appeals – Grounds – Mere repetition of the pleas and arguments put forward before the Court of First Instance – Inadmissible
            
(Art. EC; Statute of the Court, Art. 58, first para.; Rules of Procedure of the Court, Art. 112(1)(c))
2.        Own resources of the European Communities – Repayment or remission of import duties
(Council Regulations No 2658/87, Annex I, and No 2913/92, Art. 239; Annex to Commission Regulation No 1196/97)
1.        It follows from Article EC, the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice and Article 112(1)(c)
         of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice that an appeal must indicate precisely the contested elements of the judgment
         which the appellant seeks to have set aside and also the legal arguments specifically advanced in support of the appeal. An
         appeal which merely repeats or reproduces verbatim the pleas in law and arguments previously submitted to the Court of First
         Instance does not satisfy the requirements to state reasons under those provisions. However, provided that the appellant challenges
         the interpretation or application of Community law by the Court of First Instance, the points of law examined at first instance
         may be discussed again in the course of an appeal.
      
It follows that an appeal by which an appellant, although relying on arguments which it has already submitted in support of
         its action for annulment before the Court of First Instance, none the less challenges the latter’s interpretation, is admissible.
      
(see paras 33-36)
2.        In order to assess whether there is obvious negligence within the meaning of Article of the Community Customs Code, account
         must be taken in particular of the complexity of the provisions non-compliance with which resulted in the customs debt being
         incurred, and the professional experience of, and care taken by, the trader. 
      
In that regard, first, there is no particular complexity where, as regards a trader who has applied for remission of duties
         in respect of import transactions which were subsequent to the entry into force of Regulation No 1196/concerning the classification
         of certain goods in the combined nomenclature, the publication of that regulation had put an end to any possible legislative
         complexity relating to the classification of rice paper created by the absence of certain words in the wording of the Dutch
         version of subheading of the combined nomenclature. Although the wording of the Dutch version of that subheading
         may have appeared less precise than that of other language versions, the fact remains that that classification regulation,
         which is directly applicable and binding in its entirety, explicitly and unequivocally describes the goods that have to be
         classified under that subheading and the goods imported by the trader in question correspond thereto.
      
Secondly, as regards professional experience, an operator who uses the services of a customs agent cannot avoid post-clearance
         recovery of customs duties by relying on his inexperience with regard to customs formalities. Operators might in some cases
         be able to circumvent the condition relating to professional experience by using the services of customs specialists as a
         matter of course and thus it would be operators carrying out their customs operations on their own who would be placed at
         a disadvantage with regard to the procedure set out in Article of the Community Customs Code. It follows that, in so far
         as the agent acts in the name of and on behalf of the importer, information concerning possible negligence on the part of
         the agent, including the level of its professional experience, has to be taken into account for the purposes of assessing
         the negligence of that importer.
      
Thirdly, as regards the care taken by the trader, it must be pointed out that a careful operator, who has acquainted himself
         with a classification regulation published in the Official Journal of the European Communities, cannot simply continue to import his goods under a combined nomenclature heading on the sole ground that that classification
         has been accepted by those authorities. To allow such negligence would be tantamount to encouraging operators to benefit from
         the errors of their customs authorities. Furthermore, the error on the part of the customs authorities, which had already
         been taken into account in the present case in the examination as to whether a special situation existed, cannot, as a rule,
         release an operator from the consequences of its own negligence.
      
(see paras 40, 42-43, 46, 53-54, 64-65)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
November (*)
      
(Appeal – Remission of import duties – Commission decision – Article of the Customs Code – Existence of a special situation – Absence of deception – Obvious negligence on the part of the importer)
In Case C‑38/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, brought on January 2007,
Heuschen & Schrouff Oriëntal Foods Trading BV, represented by H. de Bie, advocaat,
      
appellant,
the other party to the proceedings being:
Commission of the European Communities, represented by X. Lewis, acting as Agent, assisted by F. Tuytschaever, advocaat, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, J.‑C. Bonichot, J. Makarczyk, P. Kūris, and C. Toader (Rapporteur),
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: C. Strömholm, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on May 2008,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2008,
gives the following
Judgment
By its appeal, Heuschen & Schrouff Oriëntal Foods Trading BV (‘H & S’) seeks to have set aside the judgment of the Court of
         First Instance of the European Communities of November in Case T-382/Heuschen & Schrouff Oriëntal Foods v Commission (‘the judgment under appeal’), which dismissed its action for annulment of Commission Decision REM 19/of June finding that remission of import duties was not justified in a particular case (‘the contested decision’).
      
 Legal context
 Legislation relating to the tariff classification of rice paper
Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/of July on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff
         (OJ L 256, p. 1) established a complete nomenclature of goods being imported and exported in the European Community (‘the
         CN’). That nomenclature is set out in Annex I to Regulation No 2658/87.
      
Subheadings and of the CN, in the version resulting from Commission Regulation (EC) No 1624/of August amending Annex I to Regulation No 2658/(OJ L 224, p. 16), were potentially applicable in the present case.
      
Headings and of the CN and the corresponding subheadings are as follows:
      
‘Malt extract; food preparations of flour, meal, starch or malt extract, not containing cocoa …, not elsewhere specified or
                  included; food preparations of goods of headings Nos to 0404, not containing cocoa …, not elsewhere specified or included:
               
…
– – – Other:
…
Bread, pastry, cakes, biscuits and other bakers’ wares, whether or not containing cocoa; communion wafers, empty cachets of
                  a kind suitable for pharmaceutical use, sealing wafers, rice paper and similar products:
               
…
– Other:
…
– – Communion wafers, empty cachets of a kind suitable for pharmaceutical use, sealing wafers, rice paper and similar products.’
The Dutch version of the CN describes heading and the corresponding subheadings as follows:
      
‘Brood, gebak, biscuits en andere bakkerswaren, ook indien deze producten cacao bevatten; ouwel in bladen, hosties, ouwels
                  voor geneesmiddelen, plakouwels en dergelijke producten van meel of van zetmeel:
               
…
 
 
 
 
– andere:
…
 
 
 
 
– – ouwel in bladen, hosties, ouwels voor geneesmiddelen, plakouwels en dergelijke producten, van meel of van zetmeel.’
In order to ensure uniform application of the CN within the Community, the Commission of the European Communities may, under
         the first indent of Article 9(1)(a) of Regulation No 2658/87, adopt regulations for the classification of specific goods in
         the CN.
      
According to the Annex to Commission Regulation (EC) No 1196/of June concerning the classification of certain goods
         in the combined nomenclature (OJ L 170, p. 13) (‘the Classification Regulation’), ‘Food preparation[s], in the form of
         dry, translucent sheets of different sizes, made from rice flour, salt and water’ are covered by subheading of
         the CN. It is also stated in that annex that ‘[t]hese sheets are, after being soaked in water …, generally used to make the
         “wrappers” for spring rolls and similar products’.
      
 Legislation relating to the remission of import duties
Article of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/of October establishing the Community Customs Code (OJ L 302,
         p. 1), as amended by Regulation (EC) No 82/of the European Parliament and of the Council of December (OJ L
         17, p. 1), (‘the Customs Code’) provides:
      
‘1.      Under the conditions set out in Article 64(2) and subject to the provisions adopted within the framework of Article 243(2)(b),
         any person may appoint a representative in his dealings with the customs authorities to perform the acts and formalities laid
         down by customs rules.
      
2.      Such representation may be:
–        direct, in which case the representative shall act in the name of and on behalf of another person,
or
–        indirect, in which case the representative shall act in his own name but on behalf of another person.
…’
Article of the Customs Code provides:
      
‘1.      Import duties or export duties may be repaid or remitted in situations other than those referred to in Articles 236, and
         238:
      
–        to be determined in accordance with the procedure of the committee;
–        resulting from circumstances in which no deception or obvious negligence may be attributed to the person concerned. The situations
         in which this provision may be applied and the procedures to be followed to that end shall be defined in accordance with the
         committee procedure. Repayment or remission may be made subject to special conditions.
      
2.      Duties shall be repaid or remitted for the reasons set out in paragraph upon submission of an application to the appropriate
         customs office …’
      
 Facts of the dispute as set out in the judgment under appeal
H & S, established in the Netherlands, imports rice paper from Vietnam. For that purpose, it used the services of a customs
         agent, namely Switch Customs Brokers BV, which it designated as its direct representative within the terms of Article 5(2)
         of the Customs Code.
      
H & S declared the rice paper which it imported under subheading of the CN. By letter of March 1996, the Netherlands
         customs authorities (‘the customs authorities’) informed the appellant that the rice paper in question actually had to be
         classified under that subheading.
      
On June the Commission adopted the Classification Regulation, which was published in the Official Journal of the European Communities on June and entered into force on July 1997.
      
Notwithstanding the existence of that classification regulation, H & S continued to import rice paper under subheading of the CN and the customs authorities accepted a further declarations in six months (with documentary inspection
         and, in one case, physical inspection) under such a classification. On March 1998, however, the customs authorities informed
         the appellant that the goods in question should be classified, not under subheading of the CN, but under subheading
         of the CN. Later on the same day, the customs authorities nevertheless stated that a declaration classifying rice
         paper under subheading of the CN was correct. As from March 1998, the appellant imported the rice paper by classifying
         it under subheading of the CN.
      
By letter of November 2000, the customs authorities informed H & S that, in respect of the period from November to December 1998, they would be effecting post-clearance recovery of import duties in the total amount of NLG 399.(EUR 869.52) on the ground that H & S had, during that period, classified the goods in question incorrectly inasmuch as
         subheading of the CN was that which was in accordance with the Classification Regulation. After adjustment, that
         amount was finally fixed at NLG 518.40, corresponding to the declarations lodged with the incorrect classification under
         subheading of the CN during the period from November to February 1998.
      
Acceding to a request made by H & S to that end, the Kingdom of the Netherlands asked the Commission, on September 2002,
         to decide, under Article of the Customs Code, whether the remission of import duties for that company was justified.
      
On June 2004, the Commission adopted the contested decision. In that decision, it stated that there was a special situation
         within the meaning of Article of the Customs Code. However, it took the view that H & S had displayed obvious negligence
         because, although it was an experienced trader and the Classification Regulation had dispelled the legislative complexity
         which may have existed previously, it had taken no steps to inform itself as to the correctness of the customs authorities’
         practice, which was manifestly contrary to that regulation.
      
 Procedure before the Court of First Instance and the judgment under appeal
By application lodged at the Registry of the Court of First Instance on September 2004, H & S brought an action against
         the contested decision claiming, first, that that decision should be annulled in so far as it stated that the application
         for remission of duties was not justified and, secondly, that the Commission should be ordered to pay the costs. The Commission
         contended that the action should be dismissed and that the appellant should be ordered to pay the costs.
      
In support of its action, H & S relied on three pleas alleging, first, infringement of Article of the Customs Code, an
         incorrect assessment of the facts and failure to state reasons for the decision, secondly, infringement of the principles
         of sound administration and equal treatment and, thirdly, infringement of the principle of proportionality. 
      
By the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance dismissed H & S’s action.
      
By its first plea, H & S maintained, inter alia, that the legislation was complex on account of the fact that, unlike other
         language versions, the Dutch version of the CN did not contain an express reference to ‘dried sheets of flour paste’, with
         the result that, like the customs authorities which had, in the past, stated that those goods had to be classified under subheading
         of the CN, it could in good faith take the view that the rice sheets were covered by that subheading. Furthermore,
         H & S submitted that the Classification Regulation was contrary to the Dutch version of the CN and could not therefore be
         relied on against H & S.
      
H & S also claimed that it was not an experienced importer and that the professional experience of its customs agent could
         not be attributed to it. In that regard, it maintained that possible negligence on the part of that customs agent, which had
         not acquainted itself with the Classification Regulation published in the Official Journal of the European Communities, could not be taken into account for the purpose of finding that there had been obvious negligence on the part of H & S.
         
      
In that regard, after having first pointed out, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the case related exclusively
         to the question whether the Commission could reasonably have concluded that there had been obvious negligence on the part
         of H & S, the Court of First Instance ruled, in paragraph of that judgment that, according to the case-law stemming from
         Case C-48/Söhl & Söhlke [1999] ECR I‑7877, paragraph 56, for the purposes of determining whether or not there was obvious negligence, account had
         to be taken in particular of the complexity of the provisions non-compliance with which had resulted in the customs debt being
         incurred, and the professional experience of, and care taken by, the trader.
      
Secondly, the Court of First Instance found, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the publication of the Classification
         Regulation had put an end to any possible legislative complexity created by the absence of certain words in the Dutch version
         of the wording of subheading of the CN. In paragraph of that judgment, it held that the matters relating to
         the possible negligence of the customs agent, including its professional experience, had to be attributed to H & S. Lastly,
         in paragraph of that judgment, the Court of First Instance pointed out that, where doubts exist as to the correct application
         of the provisions non-compliance with which may result in a customs debt being incurred, the onus is on the trader to make
         inquiries and to seek all possible clarification in order to ensure that he does not infringe those provisions.
      
The Court of First Instance then concluded, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that, by not asking the customs
         authorities for information about the reasons for the discrepancy between its classification practice and the provisions of
         the Classification Regulation, H & S and its customs agent had failed to display the care required by Article of the Customs
         Code.
      
In those circumstances, the Court of First Instance found, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that H & S had not
         established that the Commission had infringed Article of the Customs Code, incorrectly assessed the facts or failed to
         state reasons for the contested decision. The Court of First Instance accordingly rejected the first plea.
      
By its second plea, H & S complained inter alia that the Commission had been overly strict, contrary to the principle of sound
         administration, in leaving out of account the errors of the customs authorities in its assessment of the care taken by the
         importer.
      
In that regard, the Court of First Instance took the view, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the negligence
         on the part of the customs authorities had already been taken into account when it assessed whether a special situation existed,
         but that it could not, however, release H & S from the consequences of its own negligence.
      
As regards the third plea, the Court of First Instance found, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that where the
         conditions for applying Article of the Customs Code are not satisfied, a refusal to remit duties does not constitute infringement
         of the principle of proportionality.
      
 The appeal
By its appeal, H & S claims that the Court should set aside the judgment under appeal, annul the contested decision and order
         the Commission to pay the costs.
      
The Commission contends that the Court should dismiss the appeal as unfounded and order H & S to pay the costs.
      
H & S relies, in essence, on a single ground of appeal alleging that the Court of First Instance infringed Article of
         the Customs Code in its assessment of the condition relating to lack of obvious negligence on the part of the trader. That
         ground of appeal is divided into three parts corresponding to the three criteria derived from case-law in connection with
         such an assessment, namely the complexity of the legislation, the professional experience of the importer and the care taken
         by him.
      
The Commission submits that the Court of First Instance was correct in its application of Article of the Customs Code.
         Furthermore, although it maintains that it does not intend to raise an objection of inadmissibility, it states that H & S
         repeats, at times literally, the arguments which it submitted before the Court of First Instance.
      
 Admissibility
According to settled case-law, it follows from Article EC, the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court
         of Justice and Article 112(1)(c) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice that an appeal must indicate precisely
         the contested elements of the judgment which the appellant seeks to have set aside and also the legal arguments specifically
         advanced in support of the appeal (Case C‑499/P Biegi Nahrungsmittel and Commonfood v Commission [2005] ECR I‑1751, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
An appeal which merely repeats or reproduces verbatim the pleas in law and arguments previously submitted to the Court of
         First Instance does not satisfy the requirements to state reasons under those provisions (see, to that effect, Biegi Nahrungsmittel and Commonfood v Commission, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
However, provided that the appellant challenges the interpretation or application of Community law by the Court of First Instance,
         the points of law examined at first instance may be discussed again in the course of an appeal. Indeed, if an appellant could
         not thus base his appeal on pleas in law and arguments already relied on before the Court of First Instance, an appeal would
         be deprived of part of its purpose (Biegi Nahrungsmittel and Commonfood v Commission, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
In the present case, it must be stated that, although the appellant relies on arguments which it has already submitted in
         support of its action for annulment before the Court of First Instance, it none the less challenges the latter’s interpretation
         of the criteria which must be met in order to satisfy the condition relating to absence of obvious negligence on the part
         of the importer, as provided for in Article of the Customs Code.
      
In those circumstances it is necessary to examine the present appeal.
      
 The first part: the complexity of the legislation
 Arguments of the parties
According to H & S, it has still not been established that rice paper must be classified under subheading of the
         CN, as is borne out by the fact that the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden (Supreme Court of the Netherlands) has made a reference
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling, which has been registered as Case C-375/07. That tends to reinforce the appellant’s
         view that the legislation is complex, in particular on account of the drafting inadequacies of the Dutch version of the CN
         and the customs authorities’ persistence in accepting an allegedly incorrect classification. Furthermore, the appellant takes
         the view that, contrary to what was held by the Court of First Instance, the Classification Regulation could not dispel the
         ambiguity relating to the classification of the goods at issue because the classification effected by that regulation is contrary
         to the CN and to the case-law of the Court in Case C-12/Uelzena Milchwerke [1995] ECR I‑2397.
      
According to the Commission, the applicable legislation is not complex and, in any event, the Classification Regulation, the
         application of which is at issue in the present case, clarified the rules in force. In actual fact, H & S’s arguments are
         focused on the issue of the complexity of the classification of rice paper. Such a line of argument, however, relates not
         to the procedure for the remission of duties, but to whether there is a customs debt or not, that is to say, to the action
         brought by H & S before the national courts challenging the classification by the customs authorities of those goods under
         subheading of the CN.
      
 Findings of the Court
In order to assess whether there is obvious negligence within the meaning of Article of the Customs Code, account must
         be taken in particular of the complexity of the provisions non-compliance with which resulted in the customs debt being incurred,
         and the professional experience of, and care taken by, the trader (Case C-443/P Common Market Fertilizers v Commission [2007] ECR I‑7209, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
In that regard, there is strong evidence that the problem to be resolved is a complex one where, in view of the differences
         of opinion between the various Member States as regards the tariff classification of a product, it has been necessary to adopt
         a regulation which clarifies conclusively the tariff heading under which the product should be classified (see Case C-250/Hewlett Packard France [1993] ECR I‑1819, paragraph 23). 
      
However, in the present case, it must be held that the remission of duties applied for by H & S related to import transactions
         which were specifically subsequent to the entry into force of the Classification Regulation. Although it is true that, as
         regards the classification of the goods in question, the wording of the Dutch version of subheading of the CN may
         have appeared less precise than that of other language versions, the fact remains that that classification regulation, which
         is directly applicable and binding in its entirety, explicitly and unequivocally describes the goods that have to be classified
         under that subheading and the goods imported by the appellant correspond thereto (see, to that effect, Case C-375/Heuschen & Schrouff Oriëntal Foods Trading [2008] ECR I-0000, paragraph 52).
      
It follows that the Court of First Instance did not err in law when it found, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal,
         that the publication of the Classification Regulation had put an end to any possible legislative complexity created by the
         absence of certain words in the wording of the Dutch version of heading of the CN and, more specifically, of subheading
         20.
      
Furthermore, that finding cannot be called into question by the fact that the Court took the view, in paragraph of the
         judgment in Case C‑64/Deutsche Fernsprecher [1990] ECR I-2535, that in a case such as that there in issue, in which the trader had twice received confirmation that the
         erroneous view upon which the customs treatment was based was correct, the repetition of the error by the customs authority
         was evidence that the problem to be resolved was a complex one.
      
In the case which gave rise to the judgment in Deutsche Fernsprecher, as is stated in paragraph thereof, the applicant, doubting whether an exemption from customs duty which it had received
         was valid, asked the customs office to re-examine its case and then received confirmation from the director of that customs
         office of the exemption from customs duty. In the present case, it is common ground that H & S, after questioning the customs
         authorities on their practice, did not obtain any such confirmation at variance with the content of the Classification Regulation.
         H & S merely continued to make customs declarations, which were accepted until those authorities became aware that the classification
         was incorrect.
      
It follows from the foregoing, as the Court of First Instance found in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the
         tariff legislation at issue, in the Dutch version applicable to the facts of the case, was not particularly complex.
      
Consequently, the first part of the ground of appeal must be rejected.
      
 The second part: the professional experience of the importer
 Arguments of the parties
H & S submits that the Court of First Instance erred when it found that the professional experience of its customs agent should
         be attributed to it. It states, first, that it deals only with production and trade and thus in no way specialises in import
         transactions. Secondly, it argues, the interpretation of the Court of First Instance is contrary to the intention of the legislature
         inasmuch as an undertaking directly represented by an agent is thus less likely to receive remission of duties than a company
         which makes its own customs declarations.
      
According to the Commission, the Court of First Instance was right to find that the professional experience of the customs
         agent should be attributed to the importing undertaking because, where there is direct representation, the declaration is
         made by the agent in the name of and on behalf of the importer. Furthermore, the Court of First Instance in any event found
         that the appellant was an experienced importer.
      
 Findings of the Court
In order to assess the professional experience of an importer, which is taken into account with regard to the condition relating
         to the absence of obvious negligence within the meaning of Article of the Customs Code, it is necessary to examine whether
         or not the operator is a trader whose business activities consist mainly in import and export transactions and whether he
         had already gained some experience in the conduct of such transactions (Söhl & Söhlke, paragraph 57, and Common Market Fertilizers v Commission, paragraph 188).
      
However, Article 5(2) of the Customs Code makes provision for representation of an operator. Thus, representation of an operator
         for the performance of the acts and formalities laid down in the customs rules may be either direct, where the representative
         acts in the operator’s name and on his behalf, or indirect, where the representative acts in his own name but on behalf of
         another person (Common Market Fertilizers v Commission, paragraph 184).
      
In that regard, the Court has stated that an operator who uses a customs agent, whether for direct or indirect representation,
         is in any event the debtor in respect of the customs debt as far as the customs authorities are concerned and that he cannot
         avoid liability by relying on mistakes made by that agent (see Common Market Fertilizers v Commission, paragraphs and 187).
      
In the same way, an operator who uses the services of a customs agent cannot avoid post-clearance recovery of customs duties
         by relying on his inexperience with regard to customs formalities. Operators might in some cases be able to circumvent the
         condition relating to professional experience by using the services of customs specialists as a matter of course and thus,
         contrary to what H & S submits, it would be operators carrying out their customs operations on their own who would be placed
         at a disadvantage with regard to the procedure set out in Article of the Customs Code. Furthermore, as the appellant itself
         admits in paragraph of its appeal, an operator who is represented unquestionably benefits from the professional experience
         of his customs agent.
      
It follows that the Court of First Instance did not err in law in finding, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that,
         in so far as the agent acted in the name of and on behalf of the importer, the information concerning possible negligence
         on the part of the agent, including the level of its professional experience, had to be taken into account for the purposes
         of assessing the negligence of that importer.
      
With regard to the appellant’s argument seeking to call into question the Court of First Instance’s finding, in paragraph
         of the judgment under appeal, that the appellant itself had some experience in importing, it must be borne in mind that
         an appraisal of facts does not, save where the clear sense of the evidence before the Court of First Instance has been distorted,
         constitute a point of law which is subject, as such, to review by the Court of Justice on appeal (see Biegi Nahrungsmittel and Commonfood v Commission, paragraph 40).
      
That argument must accordingly be rejected as inadmissible.
      
Having regard to the foregoing, the second part of the ground of appeal must also be rejected.
      
 The third part: the care taken by the importer
 Arguments of the parties
H & S submits that the Court of First Instance infringed Article of the Customs Code by requiring that the care taken
         by an importer should extend to disputing the tariff classification applied by its customs authorities. In the present case,
         that company saw no reason to proceed in this way since, first, the classification of ‘unbaked’ goods under subheading appeared to it to comply with the CN and, secondly, the Classification Regulation could relate only to ‘baked’ goods.
         Furthermore, the appellant takes the view that operators cannot be required to acquaint themselves with the applicable provisions
         in the different language versions published in the Official Journal of the European Communities. In continuing to make its customs declarations under subheading – declarations which were accepted by the customs
         authorities – it therefore acted with the necessary care. Furthermore, if there was any negligence, such negligence would
         have been committed by its customs agent and could not be attributed to H & S. Lastly, H & S submits that, even if it had
         been negligent, such negligence would have been minimal when compared with the negligence of the customs authorities.
      
The Commission maintains that the Court of First Instance did not err in law in its application of the criterion relating
         to the care to be taken by the importer. It points out that, according to the case-law, where doubts exist as to the correct
         application of the provisions non-compliance with which may result in a customs debt being incurred, the onus is on the trader
         to make inquiries and to seek all possible clarification in order to ensure that he does not infringe those provisions. It
         is common ground that neither H & S nor its customs agent acquainted itself with the Classification Regulation published in
         the Official Journal of the European Communities, which in itself constitutes negligence. A fortiori, they were unable to question the customs authorities as to the tariff heading which should have been used in order to apply
         the CN correctly.
      
 Findings of the Court
It must be borne in mind at the outset that repayment or remission of import and export duties, which may be made only under
         certain conditions and in cases specifically provided for, constitutes an exception to the normal import and export procedure
         and, consequently, the provisions which provide for such repayment or remission must be interpreted strictly. Since a lack
         of ‘obvious negligence’ is an essential condition of being able to claim repayment or remission of import or export duties,
         it follows that that term must be interpreted in such a way that the number of cases of repayment or remission remains limited
         (Söhl & Söhlke, paragraph 52).
      
It is mandatory that the Community provisions applicable to customs tariffs be published in the Official Journal of the European Communities. As from their date of publication, they constitute the sole relevant positive law and everyone is deemed to be aware of
         that law (see Case 161/Binder [1989] ECR 2415, paragraph 19).
      
As was stated in paragraph of this judgment, the Classification Regulation, including the Dutch version thereof, which
         was duly published in the Official Journal of the European Communities, and which was consequently directly applicable and binding in its entirety, explicitly and unequivocally describes the goods
         that have to be classified under subheading and the goods imported by H & S correspond thereto.
      
It follows that the appellant cannot claim that it could, in good faith, take the view that that regulation did not concern
         the goods that it imported, in this case unbaked goods.
      
As regards the errors on the part of the customs authorities, which reinforced the appellant in its choice of subheading of the CN for its import transactions, it must be pointed out that a careful operator, who has acquainted himself with
         a classification regulation published in the Official Journal of the European Communities such as that at issue in the present case, cannot simply continue to import his goods under a CN heading on the sole ground
         that that classification has been accepted by those authorities. To allow such negligence would be tantamount to encouraging
         operators to benefit from the errors of their customs authorities.
      
Furthermore, as the Court of First Instance correctly stated in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the error on the
         part of the customs authorities, which had already been taken into account in the present case in the examination as to whether
         a special situation existed, cannot, as a rule, release an operator from the consequences of its own negligence.
      
In any event, it must be pointed out that, in circumstances such as those of the appellant, an operator retains the possibility
         of challenging the existence of the customs debt, if necessary by claiming that the classification regulation is unlawful,
         as indeed H & S proceeded to do before the national court, which made a reference to the Court of Justice for a preliminary
         ruling, that case giving rise to the judgment in Case C‑375/Heuschen & Schrouff Oriëntal Foods Trading. 
      
Having regard to what was stated in paragraph of this judgment, H & S’s line of argument seeking to dispute the possibility
         of having the negligence of its customs agent attributed to it cannot succeed.
      
It follows that the third part of the ground of appeal must also be rejected.
      
As all three parts of the single ground of appeal relied on by H & S have been rejected, the appeal must be dismissed.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, which applies to appeal proceedings pursuant to Article of those rules,
         the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings.
         As the Commission has applied for costs to be awarded against H & S and the latter has been unsuccessful, H & S must be ordered
         to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
1.      Dismisses the appeal;
2.      Orders Heuschen & Schrouff Oriëntal Foods Trading BV to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Dutch.
      
Top  
 