
Case C-520/Proceedings brought by
Pirkko Marjatta Turpeinen
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Korkein hallinto-oikeus)
(Freedom of movement for persons – Income tax – Retirement pension – Higher rate of tax for retired persons residing in another Member State)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Freedom of movement for persons – Workers – Provisions of the Treaty – Scope ratione personae 
(Art. EC)
2.        Citizens of the European Union – Right of free movement and freedom of residence in the territory of the Member States – Tax
            legislation
(Art. EC)
1.        Persons who have carried out all their occupational activity in the Member State of which they are nationals and who have
         exercised the right to reside in another Member State only after their retirement, without any intention of working in that
         State, cannot rely on the freedom of movement guaranteed by Article EC.
      
(see para. 16)
2.        Article EC must be interpreted as precluding national legislation according to which the income tax on a retirement pension
         paid by an institution of the Member State concerned to a person residing in another Member State exceeds in certain cases
         the tax which would be payable if that person resided in the first Member State, where that pension constitutes all or nearly
         all of that person’s income.
      
National legislation which places some of its nationals at a disadvantage simply because they have exercised their freedom
         to move and to reside in another Member State gives rise to inequality of treatment, contrary to the principles which underpin
         the status of citizen of the Union, that is, the guarantee of the same treatment in law in the exercise of the citizen’s freedom
         to move.
      
It is true that, in relation to direct taxes, the situations of residents and of non-residents are not, as a rule, comparable.
         However, in so far as the retirement pension paid in a Member State constitutes all or almost all of their income, non-resident
         retired persons are, objectively speaking, in the same situation as regards income tax as retired persons resident in that
         State who receive the same retirement pension.
      
(see paras 22, 26, 31, 39, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
November (*)
      
(Freedom of movement for persons – Income tax – Retirement pension – Higher rate of tax for retired persons residing in another Member State)
In Case C-520/04,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC by the Korkein hallinto-oikeus (Finland), made by decision of December
         2004, received at the Court on December 2004, in the proceedings brought by
      
Pirkko Marjatta Turpeinen,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of P. Jann (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, K. Lenaerts, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, M. Ilešič and E. Levits, Judges,
Advocate General: P. Léger,
Registrar: H. von Holstein, Deputy Registrar,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on March 2006,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Ms Turpeinen, by K. Äimä, oikeustieteen lisensiaatti,
–        the Finnish Government, by T. Pynnä and E. Bygglin, acting as Agents,
–        the Spanish Government, by I. del Cuvillo Contreras and M. Muñoz Pérez, acting as Agents,
–        the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, and P. Gentili, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by M. Condou, G. Rozet and P. Aalto, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on May 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles EC and EC and of Council Directive 90/365/EEC
         of June on the right of residence for employees and self-employed persons who have ceased their occupational activity
         (OJ L 180, p. 28).
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings brought by Ms Turpeinen, a retired Finnish national, residing in Spain
         at the time relevant for the purposes of the main proceedings, concerning taxation in Finland of the retirement pension paid
         to her by a Finnish institution.
      
 The main proceedings and the legal background
Until Ms Turpeinen was domiciled in Finland and worked as a youth psychiatrist in the Finnish public service. In she took early retirement and moved to Belgium. In 1999, when she took her final retirement, she settled permanently in Spain.
      
Ms Turpeinen’s only income is a retirement pension paid to her by the Kuntien Eläkevakuutus (Local government pension insurance).
         By virtue of the double taxation agreement concluded between the Republic of Finland and the Kingdom of Spain, the retirement
         pension, paid on the basis of employment in the public sector, is taxable only in Finland.
      
Until 2001, Ms Turpeinen was subject to the tax regime for fully chargeable residents, a regime which covers all of the taxable
         person’s worldwide income. It provides for progressive taxation, according to which a tax rate of 28.5% was applicable to
         the income constituted by Ms Turpeinen’s retirement pension.
      
In 2002, the tax year relevant for the purposes of the main proceedings, the Uudenmaan verovirasto (Uusimaa Tax Office) informed
         Ms Turpeinen that thenceforth she was to be subject to the limited taxation regime, which covers only income from Finland
         and applies to Finnish nationals who have not been domiciled in Finland for three years consecutively, in accordance with
         Articles and of the Finnish Law on income tax (Tuloverolaki, Law No 1535/1992). Under that regime Ms Turpeinen’s retirement
         pension was subject to a withholding tax of 35% by virtue of Paragraphs 1(1), 2(1), 3(1) and of the Finnish Law on the taxation
         of income and property of limited taxpayers (Lähdeverolaki, Law No 627/1978).
      
Taking the view that she should be taxed as if she were generally taxable in Finland, that is to say progressively, Ms Turpeinen
         lodged a complaint against the decision of the Uusimaa Tax Office. She argued that within the European Union the treatment
         of an individual, where the author of the treatment is the same and all other factors except the place of residence remain
         unchanged, should remain the same. Since her complaint was unsuccessful, she brought an action to challenge that decision
         before the Helsingin hallinto-oikeus (Adminstrative Court, Helsinki).
      
When the latter dismissed her action, she appealed against that decision to the court which made the reference for a preliminary
         ruling.
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
The Korkein hallinto-oikeus (Supreme Administrative Court) decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following questions
         to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Is Article EC, on the right of a citizen of the Union to move and reside freely in the territory of the Member States,
         or Article EC, on ensuring the freedom of movement for workers within the Community, to be interpreted as meaning that
         one or both of them preclude(s) national legislation under which, in the case of a person who resides abroad and is a limited
         taxpayer in the Member State, the withholding tax charged on the taxpayer’s retirement pension based on a public-law service
         relationship paid from that Member State exceeds in certain cases the tax which the taxpayer would be charged as a person
         resident and hence a general taxpayer in the Member State?
      
2.      Is Council Directive [90/365] to be interpreted as precluding national legislation such as that described in Question above?’
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
By its questions the national court asks, essentially, whether Articles and EC and Directive 90/preclude national
         legislation, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, according to which the tax on a retirement pension paid in the
         Member State concerned to a person residing in another Member State exceeds, in certain cases, the tax which would be charged
         if that person resided in the first Member State.
      
It should be recalled from the outset that, while in the present state of Community law direct taxation falls within the competence
         of the Member States, the latter must none the less exercise that competence in accordance with Community law, in particular
         the provisions of the EC Treaty concerning the right of every citizen of the European Union to move and reside freely within
         the territory of the Member States (Case C-403/Schempp [2005] ECR I-6421, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
In those circumstances it is appropriate to verify, first of all, whether Articles EC and EC preclude national legislation
         such as that at issue in the main proceedings.
      
 Articles EC and EC
Article EC, which sets out generally the right of every citizen of the Union to move and reside freely within the territory
         of the Member States, finds specific expression in Article EC in relation to freedom of movement for workers (see Case
         C-100/Oteiza Olazabal [2002] ECR I-10981, paragraph 26). It is therefore necessary to ascertain first whether the main case falls within the scope
         of Article EC.
      
The Court has held on many occasions that the provisions of the EC Treaty relating to freedom of movement for persons are
         intended to facilitate the pursuit by Community nationals of occupational activities of all kinds throughout the Community,
         and preclude measures which might place Community nationals at a disadvantage when they wish to pursue an economic activity
         in the territory of another Member State (Case C-18/Terhoeve [1999] ECR I-345, paragraph 37; Case C-302/Sehrer [2000] ECR I-4585, paragraph 32; and Case C-109/Kranemann [2005] ECR I-2421, paragraph 25).
      
National provisions which preclude or deter a national of a Member State from leaving his country of origin in order to exercise
         his right to freedom of movement therefore constitute an obstacle to that freedom even if they apply without regard to the
         nationality of the workers concerned (Terhoeve, paragraph 39; Sehrer, paragraph 33; and Kranemann, paragraph 26).
      
However, as the Advocate General observed in point of his Opinion, persons who have carried out all their occupational
         activity in the Member State of which they are nationals and who have exercised the right to reside in another Member State
         only after their retirement, without any intention of working in that State, cannot rely on the freedom of movement guaranteed
         by Article EC. It appears that that is Ms Turpeinen’s situation, having regard to the facts in the main proceedings as
         set out in the order for reference.
      
Since the main case is not covered by Article EC, it is appropriate to rule on the applicability of Article EC.
      
According to settled case-law, the status of citizen of the Union is destined to be the fundamental status of nationals of
         the Member States, enabling those among such nationals who find themselves in the same situation to enjoy the same treatment
         in law irrespective of their nationality, subject to such exceptions as are expressly provided for in that regard (see, in
         particular, Case C-184/Grzelczyk [2001] ECR I-6193, paragraph 31, and Case C-224/Pusa [2004] ECR I-5763, paragraph 16).
      
Situations falling within the scope of Community law include those involving the exercise of the fundamental freedoms guaranteed
         by the Treaty, in particular those involving the freedom to move and reside within the territory of the Member States, as
         conferred by Article EC (see, in particular, Grzelczyk, paragraph 33, and Pusa, paragraph 17).
      
Inasmuch as a citizen of the Union must be granted in all Member States the same treatment in law as that accorded to nationals
         of those Member States who find themselves in the same situation, it would be incompatible with the right to freedom of movement
         were a citizen to receive in the Member State of which he is a national treatment less favourable than he would enjoy if he
         had not availed himself of the opportunities offered by the Treaty in relation to freedom of movement (see Case C-224/D’Hoop [2002] ECR I-6191, paragraph 30, and Pusa, paragraph 18). 
      
Those opportunities could not be fully effective if a national of a Member State could be deterred from availing himself of
         them by obstacles placed in the way of his stay in the host Member State by legislation in his State of origin penalising
         the fact that he has used them (Pusa, paragraph 19).
      
National legislation which places some of its nationals at a disadvantage simply because they have exercised their freedom
         to move and to reside in another Member State would give rise to inequality of treatment, contrary to the principles which
         underpin the status of citizen of the Union, that is, the guarantee of the same treatment in law in the exercise of the citizen’s
         freedom to move (Pusa, paragraph 20). 
      
Since Ms Turpeinen has exercised her rights to freedom of movement and residence conferred by Article 18(1) EC, she may rely
         on that provision as against her State of origin.
      
It is common ground that the Finnish legislation at issue in the main proceedings introduces in certain cases, as between
         Finnish nationals who continue to reside in Finland and those who have established their residence in another Member State,
         a difference in treatment unfavourable to the latter, resulting simply from their having exercised their right to freedom
         of movement.
      
In so far as the rate of progressive taxation applicable to retired residents, based on the gross amount of the retirement
         pension paid by the public body in Finland, is less than the withholding tax of 35% applicable to retired non-residents, retired
         persons who reside for three years consecutively in another Member State and receive the same pension must bear a greater
         tax burden. 
      
It is true that, in relation to direct taxes, the Court has accepted that the situations of residents and of non-residents
         are not, as a rule, comparable (Case C-279/Schumacker [1995] ECR I-225, paragraph 31).
      
Thus with regard to income tax the Court has held that the situation of a resident differs from that of a non-resident in
         so far as the major part of the resident’s income is normally concentrated in the State of residence. Moreover, that State
         generally has all the information needed to assess the taxpayer’s overall ability to pay tax, taking account of his personal
         and family circumstances (Schumacker, paragraph 33, and Case C-376/D [2005] ECR I-5821, paragraph 27).
      
However, the Court has also accepted that a non-resident taxpayer, whether employed or self-employed, who receives all or
         almost all of his income in the State where he works is objectively in the same situation so far as concerns income tax as
         a resident of that State who does the same work there. Both are taxed in that State alone and their taxable income is the
         same (Case C-80/Wielockx [1995] ECR I-2493, paragraph 20). 
      
That reasoning applies mutatis mutandis in a situation such as that in the main proceedings, where a retirement pension constitutes the taxable income.
      
As the Advocate General rightly pointed out in point of his Opinion, Finnish tax legislation provides that retirement pensions
         such as that paid to Ms Turpeinen are, in the case of resident taxpayers, taxed in the same way as any income deriving directly
         from an economic activity, on a progressive scale and with allowances to take into account the taxpayer’s ability to pay tax
         and his personal and family circumstances.
      
Consequently, it must be held that, in so far as the retirement pension paid in Finland constitutes all or almost all of their
         income, non-resident retired persons such as Ms Turpeinen are, objectively speaking, in the same situation as regards income
         tax as retired persons resident in Finland who receive the same retirement pension.
      
The difference of treatment resulting from rules such as those at issue in the main proceedings could be justified only if
         it were based on objective considerations proportionate to the legitimate aim of the national provisions (see, to that effect,
         Pusa, paragraph 20).
      
None of the arguments put forward by the Finnish Government before the Court in order to justify the difference of treatment
         at issue in the main proceedings can be accepted.
      
As the Advocate General observes in point of his Opinion, the objectives of simplification and transparency of the Finnish
         tax system for non-resident taxpayers could be achieved by measures less restrictive of the freedom of movement of citizens
         of the Union than a tax which could, in certain cases, prove to be higher than that applicable to resident taxpayers who receive
         the same income.
      
As for the alleged difficulties as regards collection of the definitive tax from non-resident taxpayers, the tax regime at
         issue in the main proceedings goes beyond what is necessary in order to guarantee effective tax collection.
      
In that connection, it should be recalled that Council Directive 77/799/EEC of December concerning mutual assistance
         by the competent authorities of the Member States in the field of direct taxation (OJ L 336, p. 15) enables a Member
         State to obtain from the competent authorities of another Member State all the information enabling it to determine the correct
         amount of income tax or all the information it considers necessary to ascertain the correct amount of income tax payable by
         a taxpayer according to the legislation which it applies (Case C‑422/Skandia and Ramstedt [2003] ECR I-6817, paragraph and the case‑law cited).
      
Moreover, according to Council Directive 76/308/EEC of March on mutual assistance for the recovery of claims relating
         to certain levies, duties, taxes and other measures (OJ L 73, p. 18), in the version resulting from Council Directive
         2001/44/EC of June (OJ L 175, p. 17), a Member State may request assistance from another Member State in relation
         to the recovery of income tax payable by a taxpayer resident in the latter Member State.
      
In any event, the Finnish Government confirmed at the hearing that the tax regime at issue has been altered with effect from
         January 2006, so that henceforth the retirement pension of a limited taxpayer is taxed in the same way as that of a person
         fully taxable in Finland, that is to say on the progressive scale, with the same tax allowances and according to the same
         tax declaration procedure. That approach is based, according to the Finnish Government, on practical considerations and on
         the political decision to reduce taxation for persons with a modest pension.
      
In the light of the foregoing considerations, the answer to the questions referred must be that Article EC must be interpreted
         as meaning that it precludes national legislation according to which the income tax on a retirement pension paid by an institution
         of the Member State concerned to a person residing in another Member State exceeds in certain cases the tax which would be
         payable if that person resided in the first Member State, where that pension constitutes all or nearly all of that person’s
         income.
      
In those circumstances there is no need to give a ruling on the interpretation of Directive 90/365.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable. 
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
Article EC must be interpreted as meaning that it precludes national legislation according to which the income tax on a
            retirement pension paid by an institution of the Member State concerned to a person residing in another Member State exceeds
            in certain cases the tax which would be payable if that person resided in the first Member State, where that pension constitutes
            all or nearly all of that person’s income.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Finnish.
      
Top  
 