
ORDER OF THE COURT (Seventh Chamber)
June (*)
      
(Appeal – Failure of the Commission to initiate proceedings for failure to fulfil obligations against Romania – Alleged violations of the right to property by Romanian authorities – Action for failure to act and for damages – Manifest inadmissibility)
In Case C‑570/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, brought on November 2012,
Alexandru Octavian Concal, residing in Bucharest (Romania), represented by R. Neagu, avocat,
      
appellant,
the other party to the proceedings being:
European Commission,
defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Seventh Chamber),
composed of G. Arestis, President of the Chamber, J.-C. Bonichot and J.L. da Cruz Vilaça (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: M. Wathelet,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to give a decision by reasoned order, in accordance with Article of
         the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice,
      
makes the following
Order
By his appeal, Mr Concal seeks to have set aside the order of the General Court of the European Union of September in Case T‑320/Concal v Commission (‘the order under appeal’), in which the General Court dismissed, as manifestly inadmissible, his action seeking, first,
         a declaration, in essence, that the European Commission had failed to act in not initiating the procedure for failure to fulfil
         obligations laid down in Article TFEU against Romania and, second, compensation for the damage allegedly suffered as a
         result of that failure.
      
 Procedure before the General Court and the order under appeal
By application lodged at the Registry of the General Court on July 2012, Mr Concal brought an action seeking, first, a
         declaration, in essence, that the European Commission had failed to act in not initiating the procedure for failure to fulfil
         obligations laid down in Article TFEU against Romania and, second, compensation for the damage allegedly suffered as a
         result of that failure.
      
By the order under appeal, the General Court, under Article of its Rules of Procedure, dismissed the action as manifestly
         inadmissible.
      
As regards, first, the action for failure to act, the General Court, referring to the judgment of the Court of Justice in
         Case 247/Star Fruit v Commission [1989] ECR 291, noted, at paragraph of the order under appeal, the settled case-law that an action for failure to act is
         inadmissible where it is brought by a natural or legal person for a declaration that, by not initiating an action for failure
         to fulfil obligations against a Member State, the Commission has, in breach of the FEU Treaty, failed to act.
      
The General Court stated, at paragraph of that order, that, in the context of an action for failure to fulfil obligations,
         the only measures which the Commission may adopt are measures addressed to Member States and that neither a reasoned opinion
         nor referral to the Court of Justice for a declaration of failure to fulfil obligations can constitute acts of direct and
         individual concern to natural or legal persons.
      
As regards, second, the action for damages, the General Court pointed out, at paragraph of the order under appeal, that,
         since the Commission is not bound to commence infringement proceedings under Article TFEU, its decision not to institute
         such proceedings is not, in any event, unlawful, so that it cannot give rise to non-contractual liability on the part of the
         European Union. The General Court referred, inter alia, to the order in Case C‑72/Asia Motor France v Commission [1990] ECR I‑2181, paragraph 13.
      
Consequently, the General Court held, at paragraph of the order under appeal, that the action for damages had to be dismissed
         as manifestly unfounded, without it being necessary to examine the admissibility thereof.
      
 The form of order sought by the appellant before the Court of Justice
By his appeal, Mr Concal seeks ‘the review of the admissibility on the following grounds:
      
–        The [General] Court ... totally ignored and avoided to judge the counts of [his] action. It is a case of denial of justice.
–        The [General] Court ... turned a blind eye to the real content of [his] action under pretext of higher interpretation.
–        It is plain the [General Court] covers up on infringement of the Treaties, by the [Union] which infringement has resulted
         in act of crime against humanity in continuing form, committed against millions of people.
      
–        It is no question of failing to act or not fulfilling obligations.
–        It is a provoking fact that the [General] Court, denies the Judging of Count nr.consisting in a huge property robbery (at
         least [billion] Euro the fruits of property included), collusively perpetrated by EU and Rumanians officials.’
      
 The appeal
Under Article of the Rules of Procedure, where an appeal is, in whole or in part, manifestly inadmissible or manifestly
         unfounded, the Court may at any time, acting on a report from the Judge-Rapporteur and after hearing the Advocate General,
         by reasoned order, and without opening the oral procedure, dismiss the appeal and, where appropriate, refrain from serving
         notice of the action on the defendant.
      
 Appellant’s arguments
In essence, the appellant asserts that the order under appeal is not well founded and that it is incorrect since the judges
         did not acquire a thorough knowledge of the case.
      
He also appears to dispute the General Court’s treatment of the affair as an action for failure to act in so far as, according
         to him, what is alleged are acts of crimes against humanity, in breach of Articles TEU and TEU, and not a failure to
         act.
      
 Findings of the Court
It must be stated that the appellant does not refer to any specific element of the order under appeal and does not rely on
         any plea in law or legal argument in support of his appeal.
      
In this respect, it should be noted that, according to settled case-law, it follows from Article TFEU, the first paragraph
         of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union and Article 168(1)(d) and Article of the Rules
         of Procedure of the Court of Justice that an appeal must state precisely the contested elements of the judgment or order which
         the appellant seeks to have set aside and also the legal arguments specifically advanced in support of the appeal, failing
         which the appeal is inadmissible (see, inter alia, Case C‑248/P France v Monsanto and Commission [2002] ECR I‑1, paragraph 68, and Case C‑67/P Nuova Agricast and Cofra v Commission [2010] ECR I‑9811, paragraph 48). An appeal which does not contain any arguments aimed at specifically identifying the error
         in law which the judgment or the order in question is vitiated by does not fulfil that requirement (see, inter alia, order
         of March in Case C‑465/P Simov v Commission and Bulgaria, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Furthermore, the arguments put forward in support of this appeal are difficult to understand and confusing, so that the Court
         is not in a position to carry out the task which is required of it and to carry out its review of legality (see, to that effect,
         Case C‑51/P Hercules Chemicals v Commission [1999] ECR I‑4235, paragraph 113, and Nuova Agricast and Cofra v Commission, paragraph 49).
      
In those circumstances, in accordance with Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, the appeal must
         be dismissed as manifestly inadmissible, without it being necessary to serve it on the defendant.
      
 Costs
Under Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, which applies to the procedure on appeal by virtue of
         Article 184(1) thereof, a decision as to costs is to be given in the order which closes the proceedings.
      
As the present order has been adopted prior to notification of the appeal to the defendant at first instance and, therefore,
         before the latter could have incurred costs, it is appropriate to decide that the appellant must bear his own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Seventh Chamber) hereby orders:
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
2.      Mr Alexandru Octavian Concal shall bear his own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 