
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-65/Commission of the European CommunitiesvItalian Republic
«(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 89/655/EEC – Incomplete transposition)»
Opinion of Advocate General Mischo delivered on September I - Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber), April I - Summary of the Judgment
Social policy – Protection of health and safety of workers – Directive 89/concerning the minimum safety and health requirements for the use of work equipment by workers at work – Transposition requiring the putting into effect of minimum required standards – Insufficiency of legislation limited to requiring the necessary adaptation of the safety regulations to progress(Council Directives 89/and 89/655)Directive 89/concerning the minimum safety and health requirements for the use of work equipment by workers at work (second
         individual Directive within the meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/on the introduction of measures to encourage
         improvements in the safety and health of workers at work), as amended by Directive 95/63, is not transposed with the necessary
         clarity and precision by national legislation which requires the necessary adaptation of the safety regulations to progress,
         in line with the approach taken by the directive, but without putting into effect its minimum requirements.see paras 45, 47, JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)April (1)
((Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 89/655/EEC – Incomplete transposition))
In Case C-65/01, 
            
 Commission of the European Communities,  represented by A. Aresu, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant, 
v
 Italian Republic,  represented by U. Leanza, acting as Agent, and D. Del Gaizo, avvocato dello Stato, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
defendant, 
APPLICATION for a declaration that, by failing to adopt the laws and regulations necessary to transpose into national law
            the minimum mandatory requirements and, therefore, by failing to guarantee the protection of workers, the Italian Republic
            has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 4(1) of, and the sixth sentence of paragraph 2.1, the second sentence of
            paragraph 2.2, the second to fourth sentences of paragraph 2.3, and the second to fifth indents of the second sentence of
            paragraph 2.of Annex I to, Council Directive 89/655/EEC of November concerning the minimum safety and health requirements
            for the use of work equipment by workers at work (second individual Directive within the meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive
            89/391/EEC) (OJ L 393, p. 13), as amended by Council Directive 95/63/EC of December (OJ L 335, p. 28),
            
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
composed of: J.-P. Puissochet, President of the Chamber, C. Gulmann, F. Macken, N. Colneric (Rapporteur), and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: J. Mischo, Registrar: R. Grass, 
            
having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2002, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
By application lodged at the Court Registry on February 2001, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action
         under Article EC for a declaration that, by failing to adopt the laws and regulations necessary to transpose into national
         law the minimum mandatory requirements and, therefore, by failing to guarantee the protection of workers, the Italian Republic
         has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 4(1) of, and the sixth sentence of paragraph 2.1, the second sentence of
         paragraph 2.2, the second to fourth sentences of paragraph 2.3, and the second to fifth indents of the second sentence of
         paragraph 2.of Annex I to, Council Directive 89/655/EEC of November concerning the minimum safety and health requirements
         for the use of work equipment by workers at work (second individual Directive within the meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive
         89/391/EEC) (OJ L 393, p. 13), as amended by Council Directive 95/63/EC of December (OJ L 335, p. 28), hereinafter
          
         Directive 89/655. 
         
Legal framework
Community legislation
         
            
Article 4(1)(a) and (b) of Directive 89/provides: Without prejudice to Article 3, the employer must obtain and/or use:
         
(a)
work equipment which, if provided to workers in the undertaking and/or establishment for the first time after December
         1992, complies with: ... 
         
(ii)
the minimum requirements laid down in Annex I, to the extent that no other Community directive is applicable or is so only
         partially; 
         
(b)
work equipment which, if already provided to workers in the undertaking and/or establishment by December 1992, complies
         with the minimum requirements laid down in Annex I no later than four years after that date.
         
            
The third subparagraph of paragraph 2.of Annex I to Directive 89/655, that is to say its fourth, fifth and sixth sentences,
         provides: If necessary, from the main control position, the operator must be able to ensure that no person is present in the danger
         zones.  If this is impossible, a safe system such as an audible and/or visible warning signal must be given automatically
         whenever the machinery is about to start.  An exposed worker must have the time and/or means quickly to avoid hazards caused
         by the starting and/or stopping of the work equipment.
         
            
Paragraph 2.of Annex I to Directive 89/is worded as follows: It must be possible to start work equipment only by deliberate action on a control provided for the purpose.The same shall apply:
         
─
to restart it after a stoppage for whatever reason, 
         
─
for the control of a significant change in the operating conditions (e.g. speed, pressure, etc.), 
         
unless such a restart or change does not subject exposed workers to any hazard.This requirement does not apply to restarting or a change in operating conditions as a result of the normal operating cycle
         of an automatic device.
         
            
Paragraph 2.of Annex I to that directive provides: All work equipment must be fitted with a control to stop it completely and safely.Each work station must be fitted with a control to stop some or all of the work equipment, depending on the type of hazard,
         so that the equipment is in a safe state.  The equipment's stop control must have priority over the start controls.  When
         the work equipment or the dangerous parts of it have stopped, the energy supply of the actuators concerned must be switched
         off.
         
            
With regard to the guards and protection devices for the moving parts of work equipment which present risks of mechanical
         contact which could cause accidents, the second to fifth indents of the second sentence of paragraph 2.of that annex provide:
         The guards and protection devices must:...
         
─
not give rise to any additional hazard, 
         
─
not be easily removed or rendered inoperative, 
         
─
be situated at sufficient distance from the danger zone,  
         
─
not restrict more than necessary the view of the operating cycle of the equipment, 
         
....
         Italian legislation
         
            
Article of the Italian Civil Code provides: The employer is required to take, within the operating framework of the undertaking, the measures which, having regard to
         the particular features of the work, to experience and to the state of technology, are necessary in order to protect workers
         against physical and mental harm.
         
            
Article 4(5) of Legislative Decree No of September implementing Directives 89/391/EEC, 89/654/EEC, 89/655/EEC,
         89/656/EEC, 90/269/EEC, 90/270/EEC, 90/394/EEC and 90/679/EEC concerning the improvement of the safety and health of workers
         at work (GURI No 265, of November 1994, general supplement No 141, p. 5), as amended by Legislative Decree No of March (GURI No 104, of May 1996, general supplement No 75, p. 5), hereinafter  
         Legislative Decree No 626/94, provides: Employers, managers and personnel who carry out, direct or supervise the activities referred to in Article [namely,  
         all private and public sectors of activity save the exceptions provided for], in the context of their respective powers and spheres of competence, shall take the necessary
         measures to secure the safety and health of workers, and in particular, ...
         
(b)
shall take the preventive measures necessary on the basis of the changes in organisation and production which are of importance
         for the purposes of workers' health and the safety of the work, that is to say, on the basis of current development in technology,
         prevention and protection.
         
            
Articles 43, 44, 48, 49, 69, 71, 77, 80, 133, 157, 165, 209, and of Decree No of the President of the Republic
         of April (GURI No 158, of July 1955, general supplement, p. 3), as amended by Legislative Decrees Nos 626/94, in
         its version of September 1994, and 242/of March (hereinafter  
         DPR No 547/55) provide: Article 43Mechanisms which transform a rotary movement into a reciprocating movement or  
          vice versa  such as slides, crank arms, eccentric gears, cranks and others, must be appropriately guarded.Guards on frames for the cutting of stones, marble and the like may be dispensed with, unless there are particular dangers,
         where the moving parts are inaccessible or the engine power does not exceed one horsepower or the speed revolutions per
         minute.Article 44Parts of trees projecting from a machine or its supports by more than a quarter of their diameter must be cut back to that
         size or protected by means of a guard fixed to an immobile part....Article 48Manual cleaning, oiling or greasing of parts of a machine that are in motion are prohibited, unless this is necessary because
         of particular technical requirements, in which case appropriate methods must be used to avoid any danger.The prohibition laid down by this article must be brought to the attention of workers by clearly visible notices.Article 49It is prohibited to carry out any repair or adjustment to parts while they are in motion.If it is necessary to carry out such operations when the machine is in motion, appropriate precautions must be taken to ensure
         the safety of the worker.The prohibition laid down in paragraph must be brought to the attention of workers by clearly visible notices....Article 69If, for actual technical or operational reasons, it is impossible to protect or isolate effectively the moving parts or the
         danger zones of the machines, other measures must be taken to eliminate or reduce the danger, such as recourse to appropriate
         tools, automatic feeders, additional devices for stopping the machine and starting mechanisms with multiple simultaneous controls....Article 71In the cases provided for in Articles and 70, if any person is at risk of being caught, dragged or crushed by unprotected
         or incompletely protected work equipment and if that equipment has considerable inertial force, the stop mechanism of the
         machine must not only be provided with a control within the immediate reach of the hands or other parts of the worker's body,
         but it must also include an effective braking system enabling the machine to be stopped in the shortest possible time. ......Article 77The starting controls of the machines must be arranged in such a way as to avoid accidental starting or engagement or be equipped
         with appropriate devices to fulfil the same function....Article 80Every starting of complex machinery, which is operated by several workers positioned at various places and not perfectly visible
         by the person whose task it is to set the machinery in motion, shall be preceded by an agreed acoustic signal....Article 133Rolling mills and presses which, by reason of their dimensions, power, velocity or other working conditions, present particularly
         serious specific dangers, such as rolling mills (mixers) for rubber, presses for rubber strips and the like, must be equipped
         with a control enabling the immediate halting of the rollers.  The control system must be designed and arranged so that the
         machine can be stopped by being pressed simply and lightly by any part of the worker's body should his hands be caught in
         the moving rollers.Apart from the braking system, the stop mechanism referred to in the previous paragraph must also include a system enabling
         the simultaneous reversing of the movement of the rollers before their final stop....Article 157The reels of wire-drawing machines must be equipped with a device, which can be activated directly by the worker, enabling
         the machines to be stopped immediately in case of necessity....Article 165Platen printing presses and similar machines which are not provided with automatic feeders must be equipped with a device
         enabling the machine to be stopped automatically by a single blow of the worker's hand, should he be in danger between the
         fixed bed and the moving plate, or they must be equipped with another appropriate safety device of proven effectiveness....Article 209A rapid halting system must be provided at each loading and unloading position on vertical hoists with moving surfaces....Article 220Inclined surfaces must be equipped with a safety device which can bring about the rapid halting of the wagons or trains should
         the traction systems break or slacken, if that proves to be necessary because of the length and gradient of the run, the operating
         speed or other particular features of the installation, and in any event if they are used, even sporadically, for the transport
         of persons.If it is not possible, for technical reasons relating to the particular features of the installation or its operation, to
         use the device referred to in paragraph 1, the systems of traction and wagon-coupling must present a safety coefficient of
         at least eight: in such a situation, the use of inclined surfaces for the transport of persons is prohibited.In any event, the traction and coupling systems, like the safety devices, must be checked monthly....Article 374...Plant, machinery, equipment, tools and instruments, including protection equipment, must have the qualities of resistance
         and suitability demanded by the requirements of work safety and must be maintained in a good state of repair and efficiency.
          When maintenance manuals are supplied with the equipment referred to in paragraph 2, they must be kept up to date.
         Pre-litigation procedure
            
Taking the view that Directive 89/had not been completely transposed into Italian law within the prescribed period, the
         Commission initiated the procedure for infringement.  After giving the Italian Republic formal notice to submit its observations,
         in particular concerning the minimum requirements of Annex I to that directive, the Commission, on August 1999, issued a
         reasoned opinion requesting that Member State to adopt the measures necessary to comply therewith within a period of two months
         from the date of its notification. 
         
            
The Italian Republic refrained from replying to that opinion.  Since the Commission's consideration of the legislation forwarded
         by the Italian authorities at the start of the pre-litigation procedure did not lead it to conclude that Directive 89/had been transposed satisfactorily, it decided to bring this action. 
         The action
            
The Commission, after becoming aware of the observations of the Italian Republic in its defence, withdrew its complaint concerning
         the second sentence of paragraph 2.of Annex I to Directive 89/655. 
         The failure to transpose the sixth sentence of paragraph 2.of Annex I to Directive 89/Arguments of the parties
         
            
The Italian Government claims to have transposed the sixth sentence of paragraph 2.of Annex I to Directive 89/by Article
         of DPR No 547/55. 
         
            
According to the Italian Government, the Commission fails to have regard to the connection, in paragraph 2.of the Annex
         to Directive 89/655, between the three sentences which form the third subparagraph of that provision.  The sentence with regard
         to which the infringement is alleged by the Commission, namely the sixth sentence of that paragraph, is an extension of the
         two previous ones ─ because it was incorporated as the third and last sentence of that subparagraph ─ and, therefore, its
         function is to specify the sense and purpose of the warning required by the second sentence of that subparagraph. 
         
            
Article of DPR No 547/concerns machinery at which several workers are positioned (exposed persons) who are not perfectly
         visible to the operator responsible for setting the machinery in motion.  According to the Italian Government, it is to such
         machinery that the third subparagraph of paragraph 2.of Annex I to Directive 89/refers when it speaks of equipment with
         a  
         main control position.  In so doing, it necessarily refers to equipment operated in such a way as to require several working and control positions,
         that is to say exactly the equipment envisaged by Article of DPR No 547/55. 
         
            
The Italian Government maintains that the warning required by that article is not a general warning but an  
         agreed acoustic signal.  It submits that such a signal alerts the exposed persons to the start of a process which, after a certain
         time ─ known to those concerned and appropriate to the nature of the possible dangers presented by the process ─ results in
         the effective setting in motion of work equipment.  Because of that awareness, those exposed to the attendant hazards can
         avoid them if the warnings are correctly effected. 
         
            
According to that government, reading the sixth sentence of paragraph 2.of Annex I to Directive 89/as detached from
         the fourth and fifth sentences of that paragraph is not permissible. 
         
            
The Commission claims that the Italian Government is relying on a manifestly mistaken premiss by assuming that the function
         of the requirement for a warning, with the non-transposition of which it is charged, is to  
         specify the sense and purpose of the warning signal required for the setting in motion of the machine in cases where the operator cannot be sure of the absence of anyone from
         the danger zones.  It is incorrect to assert that the sixth sentence of paragraph 2.of Annex I to Directive 89/is a
         sort of extension to the fourth and fifth sentences of that paragraph and constitutes no more than detailing of the content
         of those sentences.  On the contrary, according to the Commission, it is precisely that sixth sentence which, by enabling
         an exposed person quickly to avoid the hazard, fulfils the decisive role of the fundamental requirement to be mandatorily
         observed. 
         
            
The Commission argues that Article of DPR No 547/requires only the necessity of an  
         agreed acoustic signal.  It is thus a transposition not of the sixth sentence of paragraph 2.of Annex I to Directive 89/655, but of the fifth
         sentence thereof.  If that sixth sentence is not completely transposed, it would be easy to point to situations in which any
         warning signals relating to the starting or stopping of work equipment would not enable the exposed workers to move rapidly
         out of danger.  The requirement that such workers must be able to remove themselves rapidly from situations of risk is totally
         lacking in the Italian legislation.  It provides for the  
         agreed acoustic signal as the only obligation.  The Commission argues that such obligation is insufficient to fill the serious gap resulting from
         the lack of a general requirement concerning the practical possibility for those concerned to withdraw themselves promptly
         from dangerous situations. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
It should be borne in mind that, according to settled case-law, in relation to the transposition of a directive into the legal
         order of a Member State, it is essential for national law to guarantee that the national authorities will effectively apply
         the directive in full, that the legal position under national law should be sufficiently precise and clear and that individuals
         are made fully aware of their rights and, where appropriate, may rely on them before the national courts (Case C-365/Commission  v  
          Greece  [1995] ECR I-499, paragraph 9, and Case C-144/Commission  v  
          Netherlands  [2001] ECR I-3541, paragraph 17). 
         
            
In the light of those considerations, it is necessary to consider whether the provisions of Italian law satisfy the requirements
         of Directive 89/655. 
         
            
In the terms of the minimum requirement laid down by the sixth sentence of paragraph 2.of Annex I to Directive 89/655, in
         danger zones,  
         [a]n exposed worker must have the time and/or the means quickly to avoid hazards caused by the starting and/or stopping of
         the work equipment.  That requirement is additional to the necessity, arising from the fifth sentence of the said paragraph 2.1, to require
         an  
         audible and/or visible warning signal. 
         
            
In this case, while the necessity for the setting in motion of complex machinery to be preceded by an  
         agreed acoustic signal, required by Article of DPR No 547/55, constitutes a transposition of the fifth sentence of paragraph 2.of Annex I to
         Directive 89/655, that provision does not, on the other hand, satisfy the requirements of the sixth sentence of that paragraph.
         
         
            
Consequently, it must be held that the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under the sixth sentence of paragraph
         2.of Annex I to Directive 89/655. 
         The failure to transpose the second sentence of paragraph 2.of Annex I to Directive 89/Arguments of the parties
         
            
The Italian Government claims to have transposed the second sentence of paragraph 2.of Annex I to Directive 89/by Article
         of DPR No 547/55. 
         
            
According to that government, that article requires, in essence, the existence both of a device on the machine (that is, a
         coordinated set of physical components designed to procure a certain result) to control its starting, consisting of a system
         (over which the operator must exercise physical control) which, for reasons to do with physical structure and positioning
         on the machine, must be such as not to cause accidental starting, and of a  
         logical starting system which  
         functionally prevents it from being set in motion unintentionally. 
         
            
The Italian Government submits that Article of DPR No 547/attains the objectives set out in the first sentence of paragraph
         2.of Annex I to Directive 89/655.  First, that national provision requires in negative terms (the avoidance of accidental
         starts) what the directive requires in positive terms (a deliberate action) and, second, it is an absolutely general provision,
         since it is not limited to the specific cases mentioned in the second sentence of paragraph 2.2. 
         
            
The Commission claims that Article of DPR No 547/refers, in extremely vague and general terms, to the positioning of
         the controls on the machines whereas Directive 89/lays down the requirement of a deliberate action to restart or to change
         the operating conditions of a machine.  The contents of the Italian and Community provisions are therefore different and inconsistent,
         the objective aimed at by the latter provision not being pursued with all the necessary efficacy by the former.  Referring
         to Case 363/Commission  v  
          Italy  [1987] ECR 1733, paragraph 7, the Commission submits that Article of DPR No 547/is too vague and general for the purpose
         of properly transposing the minimum level of protection prescribed by Directive 89/655.  Claiming to transpose a specific
         protection requirement, such as that set out in the second sentence of paragraph 2.of Annex I to that directive, by means
         of a general provision such as that appearing in Article of DPR No 547/55, does not appear to the Commission to be sufficient,
         since it risks seriously jeopardising the effective safety of the workers concerned.  In those circumstances, they would not
         be in a position to ascertain the full extent of their rights and rely on them before the competent courts. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
According to the minimum requirement laid down by the second sentence of paragraph 2.of Annex I to Directive 89/655, restarts
         after a stoppage, for whatever reason, and control of a significant change in the operating conditions (for example speed,
         pressure, etc.), must be possible only by deliberate action on a control provided for the purpose, unless such a restart or
         change does not subject exposed workers to any hazard. 
         
            
In this case, Article of DPR No 547/provides that the starting controls of the machines must be arranged in such a way
         as to avoid accidental starting or engagement or be equipped with appropriate devices to fulfil the same function. 
         
            
That general provision does not transpose, in a sufficiently precise and clear manner, the specific requirements laid down
         in the second sentence of paragraph 2.of Annex I to Directive 89/655.  In particular, it contains no reference to a significant
         change in the operating conditions of the machine. 
         
            
It must therefore be held that the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under the second sentence of paragraph
         2.of Annex I to Directive 89/655. 
         The failure to transpose the third and fourth sentences of paragraph 2.of Annex I to Directive 89/Arguments of the parties
         
            
The Italian Government claims to have transposed the third and fourth sentences of paragraph 2.of Annex I to Directive 89/by Articles and 71, which are formulated in completely general terms, as well as by Articles 133, 157, 165, and of DPR No 547/55. 
         
            
According to the Italian Government, Article of DPR No 547/provides that, where there are risks, because it is impossible
         otherwise effectively to protect or isolate moving parts or danger zones, other measures must be taken, such as recourse to
         appropriate tools, automatic feeders or additional devices supplementing the ordinary mechanisms for stopping the machine;
         the former measures are intended to eliminate the risk and the latter seek to reduce it. 
         
            
Article of DPR No 547/contains provisions which are even stricter, not only concerning the presence of the stop mechanism
         of a machine in motion, but also in relation to the positioning of the control system and to the characteristics of the braking
         system which must be achieved following the operation of the mechanism. 
         
            
The Italian Government maintains that Articles 133, 157, 165, and of DPR No 547/implement the principle laid down
         in the second sentence of paragraph 2.of Directive 89/even more concretely, by modulating it in relation to the specific
         type of risk presented by the machines respectively covered by those provisions. 
         
            
The Commission claims that none of the provisions relied upon by the Italian Government transposes the third and fourth sentences
         of paragraph 2.of Annex I to Directive 89/655.  It maintains that, in this respect, the directive has opted for a solution
         involving detailed technical requirements appropriate for the purpose of covering each type of risk, and requires the Member
         States to transpose them precisely and punctiliously, so as to avoid any ambiguity in the practical application of the national
         provisions intended to protect the safety of workers.  In the Commission's submission, the Italian provisions cannot be regarded
         as complying with the requirements of clarity and precision called for to ensure the proper transposition of the third and
         fourth sentences. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
According to the minimum requirements set out in the third and fourth sentences of paragraph 2.of Annex I to Directive 89/655,
         the work equipment's stop control must have priority over the start controls.  When the work equipment or the dangerous parts
         of it have stopped, the energy supply of the actuators concerned must be switched off. 
         
            
In this case, none of the national provisions relied upon by the Italian Republic set out those specific technical requirements.
          Those provisions transpose only the first and second sentences of paragraph 2.of Annex I to Directive 89/655. 
         
            
It must therefore be held that the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under the third and fourth sentences
         of paragraph 2.of Annex I to that directive. 
         The failure to transpose the second to fifth indents of the second sentence of paragraph 2.of Annex I to Directive 89/Arguments of the parties
         
            
The Italian Government claims to have transposed the second to fifth indents of the second sentence of paragraph 2.of Annex
         I to Directive 89/by a general provision, namely the second paragraph of Article of DPR No 547/55, which carries criminal
         sanctions, and by four specific provisions of that decree, namely Articles 43, 44, and 49. 
         
            
Furthermore, the Italian Government maintains that, in relation to safety, the application in the national legal order of
         the provisions of ordinary legislation, such as the decrees which have successively been adopted in relation to prevention
         of accidents, constitutes only the minimum level of implementation required of employers to whom that legislation applies,
         with the result that their conduct, if it falls short of that level, constitutes an offence.  That principle was established
         by Article of the Italian Civil Code and is repeated in Article 4(5)(b) of Legislative Decree No 626/94.  In addition,
         that government points out that the persons required to give effect to the principle laid down in Article of DPR No 547/must seek and apply the best up-to-date solutions in relation to safety.  The general nature of the provisions of that article
         is only apparent. 
         
            
The Italian Government acknowledges having chosen an approach other than that of Directive 89/655, but submits that the national
         legislation reaches the same safety objective as that pursued by the directive.  Its approach encourages progress in terms
         of safety linked to the development of techniques of prevention. 
         
            
The Commission submits that none of the five provisions of DPR No 547/to which the Italian Government refers properly transposes
         the technical requirements of Directive 89/655.  The approach chosen by the Italian authorities consists, in practice, of
         establishing a legislative framework containing, first, specific provisions whose content is objectively different to that
         of the requirements of the second to fifth indents of the second sentence of paragraph 2.of Annex I to Directive 89/and, second, three general principles which do not guarantee in a clear and unequivocal way the minimum level of protection
         required by the directive.  The Commission maintains that the Italian scheme obeys a logic which is certainly entitled to
         respect, but which is different from and incompatible with that of the directive, giving those concerned a lower level of
         clarity and precision and, in the end, jeopardising their ability to ascertain their rights and vindicate them before the
         national courts. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
The minimum requirements set out in the second to fifth indents of the second sentence of paragraph 2.of Annex I to Directive
         89/concern the guards and protection devices for the moving parts of work equipment which present risks of mechanical
         contact which could lead to accidents.  Such devices must not give rise to any additional hazard or be easily removed or rendered
         inoperative and they must not restrict more than necessary the view of the operating cycle of the equipment.  In addition,
         they must be located at sufficient distance from the danger zone. 
         
            
In this case, the specific provisions relied upon by the Italian Republic, namely Articles 43, 44, and of DPR No 547/55,
         do not require observance of the requirements mentioned in the preceding paragraph. 
         
            
As for the general national provisions, namely Article of the Italian Civil Code, Article 4(5)(b) of Legislative Decree
         No 626/and Article of DPR No 547/55, none of them transposes those requirements in a sufficiently precise and clear
         manner. 
         
            
The Italian Government cannot justify the infringement with which it is charged by invoking the argument that it has put into
         operation legislation based on the necessary adaptation of the safety regulations to progress.  Such an approach, which, moreover,
         itself arises from Council Directive 89/391/EEC of June on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements
         in the safety and health of workers at work (OJ L 183, p. 1), does not relieve a Member State of the obligation to bring
         into force the minimum requirements of Directive 89/655. 
         
            
It must therefore be held that the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under the second to fifth indents
         of the second sentence of paragraph 2.of Annex I to Directive 89/655. 
         
            
By not transposing completely the minimum requirements prescribed by Annex I to Directive 89/655, the Italian Republic has
         also failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 4(1) of the directive, which refers to those requirements. 
         
            
It must therefore be held that, by failing to adopt the laws and regulations necessary to transpose into national law the
         minimum mandatory requirements, the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 4(1) of and the sixth
         sentence of paragraph 2.1, the second sentence of paragraph 2.2, the third and fourth sentences of paragraph 2.3, and the
         second to fifth indents of the second sentence of paragraph 2.of Annex I to Directive 89/655. 
         
Costs
            
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party's pleadings.  Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Italian Republic has
         been unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)
hereby:  
         
1.
 Declares that, by failing to adopt the laws and regulations necessary to transpose into national law the minimum mandatory
            requirements, the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 4(1) of and the sixth sentence of paragraph
            2.1, the second sentence of paragraph 2.2, the third and fourth sentences of paragraph 2.3, and the second to fifth indents
            of the second sentence of paragraph 2.of Annex I to Council Directive 89/655/EEC of November concerning the minimum
            safety and health requirements for the use of work equipment by workers at work (second individual Directive within the meaning
            of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC), as amended by Council Directive 95/63/EC of December 1995; 
            
2.
 Orders the Italian Republic to pay the costs. 
            
Puissochet
Gulmann 
Macken 
Colneric
Cunha Rodrigues 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on April 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
J.-P. Puissochet  
Registrar
President of the Sixth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: Italian.
Top  
 