
Joined Cases C-58/to C-68/Monsanto SAS and Others 
v
Ministre de l’Agriculture et de la Pêche
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Conseil d’État (France))
(Agriculture – Genetically modified animal feed – Emergency measures – Measure adopted by a Member State – Provisional suspension of an authorisation granted pursuant to Directive 90/220/EEC – Legal basis – Directive 2001/18/EC – Article – Sectoral legislation – Article – Safeguard clause – Regulation (EC) No 1829/– Article – Existing products – Article – Regulation (EC) No 178/– Articles and – Conditions of application)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Approximation of laws – Approximation measures – Genetically modified foodstuffs and animal feed – Products authorised pursuant
            to Directive 90/220, notified as existing products and having been the subject of an application for renewal of authorisation
(European Parliament and Council Regulation No 1829/2003, Arts and 34; European Parliament and Council Directive 2001/18,
            Art. 23; Council Directive 90/220)
2.        Approximation of laws – Approximation measures – Genetically modified foodstuffs and animal feed – Emergency measures which
            may be adopted by the Member States in order to confront a serious risk to human health, animal health or the environment
(European Parliament and Council Regulations No 178/2002, Art. 54, and No 1829/2003, Art. 34)
3.        Approximation of laws – Approximation measures – Genetically modified foodstuffs and animal feed – Emergency measures which
            may be adopted by the Member States in order to confront a serious risk to human health, animal health or the environment
(European Parliament and Council Regulation No 1829/2003, Art. 34)
4.        Approximation of laws – Approximation measures – Genetically modified foodstuffs and animal feed – Treatment of a serious
            risk to human health, animal health or the environment – Assessment and management coming under the responsibility of the
            Commission and the Council, subject to review by the Union judicature – Adoption and implementation by the Member States of
            emergency measures in the absence of a decision at Union level
(Art. 267, second para. and third para., TFEU and Art. TFEU; European Parliament and Council Regulations No 178/2002,
            Art. 54, and No 1829/2003)
1.        Genetically modified organisms such as MON maize, which were authorised as, inter alia, seeds for the purpose of planting
         under Directive 90/on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms and which were notified
         as existing products in accordance with the conditions set out in Article of Regulation No 1829/on genetically modified
         food and feed, and were subsequently the subject of a pending application for renewal of authorisation, may not have their
         use or sale provisionally suspended or prohibited, by a Member State, under Article of Directive 2001/on the deliberate
         release into the environment of genetically modified organisms and repealing Directive 90/220; such measures may, however,
         be adopted pursuant to Article of Regulation No 1829/2003.
      
(see para. 63, operative part 1)
2.        Article of Regulation No 1829/on genetically modified food and feed authorises a Member State to adopt emergency measures
         only in accordance with the procedural conditions set out in Article of Regulation No 178/laying down the general
         principles and requirements of food law, establishing the European Food Safety Authority and laying down procedures in matters
         of food safety, compliance with which it is for the national court to ascertain.
      
(see para. 74, operative part 2)
3.        With a view to the adoption of emergency measures, Article of Regulation No 1829/on genetically modified food and
         feed requires Member States to establish, in addition to urgency, the existence of a situation which is likely to constitute
         a clear and serious risk to human health, animal health or the environment. That risk must be established on the basis of
         new evidence based on reliable scientific data.
      
Protective measures adopted under Article of Regulation No 1829/cannot validly be based on a purely hypothetical approach
         to the risk, founded on mere assumptions which have not yet been scientifically verified. On the contrary, such protective
         measures, notwithstanding their temporary character and even if they are preventive in nature, may be adopted only if they
         are based on a risk assessment as complete as possible in the particular circumstances of an individual case, which indicate
         that those measures are necessary.
      
(see paras 76-77, 81, operative part 3)
4.        In the light of the overall scheme provided for by Regulation No 1829/on genetically modified food and feed and its objective
         of avoiding artificial disparities in the treatment of a serious risk, the assessment and management of a serious and evident
         risk to human health, animal health or the environment ultimately come under the sole responsibility of the Commission and
         the Council, subject to review by the Union judicature.
      
It follows that, at the stage of adoption and implementation by the Member States of the emergency measures referred to in
         Article of that regulation, as long as no decision has been adopted in that regard at Union level, the national courts
         before which actions have been brought to test the lawfulness of such measures have jurisdiction to assess the lawfulness
         of those measures having regard to the substantive conditions provided for in Article of Regulation No 1829/and the
         procedural conditions laid down in Article of Regulation No 178/laying down the general principles and requirements
         of food law, establishing the European Food Safety Authority and laying down procedures in matters of food safety, whilst
         the uniformity of Union law may be ensured by the Court of Justice under the preliminary-ruling procedure since, if a national
         court has doubts as to the interpretation of a provision of Union law, it may, or must, in accordance with the second and
         third paragraphs of Article TFEU, refer a question to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling.
      
However, when, in a case, the Commission has referred a matter to the Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health
         and a decision has been adopted at Union level, the factual and legal assessments relating to that case and contained in such
         a decision are binding on all bodies of the Member State which is the addressee of such a decision, in accordance with Article
         TFEU, including its courts which are called on to assess the lawfulness of measures adopted at national level.
      
(see paras 78-80)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
September (*)
      
(Agriculture – Genetically modified animal feed – Emergency measures – Measure adopted by a Member State – Provisional suspension of an authorisation granted pursuant to Directive 90/220/EEC – Legal basis – Directive 2001/18/EC – Article – Sectoral legislation – Article – Safeguard clause – Regulation (EC) No 1829/– Article – Existing products – Article – Regulation (EC) No 178/2002– Articles and – Conditions of application)
In Joined Cases C‑58/to C‑68/10,
REFERENCES for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the Conseil d'État (France), made by decisions of November
         and December 2009, received at the Court on February 2010, in the proceedings
      
Monsanto SAS (C-58/and C-59/10),
Monsanto Agriculture France SAS (C-58/and C-59/10),
      
Monsanto International SARL (C-58/and C-59/10),
      
Monsanto Technology LLC (C-58/and C-59/10),
      
Monsanto Europe SA (C-59/10),
      
Association générale des producteurs de maïs (AGPM) (C‑60/10),
      
Malaprade SCEA and Others (C-61/10),
      
Pioneer Génétique SARL (C-62/10),
      
Pioneer Semences SAS (C-62/10),
      
Union française des semenciers (UFS), formerly Syndicat des établissements de semences agréés pour les semences de maïs (Seproma) (C-63/10),
      
Caussade Semences SA (C-64/10),
      
Limagrain Europe SA, formerly Limagrain Verneuil Holding SA (C‑65/10),
      
Maïsadour Semences SA (C-66/10),
      
Ragt Semences SA (C-67/10),
      
Euralis Semences SAS (C-68/10),
      
Euralis Coop (C-68/10),
      
v
Ministre de l’Agriculture et de la Pêche,
intervening parties:
Association France Nature Environnement (C-59/and C‑60/10),
      
Confédération paysanne (C-60/10),
      
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of J.-C. Bonichot, President of the Chamber, L. Bay Larsen (Rapporteur), C. Toader, A. Prechal and E. Jarašiūnas,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: P. Mengozzi,
Registrar: R. Şereş, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on February 2011,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Monsanto SAS, Monsanto Agriculture France SAS, Monsanto International SARL, Monsanto Technology LLC and Monsanto Europe SA,
         by R. Saint-Esteben, C.-L. Vier, M. Pittie, P. Honoré and C. Vexliard, avocats,
      
–        Association générale des producteurs de maïs (AGPM) and Others, by M. Le Prat and L. Verdier, avocats,
–        Pioneer Génétique SARL, Pioneer Semences SAS, l’Union française des semenciers (UFS), formerly Syndicat des établissements
         de semences agréés pour les semences de maïs (Seproma), Caussade Semences SA, Limagrain Europe SA, Maïsadour Semences SA,
         Ragt Semences SA, Euralis Semences SAS and Euralis Coop, by A. Monod and B. Colin, avocats, 
      
–        Confédération paysanne, by H. Bras, avocat,
–        the French Government, by G. de Bergues, S. Menez and R. Loosli-Surrans, acting as Agents,
–        the Greek Government, by I. Chalkias and S. Papaïoannou, acting as Agents,
–        the Austrian Government, by E. Riedl, acting as Agent,
–        the Polish Government, by B. Majczyna and J. Sawicka, acting as Agents,
–        the European Commission, by L. Pignataro-Nolin, M. Van Hoof and C. Zadra, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2011,
gives the following
Judgment
The present references for a preliminary ruling concern the interpretation of Articles and of Directive 2001/18/EC of
         the European Parliament and of the Council of March on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically
         modified organisms and repealing Council Directive 90/220/EEC (OJ L 106, p. 1), Articles and of Regulation (EC)
         No 1829/of the European Parliament and of the Council of September on genetically modified food and feed (OJ
         L 268, p. 1), and also Articles and of Regulation (EC) No 178/of the European Parliament and of the Council
         of January laying down the general principles and requirements of food law, establishing the European Food Safety
         Authority and laying down procedures in matters of food safety (OJ L 31, p. 1).
      
The references have been made in the context of eleven sets of proceedings between, on the one hand, Monsanto SAS, Monsanto
         Agriculture France SAS, Monsanto International SARL, Monsanto Technology LLC, Monsanto Europe SA (‘Monsanto’, ‘Monsanto Agriculture
         France’, ‘Monsanto International’, ‘Monsanto Technology’ and ‘Monsanto Europe’ respectively) and various other applicants,
         including individuals and legal entities, and, on the other hand, the Ministre de l’Agriculture et de la Pêche (French Minister
         for Agriculture and Fisheries), with, as interveners, Association France Nature Environnement and Confédération paysanne,
         concerning the lawfulness of two provisional national measures which suspended, successively, the transfer and use of MON
         maize seeds, which are genetically modified organisms (‘GMOs’), and subsequently prohibited the planting of seed varieties
         derived from the line of that maize.
      
 Legal context
 European Union law
 Directive 2001/Directive 2001/18, amended by Regulation No 1829/and by Regulation (EC) No 1830/of the European Parliament and of
         the Council of September (OJ L 268, p. 24) (‘Directive 2001/18’), governs the deliberate release of GMOs into
         the environment and the placing on the market of GMOs as or in products. 
      
Article of Directive 2001/fixes October as the latest date for its transposition. Article repeals Council
         Directive 90/220/EEC of April on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms (OJ
         L 117, p. 15) as from October and provides that references made to that directive are to be understood as being
         made to Directive 2001/18, in accordance with a correlation table set out in an annex thereto.
      
According to recitals and in the preamble thereto, Directive 2001/18, in the same way as Directive 90/previously,
         establishes: 
      
–        harmonised procedures and criteria for the case-by-case evaluation of the potential risks arising from the deliberate release
         of GMOs into the environment; 
      
–        a Community authorisation procedure for the placing on the market of the products concerned, where the intended use of the
         products involves the deliberate release of the organisms into the environment.
      
Recitals and in the preamble to Directive 2001/state:
      
‘(50) The existing consents granted under Directive [90/220] have to be renewed in order to avoid disparities between consents granted
         under that Directive and those pursuant to this Directive and in order to take full account of the conditions of consent under
         this Directive.
      
(51)      Such renewal requires a transitional period during which existing consents granted under Directive [90/220] remain unaffected.’
The detailed rules for renewal, before the deadline of October 2006, of authorisations granted before October pursuant
         to Directive 90/are governed by Article of Directive 2001/18. Article 17(2) lists the documents, information and possible
         proposal to be included with the notification for renewal. Under Article 17(2) and (9), a notifier who filed that notification
         before October may continue to place the GMOs on the market under the conditions specified in the initial consent
         until a final decision has been taken on renewal.
      
Articles 20, and of Directive 2001/set out specific detailed rules on monitoring, labelling and information to the
         public.
      
Article of that directive, entitled ‘Safeguard clause’, provides:
      
‘1.      Where a Member State, as a result of new or additional information made available since the date of the consent and affecting
         the environmental risk assessment or reassessment of existing information on the basis of new or additional scientific knowledge,
         has detailed grounds for considering that a GMO as or in a product which has been properly notified and has received written
         consent under this Directive constitutes a risk to human health or the environment, that Member State may provisionally restrict
         or prohibit the use and/or sale of that GMO as or in a product on its territory.
      
The Member State shall ensure that in the event of a severe risk, emergency measures, such as suspension or termination of
         the placing on the market, shall be applied, including information to the public.
      
The Member State shall immediately inform the Commission and the other Member States of actions taken under this Article and
         give reasons for its decision, supplying its review of the environmental risk assessment, indicating whether and how the conditions
         of the consent should be amended or the consent should be terminated, and, where appropriate, the new or additional information
         on which its decision is based.
      
2.      Within days … a decision shall be taken on the measure [at Community level]’.
Article of Directive 2001/18, entitled ‘Sectoral legislation’, provides:
      
‘1.      Articles to shall not apply to any GMO as or in products as far as they are authorised by Community legislation which
         provides for a specific environmental risk assessment carried out in accordance with the principles set out in Annex II and
         on the basis of information specified in Annex III, without prejudice to additional requirements provided for by the Community
         legislation mentioned above, and [which provides] for requirements as regards risk management, labelling, monitoring as appropriate,
         information to the public and safeguard clause at least equivalent to that laid down in this Directive.
      
…
3.      Procedures ensuring that the risk assessment, requirements regarding risk management, labelling, monitoring as appropriate,
         information to the public and safeguard clause are equivalent to those laid down in this Directive shall be introduced in
         a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council. Future sectoral legislation based on the provisions of that regulation
         shall make a reference to this Directive. ...
      
…’
 Regulation No 1829/According to recitals and in the preamble thereto, Regulation No 1829/2003, applicable as from April pursuant
         to Article thereof, establishes a single Community authorisation procedure applying, inter alia, to feed consisting of,
         containing or produced from GMOs and to GMOs to be used as a source material for the production of feed.
      
Recital states:
      
‘The new authorisation procedures for genetically modified food and feed should include the new principles introduced in Directive
         [2001/18]. They should also make use of the new framework for risk assessment in matters of food safety set up by Regulation
         (EC) No 178/of the European Parliament and of the Council of January laying down the general principles and requirements
         of food law, establishing the European Food Safety Authority and laying down procedures in matters of food safety [OJ L 31, p. 1]. Thus, genetically modified food and feed should only be authorised for placing on the Community market after
         a scientific evaluation of the highest possible standard, to be undertaken under the responsibility of the European Food Safety
         Authority (Authority), of any risks which they present for human and animal health and, as the case may be, for the environment.
         This scientific evaluation should be followed by a risk management decision by the Community, under a regulatory procedure
         ensuring close cooperation between the Commission and the Member States.’
      
Recital states:
      
‘Where the application concerns products containing or consisting of a [GMO], the applicant should have the choice of either
         supplying an authorisation for the deliberate release into the environment already obtained under part C of Directive [2001/18],
         without prejudice to the conditions set by that authorisation, or of applying for the environmental risk assessment to be
         carried out at the same time as the safety assessment under this Regulation. In the latter case, it is necessary for the evaluation
         of the environmental risk to comply with the requirements referred to in Directive [2001/18] and for the national competent
         authorities designated by Member States for this purpose to be consulted by the Authority. In addition, it is appropriate
         to give the Authority the possibility of asking one of these competent authorities to carry out the environmental risk assessment.
         It is also appropriate, in accordance with Article 12(4) of Directive [2001/18], for the national competent authorities designated
         under the said Directive in all cases concerning GMOs and food and/or feed containing or consisting of a GMO to be consulted
         by the Authority before it finalises the environmental risk assessment.’
      
Recital states:
      
‘In the case of GMOs to be used as seeds or other plant-propagating materials falling within the scope of this Regulation,
         the [European Food Safety Authority] should be under an obligation to delegate the environmental risk assessment to a national
         competent authority. Nonetheless, authorisations under this Regulation should be without prejudice to the provisions of [in
         particular, Council Directive 2002/53/EC of June on the common catalogue of varieties of agricultural plant species
         (OJ L 193, p. 1), as amended by Regulation No 1829/2003, which provides in particular for] the rules and the criteria
         for the acceptance of varieties and their official acceptance for inclusion in [the common catalogue of varieties of agricultural
         plant species] …’ 
      
Article 2.of Regulation No 1829/provides:
      
‘For the purposes of this Regulation:
…
9.      “genetically modified organism for feed use” means a GMO that may be used as feed or as a source material for the production
         of feed’.
      
Article 15(1) of Regulation No 1829/lays down as follows the scope of Section I, entitled ‘Authorisation and supervision’,
         of Chapter III, which concerns genetically modified feed:
      
‘This Section shall apply to:
(a)      GMOs for feed use;
(b)      feed containing or consisting of GMOs;
(c)      feed produced from GMOs.’
Articles to of Regulation No 1829/govern the conditions for granting initial authorisations for genetically modified
         feed.
      
Article 17(5) provides, in particular, as follows:
      
‘5.      In the case of GMOs or feed containing or consisting of GMOs, the application shall also be accompanied by:
(a)      the complete technical dossier supplying the information required by Annexes III and IV to Directive [2001/18] and information
         and conclusions about the risk assessment carried out in accordance with the principles set out in Annex II to Directive [2001/18]
         or, where the placing on the market of the GMOs has been authorised under part C of Directive [2001/18] [consisting in Articles
         to thereof], a copy of the authorisation decision;
      
(b)      a monitoring plan for environmental effects conforming with Annex VII to Directive [2001/18], including a proposal for the
         duration of the monitoring plan; this duration may be different from the proposed period for the consent.
      
In such case, Articles to of Directive [2001/18] shall not apply.’
Article 20, entitled ‘Status of existing products’, provides:
      
‘1.      … products falling within the scope of this Section which have been lawfully placed on the market in the Community before
         the date of application of this Regulation may continue to be placed on the market, used and processed provided that the following
         conditions are met: 
      
(a)      in the case of products which have been authorised under [Directive 90/220] or [Directive 2001/18], …, operators responsible
         for placing on the market the products concerned shall, within six months after the date of application of this Regulation,
         notify the Commission of the date on which they were first placed on the market in the Community;
      
…
2.      The notification referred to in paragraph shall be accompanied by the particulars mentioned in Article 17(3) and (5) …
…
4.      Within nine years from the date on which the products referred to in paragraph 1(a) were first placed on the market, but in
         no case earlier than three years after the date of application of this Regulation, operators responsible for placing them
         on the market shall submit an application in accordance with Article 23, which shall apply mutatis mutandis.
      
…
5.      Products referred to in paragraph and feed containing them or produced from them shall be subject to the provisions of this
         Regulation, in particular Articles 21, and 34, which shall apply mutatis mutandis.
      
…’
Articles and 22(1), to 26, and set out detailed specific rules on supervision, labelling and information to the public.
      
Article 34, entitled ‘Emergency measures’, provides:
      
‘Where it is evident that products authorised by or in accordance with this Regulation are likely to constitute a serious
         risk to human health, animal health or the environment, …, measures shall be taken under the procedures provided for in Articles
         and of Regulation [No 178/2002].’
      
 Regulation No 178/Article of Regulation No 178/2002, entitled ‘Emergency measures for food and feed of Community origin or imported from
         a third country’, is worded as follows:
      
‘1.      Where it is evident that … feed originating in the Community or imported from a third country is likely to constitute a serious
         risk to human health, animal health or the environment, and that such risk cannot be contained satisfactorily by means of
         measures taken by the Member State(s) concerned, the Commission, acting … on its own initiative or at the request of a Member
         State, shall immediately adopt one or more of the following measures, depending on the gravity of the situation:
      
[suspension of marketing, suspension of imports from third countries, suspension of use of the feed in question, laying down
         of special conditions for the feed in question or any other appropriate interim measure]. 
      
2.      However, in emergencies, the Commission may provisionally adopt the measures referred to in paragraph after consulting the
         Member State(s) concerned and informing the other Member States.
      
As soon as possible, and at most within working days, the measures taken shall be confirmed, amended, revoked or extended
         in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 58(2), and the reasons for the Commission's decision shall be made
         public without delay.’
      
Article of that regulation, entitled ‘Other emergency measures’, is worded as follows:
      
‘1.      Where a Member State officially informs the Commission of the need to take emergency measures, and where the Commission has
         not acted in accordance with Article 53, the Member State may adopt interim protective measures. In this event, it shall immediately
         inform the other Member States and the Commission.
      
2.      Within working days, the Commission shall put the matter before the [Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health]
         with a view to the extension, amendment or abrogation of the national interim protective measures.
      
3.      The Member State may maintain its national interim protective measures until the Community measures have been adopted.’
 National law
Article L.535-of the French Code de l’environnement (Environment Code), in force until June 2008, provides:
      
‘I. – In every case where a new evaluation of the risks to public health or the environment caused by the presence of [GMOs]
         so justifies, the administrative authority may, at the cost of the authorisation holder or the holders of the [GMOs]: 
      
(1)      suspend the authorisation pending further information and, if necessary, order the withdrawal from sale of the products or
         prohibit their use;
      
(2)      impose modifications to the conditions of deliberate release;
(3)      withdraw the authorisation;
(4)      order the destruction of the [GMOs] and, in the event of a failure by the beneficiary or of the holder of the authorisation,
         proceed to such destruction on its own initiative.
      
II– Except in emergency cases, these measures may be implemented only if the beneficiary has been given the opportunity to
         present its observations.’
      
 The actions in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
By Decision 98/294/EC of April concerning the placing on the market of genetically modified maize (Zea mays L. line MON 810), pursuant to Directive 90/(OJ L 131, p. 32), the Commission authorised the placing on the market
         of MON maize, at the request of Monsanto Europe, on the basis of Directive 90/220.
      
In implementation of Article of that decision and in accordance with Article of Directive 90/220, the French Minister
         for Agriculture and Fisheries gave, by order of August 1998, his written consent to that placing on the market, pursuant
         to Article 13(4) of Directive [90/220] and Decisions 98/293/EC and 98/294/EC of April concerning the placing on the
         market of genetically modified maize (Zea mays L. T and MON 810) (JORF, August 1998, p. 11985).
      
On July 2004, Monsanto Europe, acting pursuant to, inter alia, Article 20(1)(a) of Regulation No 1829/2003, notified MON
         maize as an ‘existing product’ to the Commission. 
      
It did not effect a notification under Article 17(2) of Directive 2001/to the competent national authority before October
         2006.
      
On May 2007, Monsanto Europe applied for renewal of the authorisation to place MON maize on the market pursuant to Article
         20(4) of Regulation No 1829/2003. 
      
By order of December suspending the transfer and use of MON maize seed (JORF of December 2007, p. 19748), the
         Minister for Agriculture and Fisheries, referring in general terms to the Code rural (Rural Code) and the Environment Code,
         suspended the authorisation for transfer to the end user and for the use in national territory of MON maize seed pending
         the publication of a law relating to GMOs and until February at the latest.
      
On February 2008, Monsanto, Monsanto Agriculture France, Monsanto International and Monsanto Technology brought an action
         for annulment of that order before the Conseil d’État (Council of State).
      
By order of February suspending the planting of genetically modified maize seed varieties (Zea mays L. line MON 810) (JORF of February 2008, p. 2462), the Minister for Agriculture and Fisheries, referring to Article of Directive 2001/18, Regulation No 1829/2003, and also Article L.535-of the Environment Code, prohibited, on the national
         territory, ‘the planting, with a view to placing on the market, of maize seed varieties derived from the genetically modified
         line of maize MON 810’ until a decision had been taken on the application for renewal of the authorisation to place that organism
         on the market.
      
By order of February amending the order of February suspending the planting of genetically modified maize seed
         varieties (Zea mays L. line MON 810) (JORF of February 2008, p. 3004), the Minister for Agriculture and Fisheries deleted the words ‘with
         a view to placing on the market’ contained in the abovementioned order of February 2008.
      
On February 2008, the French authorities, notifying the latter order to the Commission, classified it as an ‘emergency
         measure’ under Article of Regulation No 1829/2003. In that correspondence, they emphasised the need to take emergency measures
         designed to suspend the cultivation of MON maize pursuant to the combined provisions of Article of Regulation No 1829/and Articles and of Regulation No 178/2002.
      
On February 2008, notifying the Commission of the order of February 2008, the French authorities stated that that order
         had been adopted pursuant to Article of Directive 2001/18.
      
On 20, and February 2008, actions for annulment of the order of February 2008, as amended by the order of February
         2008, were brought before the Conseil d’État by Monsanto, Monsanto Agriculture France, Monsanto International, Monsanto Technology,
         Monsanto Europe and various other applicants.
      
The Conseil d’État indicates that the applicants submit that MON maize, which is a genetically modified variety of maize
         used for animal feed, henceforth comes solely within the scope of Regulation No 1829/2003, with the result that the Minister
         for Agriculture and Fisheries vitiated the contested orders by acting outside his powers in adopting an emergency measure
         which it was for the Commission to adopt or, at the very least, by an error of law in taking as the basis for those orders
         Article of Directive 2001/and Article L.535-of the Environment Code, which transposes it into national law.
      
In those circumstances, the Conseil d’État decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions, in each set
         of pending proceedings, to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Where a [GMO] constituting feed was placed on the market prior to the publication of Regulation [No 1829/2003] and the authorisation
         is maintained in force pursuant to Article of that regulation, must the product at issue be regarded, before a decision
         has been taken on the application for a new authorisation which must be submitted pursuant to the regulation, as among the
         products to which the provisions of Article of Directive [2001/18] … refer and, in that event, is the [GMO] subject, with
         respect to the emergency measures which may be adopted after the issue of authorisation to place it on the market, only to
         Article of Regulation [No 1829/2003] or, on the contrary, may such measures be adopted by a Member State on the basis of
         Article of [Directive 2001/18] and the national provisions transposing it?
      
2.      On the assumption that emergency measures may be adopted only within the framework of Article of Regulation [No 1829/2003],
         may the authorities of a Member State adopt, and under what circumstances, [measures such as those under the order of December
         (first action for annulment) and the order of February (other actions), as amended by the order of February
         2008], on grounds of the containment of risk as referred to in Article of Regulation [No 178/2002] or by way of the interim
         protective measures which may be adopted by a Member State on the basis of Article of the same regulation? 
      
3.      On the assumption that the authorities of a Member State may intervene on the basis of Article of Directive [2001/18] or
         on the basis of Article of Regulation [No 1829/2003], or on both of those legal bases, the application[s] [raise] the question
         as to what degree of requirement, taking into account in particular the precautionary principle, is imposed, respectively,
         by Article of the directive, under which the adoption of emergency measures such as a suspension of the use or provisional
         prohibition against use of the product is subject to the condition that the Member State must have “detailed grounds for considering
         that a GMO ... constitutes a risk to ... the environment” and by Article of the regulation, under which the adoption of
         such a measure is subject to the condition that it be “evident” that the product is “likely to constitute a serious risk to
         ... the environment”, in terms of identifying the risk, evaluating its probability and assessing the nature of its effects?’
      
 Consideration of the questions referred
 Preliminary observations
It should be borne in mind that seeds derived from maize varieties such as those at issue in the main proceedings come within
         the scope of Directive 2002/53, under a combined reading of Article 1(1) thereof and Article 2(1).A of Council Directive 66/402/EEC
         of June on the marketing of cereal seed (OJ, English Special Edition 1965-1966, p. 143), as amended most recently
         by Commission Directive 2009/74/EC of June (OJ L 166, p. 40).
      
Under Article 16(1) of Directive 2002/53, Member States are required to ensure that, with effect from their inclusion in the
         common catalogue of varieties of agricultural plant species, provided for in Article thereof, seeds of varieties accepted
         in accordance with that directive or in accordance with principles corresponding to those of that directive are not made subject
         to any marketing restrictions relating to variety, save as provided for in Articles 16(2) or of Directive 2002/(see,
         to that effect, Case C‑165/Commission v Poland [2009] ECR I‑6843, paragraph 62). 
      
It should be noted that the Member State concerned in the main proceedings has not relied on Articles 16(2) or of Directive
         2002/in order to be allowed to prohibit MON maize seeds under the conditions set out in those provisions.
      
In that context, the answers given to the questions referred in the present cases are without prejudice to Directive 2002/53.
      
 The first question
The first question relates to the conditions under which a measure of provisional suspension or prohibition may be adopted
         by a Member State in respect of an ‘existing product’, within the meaning of Article of Regulation No 1829/2003, which
         was authorised under Directive 90/220, a directive which was repealed and replaced by Directive 2001/18. 
      
That question raises the issue of the legal basis for such a measure.
      
The Austrian Government submits that Monsanto notified MON maize as an existing product for the purpose of use in feed
         and food, but not for use as seeds. It therefore has doubts as to whether the product in question may still be regarded as
         having been lawfully placed on the market as seeds following the expiry of the period for notification of existing products.
      
It is therefore appropriate to begin by addressing the issue of whether the use of GMOs as seed notified under Article of Regulation No 1829/is covered by that provision.
      
Regulation No 1829/constitutes an implementation of Article 12(3) of Directive 2001/18.
      
It is common ground that Monsanto did not notify the MON maize under Article 17(2) of Directive 2001/before the deadline
         of October laid down by that article.
      
It is also common ground that Monsanto notified that maize pursuant to Article 20(1) of Regulation No 1829/as an ‘existing
         product’ coming under Section of Chapter III of that regulation.
      
It follows from the wording of recital in the preamble to that regulation and, with regard to feed, from Articles 16(7)
         and 18(3)(c) thereof that the use of GMOs as seeds is covered by the authorisation granted for those GMOs under that regulation,
         without prejudice to Directive 2002/53.
      
As regards existing products, the question therefore arises as to whether Article of Regulation No 1829/2003, in so far
         as it provides, subject to the conditions which it lays down, that ‘products falling within the scope of this Section [1]
         … may continue to be placed on the market, used and processed …’, also covers use as seeds of GMOs notified as existing products
         on the basis of Article 20.
      
It should be borne in mind in this regard that products notified on the basis of Article 20(1) of Regulation No 1829/must come within the scope of Section of Chapter III of that regulation, and that it is clear from Article 15(1) thereof
         that that section covers, inter alia, ‘GMOs for feed use’.
      
Moreover, under Article 2.of Regulation No 1829/2003, that expression is to be understood as encompassing, in particular,
         a ‘GMO that may be used as … a source material for the production of feed’, a definition which can include seeds.
      
Consequently, GMO seeds come within Section of Chapter III of Regulation No 1829/2003. They can therefore come, in particular,
         within the scope of Article 20(1) thereof.
      
As the latter provision authorises the continued use of the products which it governs, it covers the use, as seeds, of products
         which have been notified. 
      
In that regard, it is for the national court to ascertain whether products such as MON maize, which were authorised as,
         inter alia, seeds for the purpose of planting pursuant to Directive 90/220, were in fact notified on the basis of Article
         20(1) of Regulation No 1829/2003.
      
In the light of the foregoing considerations, the Court finds that Regulation No 1829/provides sufficient interpretative
         information for the purpose of answering the first question, without its being necessary to interpret specifically Article
         of Directive 2001/18.
      
Accordingly, the Court finds that, by its first question, the referring court is asking, in essence, whether, in circumstances
         such as those of the disputes in the main proceedings, GMOs such as MON maize, which were authorised as, inter alia, seeds
         for the purpose of planting under Directive 90/and which were notified as existing products in accordance with the conditions
         set out in Article of Regulation No 1829/2003, and were subsequently the subject of a pending application for renewal of
         authorisation, may have their use or sale provisionally suspended or prohibited under Article of Directive 2001/18, or
         whether such measures may be adopted pursuant to Article of Regulation No 1829/2003.
      
It should be borne in mind in this regard that Article 20(5) of Regulation No 1829/provides that ‘[p]roducts referred
         to in paragraph … shall be subject to the provisions of this Regulation, in particular Articles 21, and 34, which shall
         apply mutatis mutandis’.
      
That wording thus makes it explicitly clear that Article of Regulation No 1829/is applicable.
      
It also provides that existing products are covered by other provisions of that regulation, such as headings (a) and (b) of
         the first subparagraph of Article 17(5), which provides for the provision of various types of information relating to the
         product in question and adds, in the second subparagraph that ‘[i]n such case, Articles to of Directive [2001/18] shall
         not apply’.
      
It thus results from a combined reading of Articles 20(5) and 17(5) of Regulation No 1829/that, when the information
         referred to in the first subparagraph of Article 17(5) is provided in support of the notification of an existing product,
         Article of Directive 2001/does not apply.
      
The answer to the first question is therefore that, in circumstances such as those of the disputes in the main proceedings,
         GMOs such as MON maize, which were authorised as, inter alia, seeds for the purpose of planting under Directive 90/and which were notified as existing products in accordance with the conditions set out in Article of Regulation No 1829/2003,
         and were subsequently the subject of a pending application for renewal of authorisation, may not have their use or sale provisionally
         suspended or prohibited, by a Member State, under Article of Directive 2001/18; such measures may, however, be adopted
         pursuant to Article of Regulation No 1829/2003.
      
 The second question
By its second question, the referring court asks, in essence, whether Article of Regulation No 1829/authorises a Member
         State to adopt emergency measures in circumstances such as those of the main proceedings.
      
The order of December 2007, that of February and the order of February 2008, which amended the terms of the latter,
         were published in the Journal officiel de la République française on December 2007, February and February respectively. According to the statements made by the French Government,
         which it is for the national court to verify, those orders were notified to the Commission on 9, and February respectively.
      
In that regard, it must be held that, as is evidenced by the wording of Article of Regulation No 1829/2003, that provision,
         first, lays down the substantive conditions under which a product authorised by that regulation or in accordance therewith
         may be the subject of emergency measures and, second, refers, as regards the conditions for adopting those measures, to the
         ‘procedures provided for in Articles and of Regulation [No 178/2002]’.
      
Thus, Article of Regulation No 1829/does not make the adoption of emergency measures subject to the substantive conditions
         provided for in Article of Regulation No 178/2002.
      
It should also be noted that Article of Regulation No 178/concerns emergency measures which may be taken by the Commission,
         with the adoption of such measures by the Member States coming under Article of that regulation.
      
Consequently, a Member State wishing to adopt emergency measures pursuant to Article of Regulation No 1829/must comply,
         not only with the substantive conditions laid down in that article, but also with the procedural conditions provided for in
         Article of Regulation No 178/2002.
      
Those conditions are set out in Article 54(1) of Regulation No 178/2002, which requires Member States, first, to inform the
         Commission ‘officially’ of the need to take emergency measures and, second, where the Commission has not acted in accordance
         with Article of that regulation, to inform ‘immediately’ the other Member States and the Commission of the interim protective
         measures adopted.
      
Those conditions must be interpreted not only in the light of the wording of that provision, but also in the light of the
         purpose of Regulation No 1829/and the precautionary principle, in order to ensure a high level of protection of human
         life and health, whilst taking care to ensure the free movement of safe and wholesome food and feed, which is an essential
         aspect of the internal market (see, by analogy, Case C‑6/Greenpeace France and Others [2000] ECR I‑1651, paragraph 44, and Case C‑236/Monsanto Agricoltura Italia and Others [2003] ECR I‑8105, paragraph 110). 
      
In that regard, it must be held that, although Article 54(1) of Regulation No 178/does not introduce the obligation to
         inform the Commission within a specific time, it is nevertheless clear from the specific indication that the Member State
         concerned is to inform the Commission and the other Member States ‘immediately’ of the emergency measures adopted, and from
         the fact that the Commission must then, within working days, initiate the procedure provided for in Article 58(2) of that
         regulation, that the Member State concerned must inform the Commission as quickly as possible both of the need to take emergency
         measures and, as necessary, of the content of the measures adopted.
      
Accordingly, in the light of the urgent nature of the intervention of the Member State concerned and the objective of public-health
         protection pursued by Regulation No 1829/2003, Article 54(1) of Regulation No 178/must be interpreted as requiring, in
         the same way as, moreover, under Article of Directive 2001/18, that, in the event of an emergency, the Commission be informed
         no later than the time at which the emergency measures are adopted by the Member State concerned.
      
The answer to the second question is therefore that Article of Regulation No 1829/authorises a Member State to adopt
         emergency measures only in accordance with the procedural conditions set out in Article of Regulation No 178/2002, compliance
         with which it is for the national court to ascertain.
      
 The third question
By its third question, the referring court asks, in essence, what degree of requirement Article of Regulation No 1829/imposes on the Member States in respect of the adoption of emergency measures, in so far as it makes such measures subject
         to the existence of a situation which is ‘likely’ to constitute a ‘serious risk’ to human health, animal health or the environment.
      
It should be borne in mind in this regard that the expressions ‘likely’ and ‘serious risk’ must be understood as referring
         to a significant risk which clearly jeopardises human health, animal health or the environment. That risk must be established
         on the basis of new evidence based on reliable scientific data.
      
Protective measures adopted under Article of Regulation No 1829/cannot validly be based on a purely hypothetical approach
         to the risk, founded on mere assumptions which have not yet been scientifically verified. On the contrary, such protective
         measures, notwithstanding their temporary character and even if they are preventive in nature, may be adopted only if they
         are based on a risk assessment which is as complete as possible in the particular circumstances of an individual case, which
         indicate that those measures are necessary (see, to that effect, Monsanto Agricoltura Italia and Others, cited above, paragraphs and 107).
      
It should be emphasised that, in the light of the overall scheme provided for by Regulation No 1829/and its objective
         of avoiding artificial disparities in the treatment of a serious risk, the assessment and management of a serious and evident
         risk ultimately come under the sole responsibility of the Commission and the Council, subject to review by the European Union
         Courts.
      
It follows that, at the stage of adoption and implementation by the Member States of the emergency measures referred to in
         Article of Regulation No 1829/2003, as long as no decision has been adopted in that regard at European Union level, the
         national courts before which actions have been brought to test the lawfulness of such measures have jurisdiction to assess
         the lawfulness of those measures having regard to the substantive conditions provided for in Article of Regulation No 1829/and the procedural conditions laid down in Article of Regulation No 178/2002, whilst the uniformity of European Union law
         may be ensured by the Court of Justice under the preliminary-ruling procedure since, if a national court has doubts as to
         the interpretation of a provision of European Union law, it may, or must, in accordance with the second and third paragraphs
         of Article TFEU, refer a question to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling (see, by analogy, Case C‑375/Heuschen & Schrouff Oriëntal Foods Trading [2008] ECR I‑8691, paragraphs and 67).
      
However, where, in one case, the Commission has referred a matter to the Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health
         and a decision has been adopted at European Union level, the factual and legal assessments relating to that case and contained
         in such a decision are binding on all bodies of the Member State which is the addressee of such a decision, in accordance
         with Article TFEU, including its courts which are called on to assess the lawfulness of measures adopted at national level
         (see, by analogy, Heuschen & Schrouff Oriëntal Foods Trading, cited above, paragraph 64).
      
The answer to the third question is therefore that, with a view to the adoption of emergency measures, Article of Regulation
         No 1829/requires the Member States to establish, in addition to urgency, the existence of a situation which is likely
         to constitute a clear and serious risk to human health, animal health or the environment.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the actions pending before the national court,
         the decisions on costs are a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the
         costs of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      In circumstances such as those of the disputes in the main proceedings, genetically modified organisms such as MON maize,
            which were authorised as, inter alia, seeds for the purpose of planting under Council Directive 90/220/EEC of April on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms and which were notified as existing products
            in accordance with the conditions set out in Article of Regulation (EC) No 1829/of the European Parliament and of
            the Council of September on genetically modified food and feed, and were subsequently the subject of a pending application
            for renewal of authorisation, may not have their use or sale provisionally suspended or prohibited, by a Member State, under
            Article of Directive 2001/18/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of March on the deliberate release
            into the environment of genetically modified organisms and repealing Council Directive 90/220; such measures may, however,
            be adopted pursuant to Article of Regulation No 1829/2003.
2.      Article of Regulation No 1829/authorises a Member State to adopt emergency measures only in accordance with the procedural
            conditions set out in Article of Regulation (EC) No 178/of the European Parliament and of the Council of January
            laying down the general principles and requirements of food law, establishing the European Food Safety Authority and
            laying down procedures in matters of food safety, compliance with which it is for the national court to ascertain.
3.      With a view to the adoption of emergency measures, Article of Regulation No 1829/requires Member States to establish,
            in addition to urgency, the existence of a situation which is likely to constitute a clear and serious risk to human health,
            animal health or the environment.
[Signatures]
*  Language of the cases: French.
      
Top  
 