
Case C-460/Nadine Paquay
v
Société d’architectes Hoet + Minne SPRL
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Tribunal du travail de Bruxelles)
(Social policy − Protection of pregnant women − Directive 92/85/EEC − Article − Prohibition on dismissal from the beginning
         of pregnancy to the end of maternity leave − Period of protection – Decision to dismiss a female worker during that period of protection − Notification and implementation of the decision to
         dismiss after the expiry of that period − Equal treatment for male and female workers − Directive 76/207/EEC − Articles 2(1),
         5(1) and − Direct discrimination on grounds of sex − Sanctions)
      
Judgment of the Court (Third Chamber), October Summary of the Judgment
1.     Social policy – Protection of the safety and health of workers – Pregnant, nursing or breastfeeding workers – Directive 92/– Prohibition of dismissal – Scope 
(Council Directive 92/85, Art. 10)
2.     Social policy – Male and female workers – Access to employment and working conditions – Equal treatment – Discriminatory dismissal
            
(Council Directives 76/207, Arts 2(1), 5(1) and 6, and 92/85, Arts and 12)
1.     Article of Directive 92/on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health at work of
         pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding must be interpreted as prohibiting not only
         the notification of a decision to dismiss on the grounds of pregnancy and/or of the birth of a child during the period of
         protection set down in paragraph of that article but also the taking of preparatory steps for such a decision, such as searching
         for and finding a permanent replacement for the relevant employee, before the end of that period.
      
(see paras 33, 38, operative part 1)
2.     A decision to dismiss on the grounds of pregnancy and/or child birth is contrary to Articles 2(1) and 5(1) of Directive 76/on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women as regards access to employment, vocational training
         and promotion, and working conditions irrespective of the moment when that decision to dismiss is notified and even if it
         is notified after the end of the period of protection set down in Article of Directive 92/on the introduction of measures
         to encourage improvements in the safety and health at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or
         are breastfeeding. Since such a decision to dismiss is contrary to both Article of Directive 92/and Articles 2(1) and
         5(1) of Directive 76/207, the measure chosen by a Member State under Article of that latter directive to sanction the infringement
         of those provisions must be at least equivalent to the sanction set down in national law implementing Articles and of
         Directive 92/85. 
      
(see paras 42, 54, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Social policy − Protection of pregnant women − Directive 92/85/EEC − Article − Prohibition on dismissal from the beginning
         of pregnancy to the end of maternity leave − Period of protection – Decision to dismiss a female worker during that period of protection − Notification and implementation of the decision to
         dismiss after the expiry of that period − Equal treatment for male and female workers − Directive 76/207/EEC − Articles 2(1),
         5(1), and − Direct discrimination on grounds of sex − Sanctions)
      
In Case C‑460/06,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC by the  tribunal du travail de Brussels (Belgium), made by decision
         of November 2006, received at the Court on November 2006, in the proceedings
      
Nadine Paquay
v
Société d’architectes Hoet + Minne SPRL,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of A. Rosas, President of the Chamber, U. Lõhmus, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, A. Ó Caoimh (Rapporteur), and P. Lindh, Judges,
Advocate General: Y. Bot,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure, 
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       the Belgian Government, by L. Van den Broeck, acting as Agent,
–       the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, assisted by W. Ferrante, avvocato dello Stato,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by M. van Beek, acting as Agent,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This request for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles 2(1), 5(1) and of Council Directive 76/207/EEC
         of February on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women as regards access to employment,
         vocational training and promotion, and working conditions (OJ L 39, p. 40) and of Article of Council Directive 92/85/EEC
         of October on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health at work of pregnant
         workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding (tenth individual Directive within the meaning of Article
         16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC) (OJ L 348, p. 1).
      
The request was made in the course of proceedings between Mrs Paquay (‘the applicant’) and the Société d’architectes Hoet
         + Minne SPRL (‘the defendant’) concerning the dismissal of the applicant.
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
 Directive 76/As is clear from Article 1, the purpose of Directive 76/is to put into effect in the Member States the principle of equal
         treatment for men and women as regards access to employment, including promotion, vocational training and working conditions.
      
Article 2(1) of Directive 76/provides that that principle shall mean that there shall be no discrimination whatsoever
         on grounds of sex either directly or indirectly by reference in particular to marital or family status.
      
Article 2(3) of that directive states that the directive shall be without prejudice to provisions concerning the protection
         of women, particularly as regards pregnancy and maternity. 
      
In the wording of Article 5(1) of Directive 76/207, application of the principle of equal treatment with regard to working
         conditions, including the conditions governing dismissal, means that men and women shall be guaranteed the same conditions
         without discrimination on grounds of sex.
      
In accordance with Article of that directive Member States shall introduce into their national legal systems such measures
         as are necessary to enable all persons who consider themselves wronged by failure to apply to them the principle of equal
         treatment within the meaning of Articles 3, and of that directive to pursue their claims by judicial process after possible
         recourse to other competent authorities.
      
 Directive 92/It is apparent from the ninth recital of Directive 92/that the protection of the safety and health of pregnant workers,
         workers who have recently given birth or workers who are breastfeeding should not work to the detriment of women in the labour
         market or undermine directives concerning equal treatment for men and women
      
According to the 15th recital of that directive the risk of dismissal for reasons associated with their condition may have harmful effects on the
         physical and mental state of pregnant workers, workers who have recently given birth or who are breastfeeding and provision
         should be made for such dismissal to be prohibited.
      
Article of Directive 92/states as follows:
‘In order to guarantee workers, [pregnant workers, those who have recently given birth and those who are breastfeeding] within
         the meaning of Article 2, the exercise of their health and safety protection rights as recognised under this Article, it shall
         be provided that: 
      
1.       Member States shall take the necessary measures to prohibit the dismissal of workers, within the meaning of Article 2, during
         the period from the beginning of their pregnancy to the end of the maternity leave referred to in Article 8(1), save in exceptional
         cases not connected with their condition which are permitted under national legislation and/or practice and, where applicable,
         provided that the competent authority has given its consent; 
      
2.       if a worker, within the meaning of Article 2, is dismissed during the period referred to in point 1, the employer must cite
         duly substantiated grounds for her dismissal in writing; 
      
3.       Member States shall take the necessary measures to protect workers, within the meaning of Article 2, from consequences of
         dismissal which is unlawful by virtue of point 1.’
      
Under Article of Directive 92/85, Member States are to introduce into their national legal systems such measures as are
         necessary to enable all workers who consider themselves wronged by failure to comply with the obligations arising from that
         directive to pursue their claims by judicial process (and/or, in accordance with national laws and/or national practices)
         by recourse to other competent authorities.
      
According to Article 14(1) of Directive 92/85, Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative
         provisions necessary to comply with this Directive not later than two years after the adoption thereof, which is October
         1994.
      
 National legislation
Article of the law on work of March (Moniteur belge of March 1971, p. 3931) states:
      
‘An employer who employs a pregnant worker shall not take any steps to unilaterally end the employment relationship from the
         moment when he is informed of the pregnancy until the expiry of the period of one month after the end of the maternity leave,
         except on grounds which are unrelated to the physical condition resulting from the pregnancy or the child birth.
      
The burden of proof rests on the employer to show the grounds. At the worker’s request the employer shall provide them to
         her in writing. 
      
If the grounds relied upon for the dismissal do not comply with the terms of paragraph one, or, if there are no grounds, the
         employer shall pay the worker fixed-sum compensation equal to the gross remuneration for six months, without prejudice to
         any damages available to the worker for breach of the contract of employment.’
      
The law on economic readjustment of August (Moniteur belge of August 1978, p. 9106) transposed Directive 76/into Belgian law and Part V sets out measures of legal protection
         in case of discrimination on grounds of sex.
      
Article of that law provides that all persons who consider themselves wronged may bring an action, before the competent
         court, seeking to enforce the provisions of Part V of the law of August 1978.
      
It is apparent from the reference for a preliminary ruling that Part V of the law of August does not provide a specific
         civil sanction in that regard.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
The applicant, an employee with the defendant firm of architects since December 1987, was on maternity leave from the month
         of September until the end of the month of December 1995.
      
Her maternity leave ended on December and the period of protection against dismissal, running from the beginning of
         the pregnancy until the end of the maternity leave, ended, in accordance with Belgian law, on January 1996.
      
The applicant was dismissed by registered letter dated February 1996, at a time when the period of protection had ended,
         giving a notice period of six months running from March 1996. The defendant ended the contract on April 1996, making
         a compensatory payment for the balance of the notice period.
      
The referring court notes that the decision to dismiss the applicant was taken while she was pregnant and before January
         1996, namely before the end of the period of protection against dismissal, and that decision had been formed in a number of
         stages. 
      
It is apparent from the request for a preliminary ruling that, during the pregnancy, the defendant had placed in a newspaper,
         on May 1995, a notice for the recruitment of a secretary and had indicated to a candidate, on June 1995, that ‘the post
         is available from mid-September until January 1996’ which corresponded to the expected period of maternity leave, ‘and
         then from August 1996’, or from the expiry of the 6-month notice period notified in the usual way after the protection period.
         It is not disputed that, at the date of May 1995, the company was aware of the pregnancy and that the notice concerned
         the post occupied by the applicant.
      
It is equally clear from the reference for a preliminary ruling that the defendant placed a second notice in October 1995,
         that is shortly after the beginning of the maternity leave, worded as follows: ‘accountancy, McIntosch, available immediately,
         career prospects, working in a small team’. It is not disputed that the term ‘pr carr.’, means ‘career prospects’, which confirms
         the firm’s intention to provide for the permanent replacement of the applicant and that the decision was, in that way, taken
         while the applicant was pregnant.
      
As regards the grounds for the dismissal, taking account of the burden of proof which rests with the employer, the referring
         court stated, in its judgment of April 2006, that the explanation that the defendant attempted to give for the dismissal,
         namely a failure to adapt to the evolving profession of architecture, was not established, particularly in the light of certificates
         issued on March indicating that the applicant always worked ‘to the complete satisfaction of her employer’. That court
         therefore held that the applicant’s dismissal was not unrelated to the pregnancy, or at least, to the fact of the birth of
         a child.
      
The referring court also held that Article of the law of March 1971, interpreted in light of its legislative history,
         does not prohibit the decision to dismiss being taken during the protection period, as long as the notification to the worker
         comes more than one month after the end of the maternity leave.
      
In those circumstances, the tribunal du travail de Bruxelles (the Employment Tribunal, Brussels) (Belgium) decided to stay
         proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Must Article of the Directive [92/85] be interpreted as only prohibiting the notification of a decision of dismissal during
         the period of protection referred to in paragraph of that article or does it also prohibit taking a decision of dismissal
         and attempting to find a permanent replacement for the employee before the end of the period of protection?
      
2.      Is dismissal notified after the period of protection provided for in Article of Directive 92/85, but which is not unrelated
         to the pregnancy and/or the birth of a child, contrary to Article 2(1) (or 5(1)) of the Directive [76/207] and, in such a
         case, must the sanction be at least equivalent to that laid down by national law in the implementation of Article of Directive
         92/85?’
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 The first question
By its first question, the referring court asks, in essence, whether Article of Directive 92/should be interpreted as
         prohibiting not only the notification of a decision to dismiss on the ground of pregnancy and/or the birth of a child during
         the period of protection provided for in paragraph of that article but also the taking of such a decision to dismiss and
         preparing the permanent replacement of such a worker before the expiry of that period.
      
In that regard, it is necessary to recall that the objective of Directive 92/is to encourage improvements in the safety
         and health at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding.
      
In that area, the Court has also pointed out that the objective pursued by the Community law rules governing equality as between
         men and women in regard to the rights of pregnant women and women who have given birth, is to protect female workers before
         and after they have given birth (Case C-191/McKenna [2005] ECR I-7631, paragraph 42).
      
Before Directive 92/came into force, the Court had already held that, under the principle of non-discrimination and, particularly,
         Articles 2(1) and 5(1) of Directive 76/207, protection against dismissal should be granted to women not only during maternity
         leave, but also throughout the period of the pregnancy. According to the Court, a dismissal occurring during those periods
         affects only women and therefore constitutes direct discrimination on the grounds of sex (see, to that effect, Case C-179/Handels- og Kontorfunktionærernes Forbund [1990] ECR I-3979, paragraph 15; Case C-394/Brown [1998] ECR I-4185, paragraphs to 27; and McKenna, paragraph 47).
      
It is precisely in view of the harmful effects which the risk of dismissal may have on the physical and mental state of women
         who are pregnant, have recently given birth or are breastfeeding, including the particularly serious risk that pregnant women
         may be prompted voluntarily to terminate their pregnancy, that, pursuant to Article of Directive 92/85, the Community legislature
         subsequently laid down special protection for women, by prohibiting dismissal during the period from the beginning of their
         pregnancy to the end of their maternity leave (Case C-32/Webb [1994] ECR I-3567, paragraph 21; Brown, paragraph 18; C-109/Tele Danmark [2001] ECR I-6993, paragraph 26; and McKenna, paragraph 48). 
      
It is necessary to point out that during that period, Article of Directive 92/does not provide for any exception to,
         or derogation from, the prohibition of dismissing pregnant workers, save in exceptional cases not connected with their condition
         where the employer justifies the dismissal in writing (Webb, paragraph 22; Brown, paragraph 18; and Tele Danmark, paragraph 27).
      
Finally, it is necessary to point out that, in the context of the application of Article of Directive 92/85, the Member
         States cannot amend the scope of the concept of ‘dismissal’ thereby negating the extent of the protection which that provision
         offers and compromising its effectiveness.
      
Having regard to the objectives pursued by Directive 92/and, more specifically, to those pursued by its Article 10, it
         is necessary to point out that the prohibition on the dismissal of pregnant women and women who have recently given birth
         or are breastfeeding during the period of protection is not limited to the notification of that decision to dismiss. The protection
         granted by that provision to those workers excludes both the taking of a decision to dismiss as well as the steps of preparing
         for the dismissal, such as searching for and finding a permanent replacement for the relevant employee on the grounds of the
         pregnancy and/or the birth of a child.
      
As the Italian Government correctly noted, an employer, such as the employer in the present case, who decides to replace a
         pregnant worker or a worker who has recently given birth or is breastfeeding, on the grounds of her condition, and who, from
         the moment when he first had knowledge of the pregnancy, takes concrete steps with a view to finding a replacement, is pursuing
         the objective which is specifically prohibited by Directive 92/85, that is to dismiss a worker on the grounds of her pregnancy
         and/or the birth of a child 
      
A contrary interpretation, restricting the prohibition to only the notification of the decision to dismiss during the period
         of protection set down in Article of Directive 92/85, would deprive that article of its effectiveness and could give rise
         to a risk that employers will circumvent the prohibition to the detriment of the rights of pregnant women and women who have
         recently given birth or are breastfeeding, enshrined in Directive 92/85.
      
Nevertheless it must be recalled, as is clear from paragraph of the present judgment, that a pregnant worker, or a worker
         who has recently given birth or is breastfeeding, in accordance with the provisions of Article 10(1) of Directive 92/85, may
         be dismissed during the period of protection provided for in that provision in exceptional cases not connected with her condition,
         allowed under national laws or practices.
      
Moreover, regarding the burden of proof applicable in circumstances such as those in the present case, it is a matter for
         the national court to apply the relevant provisions of Council Directive 97/80/EC of December on the burden of proof
         in cases of discrimination based on sex (OJ L 14, p. 6) which, under its Article 3(1)(a), applies to situations covered
         by Directive 92/insofar as discrimination on grounds of sex is concerned. It is apparent from Article 4(1) of Directive
         97/that when persons who consider themselves wronged because the principle of equal treatment has not been applied to them
         establish, before a court or other competent authority, facts from which it may be presumed that there has been direct or
         indirect discrimination, it shall be for the respondent to prove that there has been no breach of the principle of equal treatment.
      
Having regard to the above, the reply to the first question must be that Article of Directive 92/must be interpreted
         as prohibiting not only the notification of a decision to dismiss on the grounds of pregnancy and/or of the birth of a child
         during the period of protection set down in paragraph of that article but also the taking of preparatory steps for such
         a decision before the end of that period.
      
 The second question
By its second question, the referring court essentially asks, first, whether a dismissal decision, on the grounds of pregnancy
         and/or the birth of a child, notified after the end of the period of protection set down in Article of Directive 92/85,
         is contrary to Articles 2(1) and 5(1) of Directive 76/and, secondly, in circumstances where a violation of those provisions
         of Directive 76/is proved, whether the measure chosen by the Member State under Article of that latter directive to
         sanction the infringement of those provisions must be at least equivalent to that provided for by the national law implementing
         Articles and of Directive 92/85.
      
As regards the first part of the second question, it is necessary to recall, as is clear from paragraph of the present
         judgment, that the Court has already held that protection against dismissal should be granted to women not only during maternity
         leave, but also throughout the period of the pregnancy. The dismissal of a female worker during her pregnancy or during her
         maternity leave for reasons linked to the pregnancy and/or the birth of a child constitutes direct discrimination on the grounds
         of sex contrary to Articles 2(1) and 5(1) of Directive 76/207.
      
As is clear from the Court’s response to the first question and, in particular, paragraphs and of the present judgment,
         the fact that such a decision to dismiss is notified after the period of protection set down in Article of Directive 92/is irrelevant. Any other interpretation of Articles 2(1) and 5(1) of Directive 76/would restrict the scope of the protection
         afforded by Community law, to pregnant women or women who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding, contrary to the
         broad logic and evolution of the rules of Community law governing equality between men and women in that area. 
      
The reply to the first part of the second question must therefore be that a decision to dismiss on the grounds of pregnancy
         and/or the birth of a child is contrary to Articles 2(1) and 5(1) of Directive 76/irrespective of the moment when that
         decision to dismiss is notified and even if it is notified after the expiry of the period of protection set down in Article
         of Directive 92/85.
      
As regards the second part of the second question it is necessary to recall that, under Article of Directive 76/207, the
         Member States are bound to take the necessary measures to enable all persons who consider themselves wronged by discrimination,
         such as that in the present case, contrary to Articles 2(1) and 5(1) of that directive, to pursue their claims by judicial
         process. Such obligation implies that the measures in question should be sufficiently effective to achieve the objective of
         the directive and should be capable of being effectively relied upon by the persons concerned before national courts (Case
         C-271/Marshall [1993] ECR I-4367, paragraph 22).
      
That Article does not prescribe a specific measure to be taken in the event of a breach of the prohibition of discrimination,
         but leaves Member States free to choose between the different solutions suitable for achieving the objective of the directive,
         depending on the different situations which may arise (Case 14/von Colson and Kamann [1984] ECR 1891, paragraph 18, and Marshall, paragraph 23).
      
However, the objective is to arrive at real equality of opportunity and cannot therefore be attained in the absence of measures
         appropriate to restore such equality when it has not been observed. Those measures must guarantee real and effective judicial
         protection and have a real deterrent effect on the employer (Marshall, paragraph 24). 
      
Such requirements necessarily entail that the particular circumstances of each breach of the principle of equal treatment
         should be taken into account. Where financial compensation is the measure adopted in order to achieve the objective previously
         indicated, it must be adequate, in that it must enable the loss and damage actually sustained as a result of the discriminatory
         dismissal to be made good in full in accordance with the applicable national rules (Marshall, paragraphs and 26).
      
It is necessary to recall that, in accordance with Article of Directive 92/85, Member States are also bound to take the
         necessary measures to enable all workers who consider themselves wronged by failure to comply with the obligations arising
         from that directive, including those arising from its Article 10, to pursue their claims by judicial process. Article 10(3)
         of Directive 92/specifically states that Member States shall take the necessary measures to protect pregnant workers or
         those who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding from the consequences of dismissal which is unlawful by virtue of
         paragraph of that provision.
      
It is apparent from the Court’s replies to the first question and to the first part of the second question that notification
         of a dismissal decision, taken by reason of the pregnancy and/or the birth of a child, to a worker during the period of protection
         set down in Article of Directive 92/85, and the taking of such a decision during that period of protection, even in the
         absence of notification, and the preparation of a permanent replacement of that female worker on the same grounds, are contrary
         to Articles 2(1) and 5(1) of Directive 76/as well as Article of Directive 92/85.
      
While recognising that the Member States are not bound, under Article of Directive 76/or Article of Directive 92/85,
         to adopt a specific measure, nevertheless the fact remains, as is clear from paragraph of the present judgment, that the
         measure chosen must be such as to ensure effective and efficient legal protection, must have a genuine dissuasive effect with
         regard to the employer and must be commensurate with the injury suffered.
      
If, under Articles and of Directive 92/and to comply with the requirements established by the case-law of the Court
         on the issue of sanctions, a Member State chooses to sanction the failure to respect obligations arising under Article by granting a fixed amount of pecuniary damages, it follows, as the Italian Government pointed out in the present case, that
         the measure chosen by the Member State, in the case of infringement, in identical circumstances, of the prohibition on discrimination
         under Articles 2(1) and 5(1) of Directive 76/must be at least equivalent to that amount.
      
If the compensation chosen by a Member State under Article of Directive 92/is judged necessary to protect the relevant
         workers, it is difficult to understand how a reduced level of compensation adopted to comply with Article of Directive 76/could be deemed adequate for the injury suffered if the injury was brought about by a dismissal in identical circumstances
         and contrary to Articles 2(1) and 5(1) of that latter directive.
      
Moreover, as the Court has already stated, in choosing the appropriate solution for guaranteeing that the objective of Directive
         76/is attained, the Member States must ensure that infringements of Community law are penalised under conditions, both
         procedural and substantive, which are analogous to those applicable to infringements of domestic law of a similar nature and
         importance (Case 68/Commission v Greece [1989] ECR 2965, paragraph 24, and Case C-180/Draehmpaehl [1997] ECR I-2195, paragraph 29). That reasoning applies mutatis mutandis to infringements of Community law of a similar nature and importance.
      
It is therefore necessary to reply to the second part of the second question that, since a decision to dismiss on the grounds
         of pregnancy and/or the birth of a child, notified after the end of the period of protection set down in Article of Directive
         92/85, is contrary both to that provision of Directive 92/and to Articles 2(1) and 5(1) of Directive 76/207, the measure
         chosen by a Member State under Article of that latter directive to sanction the infringement of those provisions must be
         at least equivalent to the sanction set down in national law implementing Articles and of Directive 92/85.
      
Having regard to the above, the reply to the second question must be that a decision to dismiss on the grounds of pregnancy
         and/or the birth of a child is contrary to Articles 2(1) and 5(1) of Directive 76/irrespective of the moment when that
         decision to dismiss is notified and even if it is notified after the end of the period of protection set down in Article of Directive 92/85. Since such a decision to dismiss is contrary to both Article of Directive 92/and Articles 2(1) and
         5(1) of Directive 76/207, the measure chosen by a Member State under Article of that latter directive to sanction the infringement
         of those provisions must be at least equivalent to the sanction set down in national law implementing Articles and of
         Directive 92/85.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article of Council Directive 92/85/EEC of October on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in
            the safety and health at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding (tenth individual
            Directive within the meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC) must be interpreted as prohibiting not only the notification
            of a decision to dismiss on the grounds of pregnancy and/or of the birth of a child during the period of protection set down
            in paragraph of that article but also the taking of preparatory steps for such a decision before the end of that period.
2.      A decision to dismiss on the grounds of pregnancy and/or child birth is contrary to Articles 2(1) and 5(1) of Council Directive
            76/207/EEC, of February 1976, on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women as regards access
            to employment, vocational training and promotion, and working conditions irrespective of the moment when that decision to
            dismiss is notified and even if it is notified after the end of the period of protection set down in Article of Directive
            92/85. Since such a decision to dismiss is contrary to both Article of Directive 92/and Articles 2(1) and 5(1) of Directive
            76/207, the measure chosen by a Member State under Article of that latter directive to sanction the infringement of those
            provisions must be at least equivalent to the sanction set down in national law implementing Articles and of Directive
            92/85.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 