
         				Ordonnance de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-325/P
José Luis Zuazaga Meabe
v
Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM)
(Appeal – Community trade mark – Action for annulment – Inadmissibility because out of time – Appeal manifestly unfounded)
Order of the Court (Fourth Chamber), January Summary of the Order
1.     Procedure – Time-limits for bringing an action – Proceedings instituted by facsimile – Time-limit for lodging the signed original
            – Starting-point – Date of receipt of the fax and not date of expiry of the time-limit for instituting proceedings 
(Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance, Arts 43(6) and 102(2); Council Regulation No 40/94, Art. 63(5))
2.     Procedure – Time-limits for bringing an action – Lapse of rights – Force majeure – Concept – Limits – Specific case
(Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 45)
1.     It follows from the wording of Article 43(6) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance that the date on which
         a copy of the signed original of a pleading is received at the Registry of the Court of First Instance by fax is taken into
         consideration, for the purposes of compliance with the procedural time-limits, only if the signed original of the pleading
         is lodged at the Registry no later than days thereafter. 
      
Accordingly, with regard to an action brought against the decision of a Board of Appeal of the Office for Harmonisation in
         the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs), that time-limit of days begins to run from the date receipt of the fax and
         not the date of expiry of the period of two months and ten days arising from the provisions of Article 63(5) of Regulation
         No 40/on the Community trade mark, in conjunction with Article 102(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance.
         In particular, where the fax is received more than days before the expiry of the time-limit fixed for bringing an action
         before the Court of First Instance, the provisions of Article 43(6) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance
         do not extend that time-limit. 
      
(see paras 17-18)
2.     The concept of ‘force majeure’, within the meaning of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice on time-limits for
         bringing an action, contains both an objective element relating to abnormal circumstances unconnected with the person in question
         and a subjective element involving the obligation, on that person’s part, to guard against the consequences of the abnormal
         event by taking appropriate steps without making unreasonable sacrifices.  In particular, the person concerned must pay close
         attention to the course of the procedure set in motion and, in particular, demonstrate diligence in order to comply with the
         prescribed time-limits.  Thus, the concept of force majeure does not apply to a situation in which, objectively, a diligent
         and prudent person would have been able to take the necessary steps before the expiry of the period prescribed for instituting
         proceedings. 
      
Such is the case where an applicant increased the likelihood that his application would arrive out of time at the Community
         Court by having allowed a number of days to elapse after sending a copy of the signed original of the application by fax before
         entrusting that original, not directly to the postal service, but to an intermediary undertaking, which itself waited some
         days before sending that document by registered letter to the Registry of that Court.
      
(see paras 25-26)
  
ORDER OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)January 2005(1)
(Appeal  –  Community trade mark  –  Action for annulment  –  Inadmissibility because out of time  –  Appeal manifestly unfounded)
In Case C-325/P, APPEAL pursuant to Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice brought on July 2003,
         
 José Luis Zuazaga Meabe,  residing in Bilbao (Spain), represented by J.A. Calderón Chavero and N. Moya Fernández, abogados,
         
appellant,
 the other parties to the proceedings being:
          Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM),   represented by O. Montalto and I. de Medrano Caballero, acting as Agents,defendant at first instance, Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria SA (BBVA),  established in  Madrid (Spain), represented by J. de Rivera Lamo de Espinosa, abogado,party to the proceedings before the Board of Appeal of OHIM, 
intervener on appeal,
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
 composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber,  J.N. Cunha Rodrigues and M. Ilešič (Rapporteur), Judges,
         
 Advocate General: M. Poiares Maduro,Registrar:  R. Grass,
          after hearing the Advocate General, 
         makes the following
Order
            
 By his appeal, Mr Zuazaga Meabe seeks to have set aside the order of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities
         of April in Case T-15/Zuazaga Meabe  v  OHIM – BBVA (BLUE) , not published in the ECR (‘the order under appeal’), dismissing his action for annulment of the decision of the Second Board
         of Appeal of the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (‘OHIM’) of October (Case
         R 918/2001-2) (‘the contested decision’), rejecting Mr Zuazaga Meabe’s opposition to the registration of the word mark BLUE
         applied for by Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria SA (‘BBVA’).
         
 Background to the dispute, procedure before the Court of First Instance and the order under appeal
            
 BBVA filed an application at OHIM to register as a Community trade mark the word mark BLUE and Mr Zuazaga Meabe gave notice
         of opposition under Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 40/of December on the Community trade mark (OJ L 11, p. 1), invoking a likelihood of confusion with the national word mark BILBAO BLUE, which he owns.
         
            
 At first upheld by the Opposition Division of OHIM, that opposition was then dismissed by the contested decision, which was
         notified to Mr Zuazaga Meabe by registered recorded-delivery letter received on November 2002.
         
            
 Mr Zuazaga Meabe brought an action before the Court of First Instance seeking annulment of the contested decision. A copy
         of the application was received by the Registry of the Court of First Instance by fax on January 2003, whilst the original
         was received on January 2003.
         
            
 The Court of First Instance first of all found, in paragraphs to of the order under appeal, that the period within which
         the appellant was entitled to commence proceedings under Article 63(5) of Regulation No 40/and Article 102(2) of the Rules
         of Procedure of the Court of First Instance had expired on January 2003.
         
            
 Next it pointed out in paragraph of the order under appeal that, whilst the application had indeed been lodged at the Registry
         of the Court of First Instance by fax on January 2003, before the expiry of the time allowed for commencing proceedings,
         the original of the application, by contrast, was not received at the Registry until January 2003, that is outside the
         10-day time‑limit referred to in Article 43(6) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance, so that only the
         date of lodgement of the original was to be taken into account and the application had therefore been lodged out of time.
         
            
 Lastly, in paragraph of the order under appeal, it pointed out that the appellant had not demonstrated, or even alleged,
         the existence of unforeseeable circumstances or force majeure so as to permit a derogation from the time-limit in question
         on the basis of the second paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice. 
         
            
 Accordingly, it dismissed the action as manifestly inadmissible.
         
 The appeal 
            
 In his appeal, in support of which he puts forward five pleas in law, the appellant claims that the Court should set aside
         the order under appeal and refer the case back to the Court of First Instance. 
         
            
 OHIM decided not to lodge a response.
         
            
 BBVA contends that the Court should dismiss the appeal and order the appellant to pay the costs.
         
            
 According to Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, where the appeal is, in whole or in part, clearly
         inadmissible or clearly unfounded, the Court may at any time, acting on a report from the Judge-Rapporteur and after hearing
         the Advocate General, by reasoned order dismiss the appeal in whole or in part. 
         
 The second, third, fourth and fifth pleas in law 
            
 By his second, third, fourth and fifth pleas in law, which should be examined together, the appellant criticises the Court
         of First Instance for having infringed, respectively, Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance
         and Article 81(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of
         First Instance and Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, and Article 43(3) and (6) of the Rules of
         Procedure of the Court of First Instance.
         
            
 He submits essentially that those provisions are the expression of the principle of proportionality and of ‘legal tolerance’
         in respect of extending procedural time‑limits, so that the time-limit of days within which the original of the application
         must be lodged, under Article 43(6) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance, begins to run not on the date
         the fax is received but on the expiry of the period of two months and days resulting from the provisions of Article 63(5)
         of Regulation No 40/in conjunction with Article 102(2) of those Rules of Procedure.
         
            
 Thus, in the present case, the time-limit laid down for lodging the original of the application did not expire on January
         but on January and, therefore, his application should not have been held to be inadmissible.
         
            
 In this respect, according to settled case-law, no derogation from the application of the Community rules on procedural time-limits
         may be made save where the circumstances are quite exceptional, in the sense of being unforeseeable or amounting to force
         majeure, in accordance with the second paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, since the strict application
         of those rules serves the requirements of legal certainty and the need to avoid any discrimination or arbitrary treatment
         in the administration of justice (see, in particular, the orders in Case C-239/Ireland  v  Commission  [1998] ECR I-2655, paragraph 7, and of February in Case C-369/P  Forum des migrants  v  Commission  [2004] ECR I-0000, paragraph 16). 
         
            
 Pursuant to Article 43(6) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance, the date on which a copy of the signed
         original of a pleading is received at the Registry of the Court of First Instance by fax is taken into consideration, for
         the purposes of compliance with the procedural time-limits, only if the signed original of the pleading is lodged at the Registry
         no later than days thereafter.
         
            
 Accordingly, the interpretation to the effect that that time-limit begins to run from the date of expiry of the period of
         two months and days arising from the provisions of Article 63(5) of Regulation No 40/in conjunction with Article 102(2)
         of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance, irrespective of the date of receipt of the fax, cannot be upheld.
         In particular, it should be noted that where, as in the present case, the fax is received more than days before the expiry
         of the time-limit fixed for bringing an action before the Court of First Instance, the provisions of Article 43(6) of the
         Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance do not extend that time‑limit.
         
            
 In the present case, since the appellant sent his application by fax received on January 2003, the original of the application
         should have been lodged at the Registry of the Court of First Instance by January at the latest in order that account
         be taken of that fax. Since the original of the application did not arrive until January 2003, the Court of First Instance
         rightly held that that date alone was to be taken into account in assessing whether the time-limits for bringing proceedings
         had been complied with.
         
            
 The second, third, fourth and fifth pleas in law must therefore be rejected as clearly unfounded. 
         
 The first plea in law 
            
 By his first plea in law the appellant submits that the Court of First Instance infringed Article of the Statute of the
         Court of Justice by not finding that there was force majeure within the meaning of that article.
         
            
 The appellant states that he entrusted the original of his application to Cibeles Mailing SA (‘Cibeles Mailing’) on January
         2003, that is seven days before the expiry of the time-limit within which to commence proceedings, for its consignment to
         the Spanish postal service. Accordingly, the delay in the arrival of that letter at the Registry of the Court of First Instance
         was unforeseeable. He submits that he cannot be criticised for not having recourse to a faster method of despatch (private
         courier service) as the postal service is the safest and most efficient method in Spain.
         
            
 He adds that where a party has done everything in its power to entrust to an ordinary administrative service the letter of
         confirmation, the principle of proportionality requires the Court of First Instance to relax its time-limits.
         
            
 As a preliminary point, it should be noted that the Court of First Instance, which gave its decision by order on the basis
         of Article of its Rules of Procedure, did not inform Mr Zuazaga Meabe of its intention to dismiss the action as being
         out of time and did not give him an opportunity to justify the delay in the arrival at the Registry of the original of the
         application. Accordingly, the appellant cannot be criticised for pleading force majeure for the first time on appeal. 
         
            
 The concept of ‘force majeure’ within the meaning of Article of the Statute of the Court, contains both an objective element
         relating to abnormal circumstances unconnected with the person in question and a subjective element involving the obligation,
         on that person’s part, to guard against the consequences of the abnormal event by taking appropriate steps without making
         unreasonable sacrifices. In particular, the person concerned must pay close attention to the course of the procedure set in
         motion and, in particular, demonstrate diligence in order to comply with the prescribed time-limits (Case C-195/P  Bayer  v  Commission  [1994] ECR I-5619, paragraph 32). Thus, the concept of force majeure does not apply to a situation in which, objectively,
         a diligent and prudent person would have been able to take the necessary steps before the expiry of the period prescribed
         for instituting proceedings (Case 209/Ferriera Valsabbia  v  Commission  [1984] ECR 3089, paragraph 22).
         
            
 In the present case it is clear from the notice of appeal that Mr Zuazaga Meabe allowed four days to elapse after sending
         the fax before entrusting – just seven days before the expiry of the time-limit for commencing proceedings – the original
         of the application, not directly to the postal service, but to Cibeles Mailing, which itself waited two days before sending
         that document by registered letter to the Registry of the Court of First Instance. It follows that, by his conduct, Mr Zuazaga
         Meabe increased the likelihood that his application would arrive out of time at the Court of First Instance and thus did not
         display the diligence expected of an ordinarily prudent appellant in order to comply with the time-limits.
         
            
 Such a failure of diligence precludes the existence of force majeure and consequently the first plea in law must be rejected
         as clearly unfounded.
         
            
 Accordingly, the appeal must be dismissed as clearly unfounded.
         
Costs
            
 Article 69(1) and (2) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, which applies to appeal proceedings pursuant to Article
         of those Rules, provides that a decision as to costs is to be given in the final judgment or in the order which closes
         the proceedings and the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful
         party’s pleadings. Since BBVA applied for costs against the appellant and he has been unsuccessful, he must be ordered to
         bear his own costs and to pay those incurred by the intervener. However, as OHIM did not apply for costs against the appellant,
         it must bear its own costs. 
         
 On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby orders:
         
 
1.
 The appeal is dismissed. 
 
2.
 Mr Zuazaga Meabe shall bear his own costs and pay those incurred by Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria SA. 
 
3.
 The Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM) shall bear its own costs.  
[Signatures]
      
 –
            
Language of the case: Spanish.
Top  
 