
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Joined Cases C-465/00, C-138/and C-139/RechnungshofvÖsterreichischer Rundfunk and OthersandChrista Neukomm and Joseph LauermannvÖsterreichischer Rundfunk(References for a preliminary ruling from the Verfassungsgerichtshof and the Oberster Gerichtshof (Austria))
         
«(Protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data – Directive 95/46/EC – Protection of private life – Disclosure of data on the income of employees of bodies subject to control by the Rechnungshof)»
Opinion of Advocate General Tizzano delivered on November I - Judgment of the Court, May I - Summary of the Judgment
1..
Approximation of laws – Directive 95/– Scope – Determination in accordance with the subject-matter of the directive – Abolition of barriers to the functioning of the internal market  (Directive 95/of the European Parliament and of the Council) 
2..
Approximation of laws – Directive 95/– Interpretation in the light of fundamental rights  (Directive 95/of the European Parliament and of the Council) 
3..
Community law – Principles – Fundamental rights – Respect for private life – Interference within the meaning of Article of the European Convention on Human Rights   (European Convention on Human Rights, Art. 8) 
4..
Community law – Principles – Fundamental rights – Respect for private life – Restriction – National legislation requiring a State control body to collect and communicate, for purposes of publication, data on the income
                     of persons employed by bodies subject to that control where the income exceeds a certain threshold – Justification under Article 8(2) of the European Convention on Human Rights – Objective of public interest – Management of public funds – Proportionality   
                  (European Convention on Human Rights, Art. 8(2)) 
5..
Approximation of laws – Directive 95/– National legislation requiring a State control body to collect and communicate, for purposes of publication, data on the income
                     of persons employed by bodies subject to that control where the income exceeds a certain threshold – Permissible – Condition – Disclosure necessary with regard to the objective of proper management of public funds – Proportionality  
                  (Directive 95/of the European Parliament and of the Council, Arts 6(1)(c) and 7(c) and (e)) 
6..
Acts of the institutions – Directives – Effect – Non-implementation by a Member State – Right of individuals to rely on the directive – Conditions  (Art. 249, third para., EC; Directive 95/of the European Parliament and of the Council, Arts 6(1)(c) and 7(c) and (e))
                  
1.
 The applicability of Directive 95/on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on
         the free movement of such data cannot depend on whether the specific situations at issue have a sufficient link with the exercise
         of the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty, in particular the freedom of movement of workers. A contrary interpretation
         could make the limits of the field of application of the directive particularly unsure and uncertain, which would be contrary
         to its essential objective of approximating the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States in order
         to eliminate obstacles to the functioning of the internal market deriving precisely from disparities between national legislations.
          see para. 2.
 The provisions of Directive 95/on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the
         free movement of such data, in so far as they govern the processing of personal data liable to infringe fundamental freedoms,
         in particular the right to privacy, must necessarily be interpreted in the light of fundamental rights, which form an integral
         part of the general principles of law whose observance the Court ensures.  see para. 3.
 While the mere recording by an employer of data by name relating to the remuneration paid to his employees cannot as such
         constitute an interference with private life, the communication of that data to third parties, in the present case a public
         authority, infringes the right of the persons concerned to respect for private life, whatever the subsequent use of the information
         thus communicated, and constitutes an interference within the meaning of Article of the European Convention on Human Rights.
         To establish the existence of such an interference, it does not matter whether the information communicated is of a sensitive
         character or whether the persons concerned have been inconvenienced in any way. It suffices to find that data relating to
         the remuneration received by an employee or pensioner have been communicated by the employer to a third party. see paras 74-4.
 The interference with private life resulting from the application of national legislation  which requires a State control
         body to collect and communicate, for purposes of publication, data on the income of persons employed by the bodies subject
         to that control, where that income exceeds a certain threshold, may be justified under Article 8(2) of the European Convention
         on Human Rights only in so far as the wide disclosure not merely of the amounts of the annual income above a certain threshold
         of persons employed by the bodies subject to control by the State body in question but also of the names of the recipients
         of that income is both necessary for and appropriate to the aim of keeping salaries within reasonable limits, that being a
         matter for the national courts to examine. see para. 5.
 Articles 6(1)(c) and 7(c) and (e) of Directive 95/on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal
         data and on the free movement of such data do not preclude national legislation requiring a State control body to collect
         and communicate, for purposes of publication, data on the income of persons employed by the bodies subject to that control,
         where that income exceeds a certain threshold, provided that it is shown that the wide disclosure not merely of the amounts
         of the annual income above a certain threshold of persons employed by the bodies subject to control by the State body in question
         but also of the names of the recipients of that income is necessary for and appropriate to the objective of proper management
         of public funds pursued by the legislature, that being for the national courts to ascertain. see para. 94, operative part 6.
 Wherever the provisions of a directive appear, so far as their subject-matter is concerned, to be unconditional and sufficiently
         precise, they may, in the absence of implementing measures adopted within the prescribed period, be relied on against any
         national provision which is incompatible with the directive or in so far as they define rights which individuals are able
         to assert against the State. Such a character may be attributed to Article 6(1)(c) of Directive 95/on the protection of individuals with regard to the
         processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, under which  
         personal data must be ... adequate, relevant and not excessive in relation to the purposes for which they are collected and/or
         further processed, and to Article 7(c) or (e) of that directive, under which personal data may be processed only if inter alia  
         processing is necessary for compliance with a legal obligation to which the controller is subject or  
         is necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority vested
         in the controller ... to whom the data are disclosed. see paras 98, 100-101, operative part JUDGMENT OF THE COURTMay (1)
((Protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data – Directive 95/46/EC – Protection of private life – Disclosure of data on the income of employees of bodies subject to control by the Rechnungshof))
In Joined Cases C-465/00, C-138/and C-139/01, 
            REFERENCES to the Court under Article EC by the Verfassungsgerichtshof (C-465/00) and the Oberster Gerichtshof (C-138/and C-139/01) (Austria) for preliminary rulings in the proceedings pending before those courts between 
            
 Rechnungshof (C-465/00)
and
 Österreichischer Rundfunk, Wirtschaftskammer Steiermark, Marktgemeinde Kaltenleutgeben, Land Niederösterreich, Österreichische Nationalbank, Stadt Wiener Neustadt, Austrian Airlines, Österreichische Luftverkehrs-AG,
and between  Christa Neukomm (C-138/01), Joseph Lauermann (C-139/01)
and
 Österreichischer Rundfunk,
on the interpretation of Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of October on the protection
            of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data (OJ L 281, p. 31),
THE COURT,,
composed of: G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias, President, J.-P. Puissochet, M. Wathelet (Rapporteur) and R. Schintgen (Presidents of Chambers), C. Gulmann, D.A.O. Edward, A. La Pergola, P. Jann, V. Skouris, F. Macken, N. Colneric, S. von Bahr and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: A. Tizzano, Registrar: M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
the Rechnungshof, by F. Fiedler, acting as Agent (C-465/00), 
               
─
Österreichischer Rundfunk, by P. Zöchbauer, Rechtsanwalt (C-465/00), 
               
─
Wirtschaftskammer Steiermark, by P. Mühlbacher and B. Rupp, acting as Agents (C-465/00), 
               
─
Marktgemeinde Kaltenleutgeben, by F. Nistelberger, Rechtsanwalt (C-465/00), 
               
─
Land Niederösterreich, by E. Pröll, C. Kleiser and L. Staudigl, acting as Agents (C-465/00), 
               
─
Österreichische Nationalbank, by K. Liebscher and G. Tumpel-Gugerell, acting as Agents (C-465/00), 
               
─
Stadt Wiener Neustadt, by H. Linhart, acting as Agent (C-465/00), 
               
─
Austrian Airlines, Österreichische Luftverkehrs-AG, by H. Jarolim, Rechtsanwalt (C-465/00), 
               
─
the Austrian Government, by H. Dossi, acting as Agent (C-465/00, C-138/and C-139/01), 
               
─
the Danish Government, by J. Molde, acting as Agent (C-465/00), 
               
─
the Italian Government, by U. Leanza, acting as Agent, assisted by D. Del Gaizo, avvocato dello Stato (C-465/00) and O. Fiumara,
               avvocato generale dello Stato (C-138/and C-139/01), 
               
─
the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster, acting as Agent (C-465/00, C-138/and C-139/01), 
               
─
the Finnish Government, by E. Bygglin, acting as Agent (C-465/00), 
               
─
the Swedish Government, by A. Kruse, acting as Agent (C-465/00, C-138/and C-139/01), 
               
─
the United Kingdom Government, by R. Magrill, acting as Agent, and J. Coppel, Barrister (C-465/00, C-138/and C-139/01),
               
               
─
the Commission of the European Communities, by U. Wölker and X. Lewis, acting as Agents (C-465/00, C-138/and C-139/01),
               
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of Marktgemeinde Kaltenleutgeben, represented by F. Nistelberger; Land Niederösterreich,
               represented by C. Kleiser; Österreichische Nationalbank, represented by B. Gruber, Rechtsanwalt; Austrian Airlines, Österreichische
               Luftverkehrs-AG, represented by H. Jarolim; the Austrian Government, represented by W. Okresek, acting as Agent; the Italian
               Government, represented by M. Fiorilli, avvocato dello Stato; the Netherlands Government, represented by J. van Bakel, acting
               as Agent; the Finnish Government, represented by T. Pynnä, acting as Agent; the Swedish Government, represented by A. Kruse
               and B. Hernqvist, acting as Agent; and the Commission, represented by U. Wölker and C. Docksey, acting as Agent, at the hearing
               on June 2002,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on November 2002,
gives the following
Judgment
            
By orders of December and and February 2001, the first of which was received at the Court on December and the other two on March 2001, the Verfassungsgerichtshof (Constitutional Court) (C-465/00) and the Oberster Gerichtshof
         (Supreme Court) (C-138/and C-139/01) each referred to the Court under Article EC two questions, formulated in substantially
         the same way, on the interpretation of Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of October on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data (OJ
         L 281, p. 31). 
         
            
Those questions were raised in proceedings between, first, the Rechnungshof (Court of Audit) and a large number of bodies
         subject to its control and, second, Ms Neukomm and Mr Lauermann and their employer Österreichischer Rundfunk (
         ÖRF), a broadcasting organisation governed by public law, concerning the obligation of public bodies subject to control by the
         Rechnungshof to communicate to it the salaries and pensions exceeding a certain level paid by them to their employees and
         pensioners together with the names of the recipients, for the purpose of drawing up an annual report to be transmitted to
         the Nationalrat, the Bundesrat and the Landtage (the lower and upper chambers of the Federal Parliament and the provincial
         assemblies) and made available to the general public (
         the Report). 
         
Legal context
National provisions
         
            
Under Paragraph of the Bundesverfassungsgesetz über die Begrenzung von Bezügen öffentlicher Funktionäre (Federal constitutional
         law on the limitation of salaries of public officials, BGBl. I 1997/64, as amended,  
         the BezBegrBVG): 
         
1.
 Bodies subject to control by the Rechnungshof must, within the first three months of each second calendar year, inform the
         Rechnungshof of the salaries or pensions of persons who in at least one of the two previous calendar years drew salaries or
         pensions greater annually than times 80% of the monthly reference amount under Paragraph [for 2000, times EUR 887.87].
         The bodies must also state the salaries and pensions of persons who draw an additional salary or pension from a body subject
         to audit by the Rechnungshof. Persons who draw a salary or pension from two or more bodies subject to control by the Rechnungshof
         must inform the bodies of this. If this duty of disclosure is not complied with by the body, the Rechnungshof must inspect
         the relevant documents and draw up its report on the basis thereof.
         
2.
 In the application of subparagraph 1, social benefits and benefits in kind are also to be taken into account, unless they
         are benefits from sickness or accident insurance or on the basis of comparable provisions of  
          Land  law. Where several salaries or pensions are paid by bodies subject to control by the Rechnungshof, they are to be aggregated.
         
3.
 The Rechnungshof shall summarise that information ─ for each year separately ─ in a report. The report shall include all persons
         whose total yearly salaries and pensions from bodies subject to control by the Rechnungshof exceed the amount stated in subparagraph
         1. The report shall be transmitted to the Nationalrat, the Bundesrat and the Landtage.
         
            
It appears from the orders of reference that, in the light of the  
          travaux préparatoires  of the BezBegrBVG, legal commentators deduce from the latter provision that the Report must give the names of the persons
         concerned and against each name the amount of annual remuneration received. 
         
            
The Verfassungsgerichtshof states that, in accordance with the legislature's intention, the Report must be made available
         to the general public, so as to provide them with  
         comprehensive information. It states that through this information pressure is brought to bear on the bodies concerned to keep salaries at a low level,
         so that public funds are used thriftily, economically and efficiently. 
         
            
The bodies subject to audit by the Rechnungshof are the Federation, the  
          Länder  (Federal provinces), large municipalities and ─ where a reasoned request has been made by the government of a  
          Land  ─ municipalities with fewer than inhabitants, associations of municipalities, social security institutions, statutory
         professional bodies, Österreichischer Rundfunk, institutions, funds and foundations managed by organs of the Federation or
         the  
          Länder  or by persons appointed by them for that purpose, and undertakings managed by the Federation, a  
          Land  or a municipality or (alone or jointly with other bodies subject to control by the Rechnungshof) controlled through a company-law
         holding of not less than 50% or otherwise. 
         Community legislation
         
            
Recitals to in the preamble to Directive 95/show that it was adopted on the basis of Article 100a of the EC Treaty
         (now, after amendment, Article EC) to encourage the free movement of personal data through the harmonisation of the laws,
         regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing
         of such data. 
         
            
According to Article of Directive 95/46: 
         
1.
 In accordance with this Directive, Member States shall protect the fundamental rights and freedoms of natural persons, and
         in particular their right to privacy with respect to the processing of personal data.
         
2.
 Member States shall neither restrict nor prohibit the free flow of personal data between Member States for reasons connected
         with the protection afforded under paragraph 1.
         
            
In this connection, recitals and of Directive 95/read as follows: 
         
(2)
Whereas data-processing systems are designed to serve man; whereas they must, whatever the nationality or residence of natural
         persons, respect their fundamental rights and freedoms, notably the right to privacy, and contribute to economic and social
         progress, trade expansion and the well-being of individuals; 
         
(3)
Whereas the establishment and functioning of an internal market in which, in accordance with Article 7a of the Treaty, the
         free movement of goods, persons, services and capital is ensured require not only that personal data should be able to flow
         freely from one Member State to another, but also that the fundamental rights of individuals should be safeguarded
         . 
         
            
Recital of Directive 95/adds: (10) Whereas the object of the national laws on the processing of personal data is to protect fundamental rights and freedoms,
         notably the right to privacy, which is recognised both in Article of the European Convention for the Protection of Human
         Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and in the general principles of Community law; ...
         
            
Under Article 6(1) of Directive 95/46, personal data (that is, in accordance with Article 2(a),  
         any information relating to an identified or identifiable natural person) must be: 
         
(a)
processed fairly and lawfully; 
         
(b)
collected for specified, explicit and legitimate purposes and not further processed in a way incompatible with those purposes
         ... 
         
(c)
adequate, relevant and not excessive in relation to the purposes for which they are collected and/or further processed; 
         ...
         
            
Article 2(b) of Directive 95/defines  
         processing of personal data as: any operation or set of operations which is performed upon personal data, whether or not by automatic means, such as collection,
         recording, organisation, storage, adaptation or alteration, retrieval, consultation, use, disclosure by transmission, dissemination
         or otherwise making available, alignment or combination, blocking, erasure or destruction.
         
            
Under Article of Directive 95/46, personal data may be processed only if one of the six conditions it sets out is satisfied,
         and in particular if: 
         
(c)
processing is necessary for compliance with a legal obligation to which the controller is subject; or 
         ...
         
(e)
processing is necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority
         vested in the controller ... to whom the data are disclosed
         . 
         
            
According to recital of Directive 95/46, the directive allows for the principle of public access to official documents
         to be taken into account when implementing the principles set out in the directive. 
         
            
As regards the scope of Directive 95/46, Article 3(1) provides that it is to apply to the processing of personal data wholly
         or partly by automatic means, and to the processing otherwise than by automatic means of personal data which form part of
         a filing system or are intended to form part of a filing system. However, under Article 3(2), the directive  
         shall not apply to the processing of personal data: 
         
─
in the course of an activity which falls outside the scope of Community law, such as those provided for by Titles V and VI
            of the Treaty on European Union and in any case to processing operations concerning public security, defence, State security
            (including the economic well-being of the State when the processing operation relates to State security matters) and the activities
            of the State in areas of criminal law; 
         
─
by a natural person in the course of a purely personal or household activity
         
. 
         
            
In addition, Article of Directive 95/authorises Member States to derogate from certain of its provisions, in particular
         Article 6(1), where this is necessary to safeguard  
          inter alia an important economic or financial interest of a Member State or of the European Union, including monetary, budgetary and
         taxation matters (Article 13(1)(e)) or  
         a monitoring, inspection or regulatory function connected, even occasionally, with the exercise of official authority in certain cases referred to, including that in subparagraph (e) (Article 13(1)(f)). 
         The main proceedings and the questions referred for preliminary rulingsCase C-465/Differences of opinion as to the interpretation of Paragraph of the BezBegrBVG arose between the Rechnungshof and a large
         number of bodies under its control with respect to salaries and pensions paid in and 1999. 
         
            
The defendants in the main proceedings, which include local and regional authorities (a  
          Land  and two municipalities), public undertakings, some of which are in competition with other Austrian or foreign undertakings
         not subject to control by the Rechnungshof, and a statutory professional body (Wirtschaftskammer Steiermark), did not communicate
         the data on the income of the employees in question, or communicated the data, to a greater or lesser extent, in anonymised
         form. They refused access to the relevant documents or made access subject to conditions which the Rechnungshof did not accept.
         The Rechnungshof therefore brought proceedings before the Verfassungsgerichtshof pursuant to Article 126a of the Bundes-Verfassungsgesetz
         (Federal Constitutional Law), which gives that court jurisdiction to rule on  
         differences of opinion concerning the interpretation of the statutory provisions governing the jurisdiction of the Rechnungshof. 
         
            
The Rechnungshof infers from Paragraph of the BezBegrBVG an obligation to list in the Report the names of the persons concerned
         and show their annual income. The defendants in the main proceedings take a different view and consider that they are not
         obliged to communicate personal data relating to that income, such as the names or positions of the persons concerned, with
         an indication of the emoluments received by them. They rely principally on Directive 95/46, Article of the European Convention
         for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms signed in Rome on November (
         the Convention), which guarantees respect for private life, and on the argument that the obligation of publicity creates a barrier to the
         movement of workers, contrary to Article EC. 
         
            
The Verfassungsgerichtshof wishes essentially to know whether Paragraph of the BezBegrBVG, as interpreted by the Rechnungshof,
         is compatible with Community law, so that it can interpret it consistently with Community law or declare it (partly) inapplicable,
         as the case may be. 
         
            
It points out, in this connection, that the provisions of Directive 95/46, in particular Articles 6(1)(b) and (c) and 7(c)
         and (e), must be interpreted in the light of Article of the Convention. It considers that comprehensive information for
         the public, as intended by the national legislature with respect to the income of employees of bodies subject to control by
         the Rechnungshof whose annual remuneration exceeds a certain threshold (ATS in and ATS in 1998),
         has to be regarded as an interference with private life, which can be justified under Article 8(2) of the Convention only
         if that information contributes to the economic well-being of the country. An interference with fundamental rights cannot
         be justified by the existence of a mere  
         public interest in information. The court doubts that the disclosure, by means of the Report, of data on personal income promotes the  
         economic well-being of the country. In any event, it constitutes a disproportionate interference with private life. The audit carried out by the Rechnungshof
         is indubitably sufficient to ensure the proper use of public funds. 
         
            
The national court is also uncertain as to whether the scope of Community law varies according to the nature of the body which
         is required to contribute to the disclosure of the individual income of some of its employees. 
         
            
In those circumstances, the Verfassungsgerichtshof decided to stay proceedings and refer the following two questions to the
         Court for a preliminary ruling: 
         
1.
 Are the provisions of Community law, in particular those on data protection, to be interpreted as precluding national legislation
         which requires a State body to collect and transmit data on income for the purpose of publishing the names and income of employees
         of: 
         
(a)
a regional or local authority, 
         
(b)
a broadcasting organisation governed by public law, 
         
(c)
a national central bank, 
         
(d)
a statutory representative body, 
         
(e)
a partially State-controlled undertaking which is operated for profit? 
         
2.
 If the answer to at least part of the above question is in the affirmative: Are the provisions precluding such national legislation directly applicable, in the sense that the persons obliged to make
         disclosure may rely on them to prevent the application of contrary national provisions?
         
Cases C-138/and C-139/Ms Neukomm and Mr Lauermann, who are employees of ÖRF, a body subject to control by the Rechnungshof, brought proceedings
         in the Austrian courts for interim orders to prevent ÖRF from acceding to the Rechnungshof's request to communicate data.
         
         
            
The applications for interim orders were dismissed at first instance. The Arbeits- und Sozialgericht Wien (Labour and Social
         Court, Vienna) (Austria) (C-138/01), distinguishing between the transmission of the data to the Rechnungshof and its inclusion
         in the Report, considered that the Report had to be anonymous, while the mere transmission of the data to the Rechnungshof,
         even including names, did not infringe Article of the Convention or Directive 95/46. The Landesgericht St Pölten (Regional
         Court, St Pölten) (Austria) (C-139/01), on the other hand, held that the inclusion of data with names in the Report was lawful,
         since an anonymised report would not enable the Rechnungshof to exercise adequate control. 
         
            
The Oberlandesgericht Wien (Higher Regional Court, Vienna) (Austria) upheld on appeal the dismissal of the applications for
         interim orders by the courts at first instance. While stating, in connection with Case C-138/01, that in communicating the
         data in question the employer is merely performing a task imposed on him by law and that the subsequent processing of the
         data by the Rechnungshof is not carried out under the control of the employer, the Oberlandesgericht held, in the context
         of Case C-139/01, that Paragraph of the BezBegrBVG was consistent with fundamental rights and with Directive 95/46, even
         in the case of a list by name of the persons concerned. 
         
            
Ms Neukomm and Mr Lauermann appealed on a point of law (
          Revision ) to the Oberster Gerichtshof. 
         
            
The Oberster Gerichtshof, referring to the reference for a preliminary ruling in Case C-465/and adopting the points of
         law raised by the Verfassungsgerichtshof, decided to stay proceedings and refer the following two questions to the Court,
         using the same wording in Cases C-138/and C-139/01: 
         
1.
 Are the provisions of Community law, in particular those on data protection (Articles 1, 2, 6, and of Directive 95/46/EC
         in conjunction with Article (formerly Article F) of the Treaty on European Union and Article of the Convention), to be
         interpreted as precluding national legislation which requires a public broadcasting organisation, as a legal body, to communicate,
         and a State body to collect and transmit, data on income for the purpose of publishing the names and income of employees of
         a broadcasting organisation governed by public law? 
         
2.
 If the Court of Justice of the European Communities answers the above question in the affirmative: Are the provisions precluding national legislation of the kind described above directly applicable, in the sense that an organisation
         obliged to make disclosure may rely on them to prevent the application of contrary national legislation, and may not therefore
         rely on an obligation under national law against the employees concerned by the disclosure?
         
            
By order of the President of the Court of May 2001, Cases C-138/and C-139/were joined for the purposes of the written
         procedure, the oral procedure and judgment. Case C-465/and Cases C-138/and C-139/should also be joined for the purposes
         of judgment. 
         
            
The questions put by the Verfassungsgerichtshof and the Oberster Gerichtshof are essentially the same, and should therefore
         be examined together. 
         Applicability of Directive 95/To answer the questions as put would presuppose that Directive 95/is applicable in the main proceedings. That applicability
         is, however, disputed before the Court. This point must be decided as a preliminary issue. 
         Observations submitted to the Court
         
            
The defendants in the main proceedings in Case C-465/consider essentially that the control activity exercised by the Rechnungshof
         falls within the scope of Community law and hence of Directive 95/46. In particular, in that it relates to the remuneration
         received by the employees of the bodies concerned, that activity touches aspects covered by Community provisions in social
         matters, such as Articles EC, EC and EC, Council Directive 76/207/EEC of February on the implementation
         of the principle of equal treatment for men and women as regards access to employment, vocational training and promotion,
         and working conditions (OJ L 39, p. 40), and Council Regulation (EEC) No 1408/of June on the application of
         social security schemes to employed persons, to self-employed persons and to members of their families moving within the Community,
         as amended and updated by Council Regulation (EC) No 118/of December (OJ L 28, p. 1). 
         
            
They further submit that the control exercised by the Rechnungshof, first, affects the possibility for employees of the bodies
         concerned to seek employment in another Member State, because of the publicity attaching to their salaries which limits their
         power of negotiation with foreign companies, and, second, deters nationals of other Member States from seeking employment
         with the bodies subject to that control. 
         
            
Austrian Airlines, Österreichische Luftverkehrs-AG states that the interference with the freedom of movement of workers is
         particularly serious in its case because it competes with companies of other Member States which are not subject to such control.
         
         
            
The Rechnungshof and the Austrian and Italian Governments, and to a certain extent the Commission, on the other hand, consider
         that Directive 95/is not applicable in the main proceedings. 
         
            
According to the Rechnungshof and the Austrian and Italian Governments, the control activity referred to in Paragraph of
         the BezBegrBVG, which pursues objectives in the public interest in the field of public accounts, does not fall within the
         scope of Community law. 
         
            
After observing that the directive, which was adopted on the basis of Article 100a of the Treaty, has the objective of establishing
         the internal market, an aspect of which is the protection of the right to privacy, the Rechnungshof and the Austrian and Italian
         Governments submit that the control in question is not such as to obstruct the freedom of movement of workers, since it does
         not in any way prevent the employees of the bodies concerned from going to work in another Member State or those of other
         Member States from working for those bodies. In any event, the link between the control activity and the freedom of movement
         of workers, even supposing that workers do seek to avoid working for a body subject to control by the Rechnungshof because
         of the publicity attaching to the salaries received, is too uncertain and indirect to constitute an infringement of freedom
         of movement and thereby to allow a link to be made with Community law. 
         
            
The Commission adopts a similar position. At the hearing, it nevertheless submitted that the collection of data by the bodies
         subject to control by the Rechnungshof with a view to communication to the latter and inclusion in the report is itself within
         the scope of Directive 95/46. Collection serves not only the function of auditing but also, primarily, the payment of remuneration,
         which constitutes an activity covered by Community law, having regard to the existence of various relevant social provisions
         in the Treaty, such as Article EC, and to the possible effect of that activity on the freedom of movement of workers.
         
         Findings of the Court
         
            
Directive 95/46, adopted on the basis of Article 100a of the Treaty, is intended to ensure the free movement of personal data
         between Member States through the harmonisation of national provisions on the protection of individuals with regard to the
         processing of such data. Article 1, which defines the object of the directive, provides in paragraph that Member States
         may neither restrict nor prohibit the free flow of personal data between Member States for reasons connected with the protection
         of the fundamental rights and freedoms of natural persons, in particular their private life, with respect to the processing
         of that data. 
         
            
Since any personal data can move between Member States, Directive 95/requires in principle compliance with the rules for
         protection of such data with respect to any processing of data as defined by Article 3. 
         
            
It may be added that recourse to Article 100a of the Treaty as legal basis does not presuppose the existence of an actual
         link with free movement between Member States in every situation referred to by the measure founded on that basis. As the
         Court has previously held (see Case C-376/Germany  v  
          Parliament and Council  [2000] ECR I-8419, paragraph 85, and Case C-491/British American Tobacco (Investments) and Imperial Tobacco  [2002] ECR I-11453, paragraph 60), to justify recourse to Article 100a of the Treaty as the legal basis, what matters is
         that the measure adopted on that basis must actually be intended to improve the conditions for the establishment and functioning
         of the internal market. In the present case, that fundamental attribute was never in dispute before the Court with respect
         to the provisions of Directive 95/46, in particular those in the light of which the national court raises the question of
         the compatibility of the national legislation in question with Community law. 
         
            
In those circumstances, the applicability of Directive 95/cannot depend on whether the specific situations at issue in
         the main proceedings have a sufficient link with the exercise of the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty, in particular,
         in those cases, the freedom of movement of workers. A contrary interpretation could make the limits of the field of application
         of the directive particularly unsure and uncertain, which would be contrary to its essential objective of approximating the
         laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States in order to eliminate obstacles to the functioning of
         the internal market deriving precisely from disparities between national legislations. 
         
            
Moreover, the applicability of Directive 95/to situations where there is no direct link with the exercise of the fundamental
         freedoms of movement guaranteed by the Treaty is confirmed by the wording of Article 3(1) of the directive, which defines
         its scope in very broad terms, not making the application of the rules on protection depend on whether the processing has
         an actual connection with freedom of movement between Member States. That is also confirmed by the exceptions in Article 3(2),
         in particular those concerning the processing of personal data  
         in the course of an activity ... provided for by Titles V and VI of the Treaty on European Union or  
         in the course of a purely personal or household activity. Those exceptions would not, at the very least, be worded in that way if the directive were applicable exclusively to situations
         where there is a sufficient link with the exercise of freedoms of movement. 
         
            
The same observation may be made with regard to the exceptions in Article 8(2) of Directive 95/46, which concern the processing
         of specific categories of data, in particular those in Article 8(2)(d), which refers to processing carried out  
         by a foundation, association or any other non-profit-seeking body with a political, philosophical, religious or trade-union
         aim. 
         
            
Finally, the processing of personal data at issue in the main proceedings does not fall within the exception in the first
         indent of Article 3(2) of Directive 95/46. That processing does not concern the exercise of an activity which falls outside
         the scope of Community law, such as those provided for by Titles V and VI of the Treaty on European Union. Nor is it a processing
         operation concerning public security, defence, State security or the activities of the State in areas of criminal law. 
         
            
The purposes set out in Articles 7(c) and (e) and 13(e) and (f) of Directive 95/show, moreover, that it is intended to
         cover instances of data processing such as those at issue in the main proceedings. 
         
            
It must therefore be considered that Directive 95/is applicable to the processing of personal data provided for by legislation
         such as that at issue in the main proceedings. 
         The first question
            
By their first question, the national courts essentially ask whether Directive 95/is to be interpreted as precluding national
         legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings which requires a State control body to collect and communicate,
         for purposes of publication, data on the income of persons employed by the bodies subject to that control, where that income
         exceeds a certain threshold. 
         Observations submitted to the Court
         
            
The Danish Government considers that Directive 95/does not, strictly speaking, govern the right of third parties to obtain
         access to documents on request. In particular, Article of the directive refers only to the right of any person to obtain
         data concerning him. According to the Government, the protection of personal data which appear not to be sensitive must give
         way to the principle of transparency, which holds an essential place in the Community legal order. The Danish Government,
         with the Swedish Government, observes in this respect that, according to recital of the directive, the principle of public
         access to official documents may be taken into account when implementing the directive. 
         
            
The Rechnungshof, the Austrian, Italian, Netherlands, Finnish and Swedish Governments and the Commission consider that the
         national provisions at issue in the main proceedings are compatible with Directive 95/46, by reason, generally, of the wide
         discretion the Member States have in implementing it, in particular where a task in the public interest provided for by law
         is to be carried out, under Articles 6(b) and (c) and 7(c) or (e) of the directive. Both the principles of transparency and
         of the proper management of public funds and the prevention of abuses are relied on in this respect. 
         
            
Those objectives in the public interest can justify an interference with private life, protected by Article 8(2) of the Convention,
         if it is in accordance with the law, is necessary in a democratic society for the pursuit of legitimate aims, and is not disproportionate
         to the objective pursued. 
         
            
The Austrian Government notes in particular that, when reviewing proportionality, the extent to which the data affect private
         life must be taken into account. Data relating to personal intimacy, health, family life or sexuality must therefore be protected
         more strongly than data relating to income and taxes, which, while also personal, concern personal identity to a lesser extent
         and are thereby less sensitive (see, to that effect,  
          Fressoz and Roire v. France  [GC], no. 29183/95, § 65, ECHR 1999-I). 
         
            
The Finnish Government likewise considers that protection of private life is not absolute. Data relating to a person acting
         in the course of a public office or public functions relating thereto do not fall within the protection of private life. 
         
            
The Italian Government submits that data such as that at issue in the main proceedings are already by their nature public
         in most Member States, since they are visible from salary scales or remuneration brackets laid down by statute, regulation
         or collective agreements. In those circumstances, it is not contrary to the principle of proportionality to provide for diffusion
         of that data with the identities of the various people in receipt of the salaries in question. That diffusion, being thus
         intended to clarify a situation that is already apparent from data available to the public, constitutes the minimum measure
         which would ensure realisation of the objectives of transparency and sound administration. 
         
            
The Netherlands Government adds, however, that the national courts must ascertain, for each public body concerned, whether
         the objective of public interest can be attained by processing the personal data in a way that interferes less with the private
         lives of the persons concerned. 
         
            
The United Kingdom Government submits that, in answering the first question, the provisions of the Charter of Fundamental
         Rights of the European Union, proclaimed in Nice on December (OJ C 364, p. 1), to which the Verfassungsgericht
         briefly refers, are of no relevance. 
         
            
In Cases C-138/and C-139/01, the Commission questions whether, in the context of examining proportionality under Article
         6(1)(b) of Directive 95/46, it might not suffice for attaining the objective pursued by the BezBegrBVG to transmit the data
         in an anonymised form, for example by indicating the function of the person concerned rather than his name. Even if it is
         admitted that the Rechnungshof needs details of names in order to carry out a more exact check, it is questionable whether
         the inclusion of that data in the Report, giving the name of the person concerned, is really necessary for performing that
         check, especially as the Report is not only submitted to the parliamentary assemblies but must also be widely published. 
         
            
Moreover, the Commission observes that under Article of Directive 95/the Member States may  
          inter alia  derogate from Article 6(1)(b) of the directive in order to safeguard a number of objectives in the public interest, in particular
          
         an important economic or financial interest of a Member State (Article 13(1)(e)). However, in the Commission's view, the derogating measures must also comply with the principle of proportionality,
         which calls for the same considerations as those stated in the preceding paragraph with reference to Article 6(1)(b) of the
         directive. 
         
            
The defendants in the main proceedings in Case C-465/consider that the national legislation at issue is incompatible with
         Article 6(1)(b) and (c) of Directive 95/and cannot be justified under Article 7(c) or (e) of the directive, since it constitutes
         an interference which is not justified under Article 8(2) of the Convention, and is in any event disproportionate. The audit
         performed by the Rechnungshof is sufficient to guarantee the thrifty use of public funds. 
         
            
More particularly, it has not been shown that publication of the names and the amount of the income of all persons employed
         by public bodies where that amount exceeds a certain level constitutes a measure aimed at the economic well-being of the country.
         The aim of the legislature was to exert pressure on the bodies in question to maintain salaries at a low level. The defendants
         also submit that that measure is aimed, in the present case, at persons who for the most part are not public figures. 
         
            
Moreover, even if the drawing up by the Rechnungshof of a report containing personal data on income intended for public debate
         were to be regarded as an interference with private life justified under Article 8(2) of the Convention, Land Niederösterreich
         and ÖRF consider that that measure also violates Article of the Convention. Persons receiving the same income are treated
         unequally, depending on whether or not they are employed by a body subject to control by the Rechnungshof. 
         
            
ÖRF points out a further example of unequal treatment that cannot be justified under Article of the Convention. Among the
         employees of bodies subject to control by the Rechnungshof, only those whose income exceeds the threshold fixed in Paragraph
         of the BezBegrBVG have to suffer an interference with their private life. If the legislature attaches real importance to
         the reasonableness of the remuneration received by the employees of certain bodies, it is then necessary to publish the income
         of all employees, regardless of its amount. 
         
            
Finally, ÖRF, Marktgemeinde Kaltenleutgeben and Austrian Airlines, Österreichische Luftverkehrs-AG submit that the wording
         of Paragraph of the BezBegrBVG lends itself to an interpretation consistent with Community law, under which the salaries
         in question are required to be communicated to the Rechnungshof and included in the Report only in anonymised form. That interpretation
         should prevail, as it resolves the contradiction between that provision and Directive 95/46. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
It should be noted, to begin with, that the data at issue in the main proceedings, which relate both to the monies paid by
         certain bodies and the recipients, constitute personal data within the meaning of Article 2(a) of Directive 95/46, being 
         
         information relating to an identified or identifiable natural person. Their recording and use by the body concerned, and their transmission to the Rechnungshof and inclusion by the latter in
         a report intended to be communicated to various political institutions and widely diffused, constitute processing of personal
         data within the meaning of Article 2(b) of the directive. 
         
            
Under Directive 95/46, subject to the exceptions permitted under Article 13, all processing of personal data must comply,
         first, with the  
         principles relating to data quality set out in Article of the directive and, second, with one of the  
         criteria for making data processing legitimate listed in Article 7. 
         
            
More specifically, the data must be  
         collected for specified, explicit and legitimate purposes (Article 6(1)(b) of Directive 95/46) and must be  
         adequate, relevant and not excessive in relation to those purposes (Article 6(1)(c)). In addition, under Article 7(c) and (e) of the directive respectively, the
         processing of personal data is permissible only if it  
         is necessary for compliance with a legal obligation to which the controller is subject or  
         is necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority vested
         in the controller ... to whom the data are disclosed. 
         
            
However, under Article 13(e) and (f) of the directive, the Member States may derogate  
          inter alia  from Article 6(1) where this is necessary to safeguard respectively  
         an important economic or financial interest of a Member State or of the European Union, including monetary, budgetary and
         taxation matters or  
         a monitoring, inspection or regulatory function connected, even occasionally, with the exercise of official authority in particular cases including that referred to in subparagraph (e). 
         
            
It should also be noted that the provisions of Directive 95/46, in so far as they govern the processing of personal data liable
         to infringe fundamental freedoms, in particular the right to privacy, must necessarily be interpreted in the light of fundamental
         rights, which, according to settled case-law, form an integral part of the general principles of law whose observance the
         Court ensures (see,  
          inter alia , Case C-274/P  
          Connolly  v  
          Commission  [2001] ECR I-1611, paragraph 37). 
         
            
Those principles have been expressly restated in Article 6(2) EU, which states that  
         [t]he Union shall respect fundamental rights, as guaranteed by the [Convention] and as they result from the constitutional
         traditions common to the Member States, as general principles of Community law.
         
            
Directive 95/itself, while having as its principal aim to ensure the free movement of personal data, provides in Article
         1(1) that  
         Member States shall protect the fundamental rights and freedoms of natural persons, and in particular their right to privacy
         with respect to the processing of personal data. Several recitals in its preamble, in particular recitals and 11, also express that requirement. 
         
            
In this respect, it is to be noted that Article of the Convention, while stating in paragraph the principle that the public
         authorities must not interfere with the right to respect for private life, accepts in paragraph that such an interference
         is possible where it is  
         in accordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security, public safety or
         the economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or
         for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others. 
         
            
So, for the purpose of applying Directive 95/46, in particular Articles 6(1)(c), 7(c) and (e) and 13, it must be ascertained,
         first, whether legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings provides for an interference with private life, and
         if so, whether that interference is justified from the point of view of Article of the Convention. 
         Existence of an interference with private life
         
            
First of all, the collection of data by name relating to an individual's professional income, with a view to communicating
         it to third parties, falls within the scope of Article of the Convention. The European Court of Human Rights has held in
         this respect that the expression  
         private life must not be interpreted restrictively and that  
         there is no reason of principle to justify excluding activities of a professional ... nature from the notion of  
         private life (see,  
          inter alia ,  
          Amann v. Switzerland  [GC], no. 27798/95, § 65, ECHR 2000-II and  
          Rotaru v. Romania  [GC], no. 28341/95, § 43, ECHR 2000-V). 
         
            
It necessarily follows that, while the mere recording by an employer of data by name relating to the remuneration paid to
         his employees cannot as such constitute an interference with private life, the communication of that data to third parties,
         in the present case a public authority, infringes the right of the persons concerned to respect for private life, whatever
         the subsequent use of the information thus communicated, and constitutes an interference within the meaning of Article of
         the Convention. 
         
            
To establish the existence of such an interference, it does not matter whether the information communicated is of a sensitive
         character or whether the persons concerned have been inconvenienced in any way (see, to that effect,  
          Amann v. Switzerland , § 70). It suffices to find that data relating to the remuneration received by an employee or pensioner have been communicated
         by the employer to a third party. 
         Justification of the interference
         
            
An interference such as that mentioned in paragraph above violates Article of the Convention unless it is  
         in accordance with the law, pursues one or more of the legitimate aims specified in Article 8(2), and is  
         necessary in a democratic society for achieving that aim or aims. 
         
            
It is common ground that the interference at issue in the main proceedings is in accordance with Paragraph of the BezBegrBVG.
         However, the question arises whether that paragraph is formulated with sufficient precision to enable the citizen to adjust
         his conduct accordingly, and so complies with the requirement of foreseeability laid down in the case-law of the European
         Court of Human Rights (see,  
          inter alia ,  
          Rekvényi v. Hungary  [GC], no. 25390/94, § 34, ECHR 1999-III). 
         
            
In this respect, Paragraph 8(3) of the BezBegrBVG states that the report drawn up by the Rechnungshof is to  
         include all persons whose total yearly salaries and pensions from bodies ... exceed the amount stated in subparagraph 1, without expressly requiring the names of the persons concerned to be disclosed in relation to the income they receive. According
         to the orders for reference, it is legal commentators who, on the basis of the  
          travaux préparatoires , interpret the constitutional law in that way. 
         
            
It is for the national courts to ascertain whether the interpretation to the effect that Paragraph 8(3) of the BezBegrBVG
         requires disclosure of the names of the persons concerned in relation to the income received complies with the requirement
         of foreseeability referred to in paragraph above. 
         
            
However, that question need not arise until it has been determined whether such an interpretation of the national provision
         at issue is consistent with Article of the Convention, as regards its required proportionality to the aims pursued. That
         question will be examined below. 
         
            
It appears from the order for reference in Case C-465/that the objective of Paragraph of the BezBegrBVG is to exert pressure
         on the public bodies concerned to keep salaries within reasonable limits. The Austrian Government observes, more generally,
         that the interference provided for by that provision is intended to guarantee the thrifty and appropriate use of public funds
         by the administration. Such an objective constitutes a legitimate aim within the meaning both of Article 8(2) of the Convention,
         which mentions the  
         economic well-being of the country, and Article 6(1)(b) of Directive 95/46, which refers to  
         specified, explicit and legitimate purposes. 
         
            
It must next be ascertained whether the interference in question is necessary in a democratic society to achieve the legitimate
         aim pursued. 
         
            
According to the European Court of Human Rights, the adjective  
         necessary in Article 8(2) of the Convention implies that a  
         pressing social need is involved and that the measure employed is  
         proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued (see,  
          inter alia , the Gillow v. the United Kingdom judgment of November 1986, Series A no. 109, § 55). The national authorities also enjoy
         a margin of appreciation,  
         the scope of which will depend not only on the nature of the legitimate aim pursued but also on the particular nature of the
         interference involved (see the Leander v. Sweden judgment of March 1987, Series A no. 116, § 59). 
         
            
The interest of the Republic of Austria in ensuring the best use of public funds, and in particular keeping salaries within
         reasonable limits, must be balanced against the seriousness of the interference with the right of the persons concerned to
         respect for their private life. 
         
            
On the one hand, in order to monitor the proper use of public funds, the Rechnungshof and the various parliamentary bodies
         undoubtedly need to know the amount of expenditure on human resources in the various public bodies. In addition, in a democratic
         society, taxpayers and public opinion generally have the right to be kept informed of the use of public revenues, in particular
         as regards expenditure on staff. Such information, put together in the Report, may make a contribution to the public debate
         on a question of general interest, and thus serves the public interest. 
         
            
The question nevertheless arises whether stating the names of the persons concerned in relation to the income received is
         proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued and whether the reasons relied on before the Court to justify such disclosure
         appear relevant and sufficient. 
         
            
It is plain that, according to the interpretation adopted by the national courts, Paragraph of the BezBegrBVG requires disclosure
         of the names of the persons concerned, in relation to income above a certain level, with respect not only to persons filling
         posts remunerated by salaries on a published scale, but to all persons remunerated by bodies subject to control by the Rechnungshof.
         Moreover, such information is not only communicated to the Rechnungshof and via the latter to the various parliamentary bodies,
         but is also made widely available to the public. 
         
            
It is for the national courts to ascertain whether such publicity is both necessary and proportionate to the aim of keeping
         salaries within reasonable limits, and in particular to examine whether such an objective could not have been attained equally
         effectively by transmitting the information as to names to the monitoring bodies alone. Similarly, the question arises whether
         it would not have been sufficient to inform the general public only of the remuneration and other financial benefits to which
         persons employed by the public bodies concerned have a contractual or statutory right, but not of the sums which each of them
         actually received during the year in question, which may depend to a varying extent on their personal and family situation.
         
         
            
With respect, on the other hand, to the seriousness of the interference with the right of the persons concerned to respect
         for their private life, it is not impossible that they may suffer harm as a result of the negative effects of the publicity
         attached to their income from employment, in particular on their prospects of being given employment by other undertakings,
         whether in Austria or elsewhere, which are not subject to control by the Rechnungshof. 
         
            
It must be concluded that the interference resulting from the application of national legislation such as that at issue in
         the main proceedings may be justified under Article 8(2) of the Convention only in so far as the wide disclosure not merely
         of the amounts of the annual income above a certain threshold of persons employed by the bodies subject to control by the
         Rechnungshof but also of the names of the recipients of that income is both necessary for and appropriate to the aim of keeping
         salaries within reasonable limits, that being a matter for the national courts to examine. 
         Consequences with respect to the provisions of Directive 95/If the national courts conclude that the national legislation at issue is incompatible with Article of the Convention, that
         legislation is also incapable of satisfying the requirement of proportionality in Articles 6(1)(c) and 7(c) or (e) of Directive
         95/46. Nor could it be covered by any of the exceptions referred to in Article of that directive, which likewise requires
         compliance with the requirement of proportionality with respect to the public interest objective being pursued. In any event,
         that provision cannot be interpreted as conferring legitimacy on an interference with the right to respect for private life
         contrary to Article of the Convention. 
         
            
If, on the other hand, the national courts were to consider that Paragraph of the BezBegrBVG is both necessary for and appropriate
         to the public interest objective being pursued, they would then, as appears from paragraphs to above, still have to
         ascertain whether, by not expressly providing for disclosure of the names of the persons concerned in relation to the income
         received, Paragraph of the BezBegrBVG complies with the requirement of foreseeability. 
         
            
Finally, it should be noted, in the light of the above considerations, that the national court must also interpret any provision
         of national law, as far as possible, in the light of the wording and the purpose of the applicable directive, in order to
         achieve the result pursued by the latter and thereby comply with the third paragraph of Article EC (see Case C-106/Marleasing  [1990] ECR I-4135, paragraph 8). 
         
            
In the light of all the above considerations, the answer to the first question must be that Articles 6(1)(c) and 7(c) and
         (e) of Directive 95/do not preclude national legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings, provided that it
         is shown that the wide disclosure not merely of the amounts of the annual income above a certain threshold of persons employed
         by the bodies subject to control by the Rechnungshof but also of the names of the recipients of that income is necessary for
         and appropriate to the objective of proper management of public funds pursued by the legislature, that being for the national
         courts to ascertain. 
         The second question
            
By their second question, the national courts ask whether the provisions of Directive 95/which preclude national legislation
         such as that at issue in the main proceedings are directly applicable, in that they may be relied on by individuals before
         the national courts to oust the application of that legislation. 
         
            
The defendants in the main proceedings in Case C-465/and the Netherlands Government consider that Articles 6(1) and of
         Directive 95/fulfil the criteria stated in the Court's case-law for having such direct effect. They are sufficiently precise
         and unconditional for the bodies required to disclose the data relating to the income of the persons concerned to be able
         to rely on them to prevent application of the national provisions contrary to those provisions. 
         
            
The Austrian Government submits, on the other hand, that the relevant provisions of Directive 95/are not directly applicable.
         In particular, Articles 6(1) and are not unconditional, since their implementation requires the Member States, which have
         a wide discretion, to adopt special measures to that effect. 
         
            
On this point, it should be noted that wherever the provisions of a directive appear, so far as their subject-matter is concerned,
         to be unconditional and sufficiently precise, they may, in the absence of implementing measures adopted within the prescribed
         period, be relied on against any national provision which is incompatible with the directive or in so far as they define rights
         which individuals are able to assert against the State (see,  
          inter alia , Case 8/Becker  [1982] ECR 53, paragraph 25, and Case C-141/Kügler  [2002] ECR I-6833, paragraph 51). 
         
            
In the light of the answer to the first question, the second question seeks to know whether such a character may be attributed
         to Article 6(1)(c) of Directive 95/46, under which  
         personal data must be ... adequate, relevant and not excessive in relation to the purposes for which they are collected and/or
         further processed, and to Article 7(c) or (e), under which personal data may be processed only if  
          inter alia processing is necessary for compliance with a legal obligation to which the controller is subject or  
         is necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority vested
         in the controller ... to whom the data are disclosed. 
         
            
Those provisions are sufficiently precise to be relied on by individuals and applied by the national courts. Moreover, while
         Directive 95/undoubtedly confers on the Member States a greater or lesser discretion in the implementation of some of its
         provisions, Articles 6(1)(c) and 7(c) or (e) for their part state unconditional obligations. 
         
            
The answer to the second question must therefore be that Articles 6(1)(c) and 7(c) and (e) of Directive 95/are directly
         applicable, in that they may be relied on by an individual before the national courts to oust the application of rules of
         national law which are contrary to those provisions. 
         
Costs
            
The costs incurred by the Austrian, Danish, Italian, Netherlands, Finnish, Swedish and United Kingdom Governments and by the
         Commission, which have submitted observations to the Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties
         to the main proceedings, a step in the proceedings pending before the national courts, the decisions on costs are a matter
         for those courts. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT,
in answer to the questions referred to it by the Verfassungsgerichtshof by order of December and by the Oberster Gerichtshof
         by orders of and February 2001, hereby rules: 
         
1.
 Articles 6(1)(c) and 7(c) and (e) of Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of October on
            the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data do not
            preclude national legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings, provided that it is shown that the wide disclosure
            not merely of the amounts of the annual income above a certain threshold of persons employed by the bodies subject to control
            by the Rechnungshof but also of the names of the recipients of that income is necessary for and appropriate to the objective
            of proper management of public funds pursued by the legislature, that being for the national courts to ascertain. 
            
2.
 Articles 6(1)(c) and 7(c) and (e) of Directive 95/are directly applicable, in that they may be relied on by an individual
            before the national courts to oust the application of rules of national law which are contrary to those provisions. 
            
Rodríguez Iglesias
Puissochet 
Wathelet 
Schintgen
Gulmann 
Edward 
La Pergola
Jann 
Skouris 
Macken
Colneric 
von Bahr 
Cunha Rodrigues 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on May 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: German.
Top  
 