
Order of the Court (Fifth Chamber) of October — ara v OHIM(Case C-611/P)
Appeal – Community trade mark – Regulation (EC) No 207/– Article 8(1)(b) – International registration designating the European Community – Figurative mark A with two triangular motifs – Earlier national word mark A – Relative grounds for refusal – No likelihood of confusion
1.                     Appeals – Grounds – Inadequate or contradictory grounds – Admissibility (see para. 35)
2.                     Appeals – Grounds – Incorrect assessment of the facts and evidence – Inadmissibility – Review by the Court of Justice of the
            assessment of the facts and evidence – Possible only where the clear sense of the evidence has been distorted (Art. 256(1)
            TFEU; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 58, first para.) (see para. 41)
3.                     Appeals – Grounds – Mere repetition of the pleas and arguments put forward before the General Court – Error of law relied
            on not identified – Inadmissibility (Art. 256(1) TFEU; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 58, first para.; Rules of Procedure
            of the Court, Art. 112(1)(c)) (see para. 46)
4.                     Appeals – Grounds – Plea submitted for the first time in the context of the appeal – Inadmissibility (Statute of the Court
            of Justice, Art. 51) (see para. 58)
Re:
Appeal brought against the judgment of the General Court (Seventh Chamber) of September in Case T-174/ara 
v
 OHIM — Allrounder (A with two triangular motifs)
, by which the General Court rejected the action brought for the annulment of the decision of the First Board of Appeal of
                  OHIM of January (Case R 481/2009-1), relating to opposition proceedings between ara and Allrounder — Article 8(1)(b)
                  of Council Regulation (EC) No 207/of February on the Community trade mark (OJ L 78, p. 1) — Figurative mark
                  A with two triangular motifs — Opposition by the proprietor of the national word mark ‘A’ — Likelihood of confusion between
                  two marks — Erroneous assessment of distinctive character. 
               
Operative part
The Court:
1.
	Dismisses the appeal; 
2.
	Orders ara AG to pay the costs. 
Top  
 