
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-257/Commission of the European Communities
v
Council of the European Union
(Regulations (EC) Nos 789/and 790/– Visa policy – Border checks and surveillance – Article EC – Implementing powers reserved to the Council – Updating reserved to the Member States – Specific cases – Obligation to state reasons)
Opinion of Advocate General Léger delivered on April Judgment of the Court (Full Court), January Summary of the Judgment 
1.     Acts of the institutions – Regulations – Basic regulations and implementing regulations – Implementing powers reserved to
            the Council – Conditions – Specific and substantiated cases – Procedures for the exercise of implementing powers in respect
            of  the rules concerning the crossing of external borders and visas
(Arts EC and EC; Council Regulations Nos 789/and 790/2001; Council Decision 1999/468, Art. 1, first subpara.)
2.     European Union – Police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters – Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement – Crossing
            of external borders and visas – Establishment by the Council of a procedure for the transmission of amendments made by the
            Member States to the implementation procedures – Whether permitted
(Council Regulations No 789/2001, Art. 2, and No 790/2001, Art. 2)
1.     In accordance with Article EC and the first subparagraph of Article of Decision 1999/laying down the procedures
         for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the Commission (Second Comitology Decision), when measures implementing
         a basic instrument need to be taken at Community level, it is the Commission which, in the normal course of events, is responsible
         for exercising that power.  The Council must properly explain, by reference to the nature and content of the basic instrument
         to be implemented or amended, any exception to the rule. 
      
In that regard, in the preamble to Regulations Nos 789/and 790/reserving to the Council implementing powers with
         regard to certain detailed provisions and practical procedures for examining visa applications and the carrying-out of border
         checks and surveillance at the external borders respectively, the Council specifically referred to the enhanced role of the
         Member States in respect of visas and border surveillance and to the sensitivity of those areas, in particular as regards
         political relations with non-member States.  It could reasonably consider itself to be concerned with a specific case and
         thus it duly stated the reasons, in accordance with Article EC, for its decision to reserve to itself, on a transitional
         basis, power to implement a series of provisions exhaustively listed in the Common Consular Instructions and in the Common
         Manual, which set out the rules concerning the crossing of external borders and visas, contained in the Convention implementing
         the Schengen Agreement.
      
Assessed in their proper context, such considerations, although general and laconic, are such as to show clearly the grounds
         justifying the reservation of powers to the Council and to allow the Court to exercise its power of review. 
      
(see paras 49-53, 59)
2.     It is apparent from Article of Regulations Nos 789/and 790/reserving to the Council implementing powers with regard
         to certain detailed provisions and practical procedures for examining visa applications and the carrying-out of border checks
         and surveillance at the external borders respectively that each Member State may itself amend, sometimes in agreement with
         the other Member States, certain of those provisions or procedures.  With regard to those texts, adopted at a time when the
         area concerned was a matter for intergovernmental cooperation, their integration into the framework of the European Union
         with effect from the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam did not, of itself, result in the Member States being immediately
         stripped of the powers which they were entitled to exercise under those instruments in order to ensure their proper implementation.
         
      
In that quite specific and transitional situation, prior to the evolution of the Schengen acquis within the legal and institutional
         framework of the European Union, no objection can be made to the Council having established a procedure for the transmission
         by the Member States of amendments which they are authorised to make, unilaterally or in collaboration with the other Member
         States, to certain of those provisions, the contents of which depend exclusively on information which they alone possess,
         since it has not been shown that it was appropriate to use a uniform updating procedure in order to ensure proper and effective
         implementation.
      
(see paras 65, 69-71)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Full Court)January 2005(1)
(Regulations (EC) Nos 789/and 790/–  Visa policy  –  Border checks and surveillance  –  Article EC  –  Implementing powers reserved to the Council  –  Updating reserved to the Member States  –  Specific cases  –  Obligation to state reasons)
In Case C-257/01, APPLICATION for annulment under Article EC, brought on July 2001,
            
 Commission of the European Communities,  represented by D. Maidani and C. O'Reilly, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant, supported by: Kingdom of the Netherlands,  represented by H.G. Sevenster, acting as Agent, 
            
intervener,
v
 Council of the European Union,  represented by E. Finnegan and I. Díez Parra, acting as Agents, 
defendant, supported by: Kingdom of Spain,  represented by R. Silva de Lapuerta, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
intervener,
THE COURT (Full Court),,
 composed of V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Rosas and K. Lenaerts, Presidents of Chambers, C. Gulmann,
            J.-P. Puissochet, R. Schintgen (Rapporteur), N. Colneric, S. von Bahr and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: P. Léger, Registrar: R. Grass,
             having regard to the written procedure,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on April 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By its application, the Commission of the European Communities is seeking annulment of Council Regulation (EC) No 789/of April reserving to the Council implementing powers with regard to certain detailed provisions and practical procedures
         for examining visa applications (OJ L 116, p. 2) and Council Regulation (EC) No 790/of April reserving to
         the Council implementing powers with regard to certain detailed provisions and practical procedures for carrying out border
         checks and surveillance (OJ L 116, p. 5; together ‘the contested regulations’).
         
            
 By orders of the President of the Court of Justice of October and November 2001, the Kingdom of Spain and the Kingdom
         of the Netherlands were granted leave to intervene, the former in support of the form of order sought by the Council of the
         European Union and the latter in support of that sought by the Commission. 
         
 Legal framework 
 Relevant provisions of the EC Treaty  
            
 Article EC provides:
         ‘To ensure that the objectives set out in this Treaty are attained the Council shall, in accordance with the provisions of
         this Treaty:
         
–
…
–
…
–
confer on the Commission, in the acts which the Council adopts, powers for the implementation of the rules which the Council
               lays down. The Council may impose certain requirements in respect of the exercise of these powers. The Council may also reserve
               the right, in specific cases, to exercise directly implementing powers itself. The procedures referred to above must be consonant
               with principles and rules to be laid down in advance by the Council, acting unanimously on a proposal from the Commission
               and after obtaining the Opinion of the European Parliament.’
            
            
 Article EC, which is in Title IV of the Treaty, entitled ‘Visas, asylum, immigration and other policies related to free
         movement of persons’, provides:
         ‘The Council, acting in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 67, shall, within a period of five years after
         the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam, adopt:
         
…
(2)
measures on the crossing of the external borders of the Member States which shall establish:
(a)
standards and procedures to be followed by Member States in carrying out checks on persons at such borders; 
(b)
rules on visas for intended stays of no more than three months, including:
(i)
the list of third countries whose nationals must be in possession of visas when crossing the external borders and those whose
                           nationals are exempt from that requirement; 
                        
(ii)
the procedures and conditions for issuing visas by Member States;
(iii)
a uniform format for visas; 
(iv)
rules on a uniform visa; 
…’
            
 Article 64(1) EC states:
         ‘This Title shall not affect the exercise of the responsibilities incumbent upon Member States with regard to the maintenance
         of law and order and the safeguarding of internal security.’
         
            
 Article 67(1) EC provides:
         ‘During a transitional period of five years following the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam, the Council shall act
         unanimously on a proposal from the Commission or on the initiative of a Member State and after consulting the European Parliament.’
         
 The Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement, the Common Manual and the Common Consular Instructions  
            
 Article of the Protocol integrating the Schengen  acquis  into the framework of the European Union, annexed to the Treaty on European Union and to the Treaty establishing the European
         Community by the Treaty of Amsterdam (‘the Protocol’), authorised Member States to establish closer cooperation among themselves
         within the scope of the Schengen  acquis , as set out in the annex to the Protocol. 
         
            
 The Schengen  acquis  thus defined includes inter alia the Agreement, signed in Schengen on June 1985, between the Governments of the States
         of the Benelux Economic Union, the Federal Republic of Germany and the French Republic on the gradual abolition of checks
         at their common borders (OJ L 239, p. 13; ‘the Schengen Agreement’) and the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement
         (OJ L 239, p. 19; ‘the CISA’), which was signed on June 1990, including the decisions of the Executive Committee set
         up by the CISA. 
         
            
 Chapters and of Title II of the CISA set out the rules concerning the crossing of external borders and visas respectively.
         
         
            
 The practical procedures for the application of those rules are laid down, as regards border checks, by the Common Manual
         (‘the CM’) and, as regards visa applications, by the Common Consular Instructions for the diplomatic missions and consular
         posts (OJ C 313, p. 1; ‘the CCI’). The definitive versions of the CCI and the CM were adopted by the Executive Committee,
         under Article of the CISA and also on the basis of Articles 3(1), 5(1), 6(3), 8, 12(3) and of the CISA by decision
         of April on the definitive versions of the Common Manual and the Common Consular Instructions (SCH/Com-ex (99) 13)
         (OJ L 239, p. 317; ‘Decision 99/13’).
         
            
 The CM and the CCI contain both detailed normative provisions and practical instructions and are intended for officials who
         carry out checks at the external borders of the Contracting Parties and for the consular agents of those parties in the daily
         handling of visa applications.
         
            
 As regards certain aspects of the CCI, reference should also be made to a number of decisions of the Executive Committee.
         Those are the decisions of December (SCH/Com-ex (98) 56) (OJ L 239, p. 207; ‘Decision 98/56’) and of April
         (SCH/Com-ex (99) 14) (OJ L 239, p. 298; ‘Decision 99/14’) concerning the compilation of a manual of documents to
         which a visa may be affixed. In addition, Executive Committee Decision SCH/Com-ex (94) rev. of November (OJ L 239, p. 165; ‘Decision 94/15’) introduced a computerised procedure for consulting the central authorities referred to in
         Article 17(2) of the CISA. 
         
            
 The first subparagraph of Article 2(1) of the Protocol provided that from the date of entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam
         the Schengen  acquis  was to apply immediately to the Member States referred to in Article of the Protocol. The same provision also laid down
         that the Council would replace the Executive Committee in the exercise of its functions.
         
            
 Acting under the second sentence of the second subparagraph of Article 2(1) of the Protocol, the Council adopted on May
         Decision 1999/436/EC determining, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Treaty establishing the European
         Community and the Treaty on European Union, the legal basis for each of the provisions or decisions which constitute the Schengen
          acquis  (OJ L 176, p. 17). It is clear from Article of the decision, in conjunction with Annex A thereto, that Articles EC and EC form the new legal bases for Decision 99/13, whilst Article 62(2)(b)(ii) EC, Article EC and Article 62(2)(b)
         EC form the new legal bases for Decisions 98/56, 99/and 94/respectively. 
         
 Decision 1999/468/EC 
            
 In the words of the first subparagraph of Article of Council Decision 1999/468/EC of June laying down the procedures
         for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the Commission (OJ L 184, p. 23; ‘the second comitology decision’):
         ‘Other than in specific and substantiated cases where the basic instrument reserves to the Council the right to exercise directly
         certain implementing powers itself, such powers shall be conferred on the Commission in accordance with the relevant provisions
         in the basic instrument. These provisions shall stipulate the essential elements of the powers thus conferred.’
         
 The contested regulations  
            
 Following the adoption of Decision 1999/436, it was considered expedient to define in a Community act the procedures in accordance
         with which measures implementing and updating the CM and the CCI should be taken. 
         
            
 To that end, the Council enacted Regulations Nos 789/and 790/on the basis of Article 62(2) and (3) EC and Articles
         62(2)(a) and (b) EC and 67(1) EC. 
         
            
 According to recitals to in the preamble to Regulation No 789/and recital in the preamble to Regulation No 790/2001,
         certain ‘detailed provisions and practical procedures’ relating to both the examination of visa applications and the carrying-out
         of border checks and surveillance at the external borders, contained in the CCI and the CM respectively and the annexes thereto,
         must be ‘regularly amended and updated in order to meet the operational requirements’ of the relevant authorities. 
         
            
 For that purpose, the contested regulations establish two procedures. First, Article of each of them provides that some
         of the provisions listed therein may be amended by the Council acting unanimously. Second, Article of each of the regulations
         establishes a procedure by which the Member States are to communicate such amendments as they wish to make to certain provisions
         of, or parts of the annexes to, the CCI and the CM to the Secretary-General of the Council, who then communicates those amendments
         to the members of the Council and to the Commission.
         
 Regulation No 789/Recital in the preamble to Regulation No 789/states:
         ‘Since the Member States have an enhanced role in respect of the development of visa policy, reflecting the sensitivity of
         this area, in particular involving political relations with third countries, the Council reserves the right, during the transitional
         period of five years referred to in Article 67(1) of the Treaty, to adopt, amend and update the detailed provisions and practical
         procedures referred to above by unanimity, pending a review by the Council of the conditions under which such implementing
         powers would be conferred on the Commission after the end of that transitional period.’
         
            
 Paragraphs and of Article of Regulation No 789/provide:
         ‘1. The Council, acting unanimously, at the initiative of one of its members or on a proposal from the Commission, shall amend,
         as necessary, Parts II, III, V, VI, VII and VIII of the CCI, as well as Annex (with the exception of Schedule B and excepting
         the visa requirements relating to those countries mentioned in Schedule A which do not need to be the subject of prior consultation)
         and Parts I and III of Annex as well as Annexes 6, 10, 11, 12, 13, and thereto.
          2. The Council, acting unanimously, at the initiative of one of its members or on a proposal from the Commission, shall amend,
         as necessary, the introduction and Parts I, II and III of the Schengen Consultation Network (Technical Specifications), as
         well as Annexes 2, 2A, 3, 4, 5, and thereto.’
         
            
 The provisions of the CCI which the Council may amend pursuant to Article of Regulation No 789/concern the following
         matters:
         
–
the diplomatic mission or consular post responsible for visa applications for a visit not exceeding three months (Part II
               of the CCI);
            
–
initiation of the application procedure for a visit not exceeding three months (Part III of the CCI);
–
examination of the application and the decision relating thereto (Part V of the CCI);
–
how to fill in visa‑stickers (Part VI of the CCI);
–
administrative management and organisation of the visa sections (Part VII of the CCI);
–
consular cooperation at local level (Part VIII of the CCI); 
–
regulations governing the movement of holders of diplomatic, official duty and service passports, and holders of laissez-passers
               which certain international intergovernmental organisations issue to their officials (Annex to the CCI other than Schedule
               B and visa requirements relating to the countries referred to in Schedule A for which prior consultation is not necessary);
            
–
the joint list of third countries whose nationals are subject to airport visa requirements by all Member States which are
               Contracting Parties to the Schengen Agreement (‘the Schengen States’), holders of travel documents issued by these third countries
               also being subject to this requirement (Annex 3, Part I, to the CCI); 
            
–
the list of residence permits of the States of the European Economic Area for which the holders are exempt from the airport
               transit visa requirement (Annex 3, Part III, to the CCI);
            
–
the list of honorary consuls authorised, in exceptional cases and on a temporary basis, to issue uniform visas (Annex to
               the CCI);
            
–
the instructions concerning entries in the electronically scanned section (Annex to the CCI);
–
criteria for determining whether a travel document may bear a visa (Annex to the CCI);
–
the fees to be charged, in euro, corresponding to the administrative costs of processing the visa application (Annex to
               the CCI);
            
–
details of how to complete the visa‑stickers (Annex to the CCI); 
–
rules and procedures governing information to be sent by Contracting Parties when issuing visas with limited territorial validity,
               when cancelling, revoking and reducing the duration of validity of uniform visas and when issuing national residence permits
               (Annex to the CCI);
            
–
model harmonised forms providing proof of invitation, sponsorship and accommodation drafted by the Contracting Parties (Annex
               to the CCI).
            
            
 Furthermore, in the words of recital in the preamble to Regulation No 789/2001:
         ‘It is also necessary to provide for a procedure whereby the members of the Council and the Commission are informed without
         delay of all amendments to the manual of documents to which a visa may be affixed, to the manual concerning the issuance of
         Schengen visas in third States where all the Schengen States are not represented, to Annexes and [to] the Schengen Consultation
         Network (Technical Specifications), and to those Annexes to the CCI which consist, in whole or in part, of lists of factual
         information which must be provided by each Member State in accordance with the rules which it currently applies, and which
         therefore do not fall to be adopted, amended or updated by an act of the Council.’
         
            
 Article of the regulation provides:
         ‘1.     Each Member State shall communicate to the Secretary-General of the Council such amendments as it wishes to make to the CCI
         concerning Part III of Annex thereto, Schedule A of Annex thereto (with the exception of the visa requirements relating
         to the countries mentioned in that Schedule which must be the subject of prior consultation) and Schedule B of Annex 2, Part
         II of Annex 3, and to Annexes 4, 5, and thereto, to the manual of documents to which a visa may be affixed, to the manual
         concerning the issuance of Schengen visas in third States where all the Schengen States are not represented, and to Annexes
         and [to] the Schengen Consultation Network (Technical Specifications).
          2.       Any Member State wishing to make an amendment to Annex 4, 5B, 5C, or to the CCI shall first submit a proposal for amendment
         to the other Member States and afford them an opportunity to comment on the proposal.
          3.       Amendments made pursuant to paragraphs and shall be deemed to take effect as from the date on which the Secretary-General
         communicates such amendments to the members of the Council and to the Commission.’
         
            
 The provisions of the CCI which, in accordance with Article of Regulation No 789/2001, may be amended by the Member States
         concern the following matters:
         
–
the list of countries whose nationals are not subject to a visa requirement in one or more Schengen States when they are holders
               of diplomatic, official or service passports, but who are subject to this requirement when they are holders of ordinary passports
               (Annex 2, Schedule A, to the CCI, with the exception of the visa requirements relating to the countries mentioned in that
               schedule which must be the subject of prior consultation);
            
–
the list of countries whose nationals are subject to visas in one or more Schengen States, when they are holders of diplomatic,
               official or service passports, but who are not subject to this requirement when they are holders of ordinary passports (Annex
               2, Schedule B, to the CCI);
            
–
the joint list of third countries whose nationals are subject to an airport visa requirement by some Schengen States only,
               with holders of travel documents issued by these third countries also being subject to this requirement (Annex 3, Part II,
               to the CCI);
            
–
the list of documents entitling holders to entry without a visa (Annex to the CCI);
–
the list of visa applications which must be the subject of prior consultation with the central authorities of the Member State
               with which the application is lodged in accordance with Article 17(2) of the CISA (Annex 5A to the CCI);
            
–
the list of visa applications which must be the subject of prior consultation with the central authorities of other Contracting
               Parties, in accordance with Article 17(2) of the CISA (Annexes 5B and 5C to the CCI);
            
–
the reference amounts (that is to say, adequate means of subsistence) required for crossing borders fixed annually by the
               national authorities (Annex to the CCI);
            
–
information which, in certain cases, must be given by the authorities in the ‘Remarks’ section of the visa‑sticker (Annex
               to the CCI);
            
–
certain aspects of the computerised procedure for consultation for the purposes of issuing visas (Annexes and to the ‘Schengen
               Consultation Network (Technical Specifications’)).
            
 Regulation No 790/Recital in Regulation No 790/2001, which is worded in almost identical terms to recital in Regulation No 789/2001, states:
         ‘Since the Member States have an enhanced role in respect of the development of border policy, reflecting the sensitivity
         of this area, in particular involving political relations with third countries, the Council reserves the right, during the
         transitional period of five years referred to in Article 67(1) of the Treaty establishing the European Community, to adopt,
         amend and update the detailed provisions and practical procedures referred to above by unanimity, pending a review by the
         Council of the conditions under which such implementing powers would be conferred on the Commission after the end of this
         transitional period.’
         
            
 Article 1(1) of Regulation No 790/provides:
         ‘The Council, acting unanimously, at the initiative of one of its members or on a proposal from the Commission, shall amend,
         as necessary, Part I points 1.2, 1.3, 1.3.1, 1.3.3, 2.1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, 3.1.4, 3.2.4, 4.1, 4.1.1, 4.1.2, and Part II points
         1.1, 1.3, 1.4.1, 1.4.1a, 1.4.4, 1.4.5, 1.4.6, 1.4.7, 1.4.8, 2.1, 2.2.2, 2.2.3, 2.2.4, 2.3, 3.1, 3.2, 3.3.1, 3.3.2, 3.3.3,
         3.3.4, 3.3.5, 3.3.6, 3.3.7, 3.3.8, 3.4, 3.5, 4.1, 4.2, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.6, 6.4, 6.5, 6.6, 6.7, 6.8, 6.9, 6.and 6.of the Common Manual as well as Annex thereto.’
         
            
 The provisions of the CM which the Council may amend pursuant to Article of Regulation No 790/deal with the following
         matters:
         
–
crossing the border at authorised border crossing points (Part I, point 1.2, of the CM);
–
crossing the border at places other than authorised border crossing points (Part I, points 1.3, 1.3.and 1.3.3, of the CM);
–
the list, for each country, of documents recognised as valid for the crossing of external borders and of those which may bear
               a visa (Part I, point 2.1, of the CM); 
            
–
the technical description of the stick-in visa given in Annex to the CM (Part I, point 3.1.2, of the CM);
–
the specimen stick-in visas with examples of possible endorsements provided for in Annex to the CM (Part I, point 3.1.3,
               of the CM);
            
–
the rule that ‘[t]he endorsements printed on the stick-in visa are to be in English, French and the respective national languages’
               (Part I, point 3.1.4, of the CM);
            
–
the rule that ‘[t]he rules and procedures governing information to be sent by Contracting Parties when issuing visas with
               limited territorial validity, when cancelling, revoking and reducing the duration of uniform visas and when issuing national
               residence permits are described in Annex 8a’ (Part I, point 3.2.4, of the CM);
            
–
the documentary evidence or information establishing the likelihood of the reasons given for entry which may be provided (Part
               I, points 4.1, 4.1.and 4.1.2, of the CM);
            
–
the officers authorised to carry out checks and surveillance (Part II, point 1.1, of the CM);
–
the procedures for checks (Part II, point 1.3, of the CM);
–
certain detailed provisions concerning the procedures for refusing entry (Part II, points 1.4.1, 1.4.1a and 1.4.to 1.4.8,
               of the CM);
            
–
the detailed provisions concerning the affixing of stamps (Part II, point 2.1, of the CM);
–
certain detailed provisions concerning the surveillance of external borders at places other than crossing points and outside
               office opening hours (Part II, points 2.2.2, 2.2.and 2.2.4, of the CM);
            
–
the information which must be entered in a register (Part II, point 2.3, of the CM);
–
checks on road traffic (Part II, point 3.1, of the CM);
–
checks on rail traffic (Part II, point 3.2, of the CM);
–
the procedure determining the place where persons and hand baggage are checked with regard to international civil air traffic
               (Part II, point 3.3.1, of the CM);
            
–
additional procedures for checking persons in relation to international civil air traffic (Part II, points 3.3.2, 3.3.3, 3.3.and 3.3.5, of the CM);
            
–
the procedure for checks in aerodromes (Part II, point 3.3.6, of the CM);
–
the rule that ‘[i]n order to prevent dangers, checks must be carried out, in airports and aerodromes, on passengers on internal
               flights, where uncertainty exists whether such passengers are exclusively coming from, or solely bound for, the territories
               of the Contracting Parties without landing on the territory of a third State’ (Part II, point 3.3.7, of the CM);
            
–
checks on maritime traffic, with the exclusion of regular ferry services, pleasure boating, coastal fisheries and inland waterway
               transport (Part II, point 3.4, of the CM);
            
–
checks on inland waterway shipping (Part II, point 3.5, of the CM);
–
exchange of information (Part II, point 4.1, of the CM);
–
secondment of liaison officers (Part II, point 4.2, of the CM);
–
the issue of visas at the border (Part II, points 5.to 5.6, of the CM);
–
special rules on the checking of the pilots of aircraft and other crew members (Part II, point 6.4, of the CM);
–
special rules on the checking of seamen (Part II, point 6.5, of the CM);
–
special rules on the checking of holders of diplomatic, official or service passports (Part II, point 6.6, of the CM);
–
special rules on the checking of cross-border workers (Part II, point 6.7, of the CM);
–
special rules on the checking of minors (Part II, point 6.8, of the CM);
–
special rules on the checking of group trips (Part II, point 6.9, of the CM);
–
special rules on the checking of aliens who submit an application for asylum at the border (Part II, point 6.10, of the CM);
–
special rules on the checking of members of international organisations (Part II, point 6.11, of the CM);
–
the specimen long-stay visa (Annex to the CM).
            
 Recital in Regulation No 790/2001, the wording of which is similar to that of recital in Regulation No 789/2001, states:
         ‘It is also necessary to provide for a procedure whereby the members of the Council and the Commission are informed without
         delay of all amendments to those Annexes [to] the Common Manual which consist, in whole or in part, of lists of factual information
         which must be provided by each Member State in accordance with the rules which it currently applies, and which therefore do
         not fall to be adopted, amended or updated by an act of the Council.’
         
            
 Article of Regulation No 790/provides:
         ‘1. Each Member State shall communicate to the Secretary-General of the Council such amendments as it wishes to make to point
         1.3.of Part I and to Annexes 1, 2, 3, 7, and of the Common Manual.
          2. Amendments made pursuant to paragraph shall be deemed to take effect as of the date on which the Secretary-General communicates
         those amendments to the members of the Council and to the Commission.’
         
            
 The provisions of the CM which, in accordance with Article of Regulation No 790/2001, may be amended by the Member States
         concern the following matters: 
         
–
the rule that ‘[n]ationals of the Kingdom of Belgium, the Kingdom of Denmark, the French Republic, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg
               and the Kingdom of the Netherlands shall be authorised to cross, at any point, the borders of the State whose nationality
               they hold’ (Part I, point 1.3.2, of the CM);
            
–
authorised border crossing points for the purposes of Part I, point 1.2, of the CM (Annex to the CM);
–
specimen stick‑in visas for the purposes of Part I, point 3.1.3, of the CM (Annex to the CM);
–
specimen separate sheets (that is to say, authorisations replacing visas) (Annex to the CM);
–
specimen cards issued by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Annex to the CM).
            
 It is to be noted that Annexes and to the CM, to which Article 2(1) of Regulation No 790/refers, were repealed by
         Council Decision 2002/352/EC of April on the revision of the Common Manual (OJ L 123, p. 47).
         
 The action 
            
 The Commission puts forward two pleas in law in support of its action. The first alleges infringement of Article EC and
         Article of the second comitology decision in that, in Article of each of the contested regulations, the Council reserved
         the right to exercise implementing powers itself, improperly and without giving adequate reasons for doing so. The second
         plea alleges infringement of Article EC in that Article of the contested regulations confers power on the Member States
         to amend, first, certain parts of the CCI and certain Executive Committee decisions supplementing the CCI and, second, parts
         of the CM.
         
 First plea in law: reservation of powers to the Council  Arguments of the parties
         
            
 The first plea in law comprises two parts. By the first part of the plea, the Commission submits that the Council did not
         establish that the specific nature of the implementing measures provided for by the contested regulations was such as to justify
         the exercise of implementing powers by the Council. It is clear from recital in Regulation No 789/and from recital
         in Regulation No 790/that the Council provided a ‘generic’ statement of reasons which covers an entire area of the
         CCI or the CM rather than a specific measure.
         
            
 Those recitals describe neither the nature nor the content of the implementing powers concerned, which would show why it is
         necessary for the Council to exercise such powers itself, since the mere reference to visa policy and border surveillance
         in general terms is not sufficient to establish the specificity of the measures to be taken.
         
            
 Likewise, an explanation concerning both ‘the enhanced role of the Member States’, which, in the Commission’s submission,
         can refer only to the fact that under Title IV of the Treaty the Member States may take legislative initiatives, and the sensitivity,
         particularly as regards political relations with third countries, of questions concerning border surveillance and the issue
         of visas, which accounts precisely for the enhanced role of the Member States, could apply to any implementing measure adopted
         under Title IV of the Treaty.
         
            
 Finally, the reference to the transitional period of five years provided for in Article 67(1) EC and the Council’s undertaking
         to review the ‘conditions under which such implementing powers would be conferred on the Commission’ after the end of that
         period clearly shows that the reason for the Council’s reservation of implementing powers to itself lies not in the nature
         or content of the basic instruments but in the fact that the latter fall within the scope of Title IV of the Treaty.
         
            
 By the second part of its first plea in law, the Commission maintains that, quite apart from whether the implementing measures
         are specific in nature, the Council failed to comply with the obligation to state reasons laid down in Article EC. Reasoning
         which is founded, first, on the specific institutional situation in Title IV of the Treaty, and secondly on the sensitive
         nature of the policies concerned cannot justify the Council’s decision to reserve to itself the implementing powers provided
         for by the contested regulations.
         
            
 As regards the specific institutional arrangements of Title IV of the Treaty, the Commission argues that matters such as external
         borders, asylum, immigration and judicial cooperation in civil matters, which were formerly included in Title VI of the Treaty
         on European Union, have been brought within the Community framework.
         
            
 Admittedly, the Member States have power to take legislative initiatives during a five‑year transitional period laid down
         in Article 67(1) EC, and Article EC contains derogations as regards the procedure laid down in Article EC. However,
         use of the comitology procedure set up pursuant to Article EC cannot be excluded by the special and derogating provisions
         of Title IV of the EC Treaty.
         
            
 Furthermore, even if areas concerning border surveillance and the issue of visas were to be regarded as sensitive, the Commission
         submits that it is capable of dealing with such matters and that, in any event, it would not act without involving the Member
         States in the decision in accordance with the comitology procedure. The Commission draws attention to the institutional role
         conferred on it by the Treaty in respect of relations with non-member States, in particular at the stage of negotiating international
         agreements. It also points out that certain aspects of visa policy, in particular the determination of the States whose nationals
         must be in possession of a visa, already came within the Community framework before the Treaty of Amsterdam was adopted. Finally,
         the domains concerned are merely a matter of procedures and formalities.
         
            
 The Council submits as a preliminary point that the CCI and the CM are hybrid documents in the sense that each of them contains
         provisions which are legislative, executive and factual in nature. The contested regulations take account of this particular
         feature by providing for three different procedures for amending the CCI and the CM. According to recital in Regulation
         No 789/and recital in Regulation No 790/2001, the elements which are legislative in nature may be amended only in accordance
         with the relevant provisions of the EC Treaty; those which are executive in nature may be amended only in accordance with
         the procedure laid down in Article of each of the contested regulations and only amendments of those provisions may be regarded
         as implementing measures; finally, information of a factual nature may be amended only in accordance with the procedure set
         out in Article of each of the contested regulations.
         
            
 The Council also observes, as a preliminary point, that there is a considerable overlap between the CCI and the CM, which
         results from the fact that the competent consular authorities and the competent border authorities must often consult the
         same information in the course of their work, which explains the similarity of the procedures established by the contested
         regulations.
         
            
 In respect of the first plea, the Council contends that recital in Regulation No 789/and recital in Regulation No
         790/clearly indicate that the reservation of implementing powers relates specifically to the amendment of certain ‘detailed
         provisions and practical procedures’ set out in the CCI and the CM. The nature and content of those provisions are described
         in more detail in the preceding recitals, namely recitals 1, and in Regulation No 789/and recitals and in Regulation
         No 790/2001. Accordingly, the reasons given are not generic in nature and cannot apply to all measures taken under Title IV
         of the Treaty. In that regard, the Council states that it has already adopted numerous acts under Title IV, some of which
         concern visa matters, without having reserved implementing powers to itself.
         
            
 The considerations which led the Council to reserve the right, in this instance, to exercise implementing powers itself are
         the same as those which led the framers of the Amsterdam Treaty to give the Member States power to take initiatives under
         Title IV of the EC Treaty for an initial five-year period. The same reasons also led the Council to provide that amendments
         and updates of the measures in question should be agreed unanimously. 
         
            
 At the time of adoption of the contested regulations, the incorporation of the Schengen  acquis  into the framework of the European Union and the conferral on the Community of new competences in respect of visa policy
         and border control had taken place only a short time previously.
         
            
 It is precisely because the decision to reserve the right to exercise implementing powers itself is the exception rather than
         the rule that the Council, despite the sensitivity of the area, indicated that it would review the conditions under which
         such implementing powers would be conferred on the Commission after the end of the five‑year transitional period referred
         to in Article 67(1) EC. The Council submits that the three-year period still to run before expiry of the transitional period
         was a reasonable period of time for it to assess whether the considerations which led it initially to reserve implementing
         powers to itself were still valid.
         
            
 The Council denies that it reserved the right to exercise implementing powers itself on the ground that the measures in question
         fell within Title IV of the Treaty. Since the Treaty of Amsterdam entered into force, it has in fact adopted many measures
         in the realm of Title IV, which contain comitology provisions.
         
 Findings of the Court
         
            
 As a preliminary point, it must be borne in mind that, under the first subparagraph of Article of the second comitology
         decision, implementing powers are conferred on the Commission other than in specific and substantiated cases where the basic
         instrument reserves to the Council the right to exercise directly certain implementing powers itself. In that, the provision
         merely reproduces the requirements set out concurrently in Articles EC, third indent, and EC.
         
            
 In that regard, as the Court held in its judgment in Case 16/Commission  v  Council  [1989] ECR 3457, paragraph 10, following the amendments made to Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC) by the Single
         European Act, the Council may reserve the right to exercise implementing powers directly only in specific cases, and it must
         state in detail the grounds for such a decision.
         
            
 That means that the Council must properly explain, by reference to the nature and content of the basic instrument to be implemented
         or amended, why exception is being made to the rule that, under the system established by the Treaty, when measures implementing
         a basic instrument need to be taken at Community level, it is the Commission which, in the normal course of events, is responsible
         for exercising that power.
         
            
 In this instance, the Council specifically referred, in recital in Regulation No 789/and in recital in Regulation
         No 790/2001, to the enhanced role of the Member States in respect of visas and border surveillance and to the sensitivity
         of those areas, in particular as regards political relations with non-member States. 
         
            
 It cannot be denied that such considerations are both general and laconic. However, assessed in their proper context, they
         are such as to show clearly the grounds justifying the reservation of powers to the Council and to allow the Court to exercise
         its power of review.
         
            
 It is clear, in the first place, that prior to the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam, which occurred two years before
         the contested regulations were adopted, visa policy – with the exception of the determination of the third countries whose
         nationals must be in possession of a visa when crossing the external borders of the Member States, as provided for in Article
         100c(1) of the EC Treaty (repealed by the Treaty of Amsterdam) – and external border policy were excluded in their entirety
         from the European Community’s competence and were among the procedures established under Title VI of the Treaty on European
         Union.
         
            
 In the second place, Title IV of the EC Treaty includes, in Articles EC and EC, progressive special and derogating provisions
         concerning the procedure for adopting subordinate legislation and the preliminary ruling procedure. Thus, Article 67(1) and
         (2) EC provides for a transitional period of five years following the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam, during
         which, as a general rule, the Council acts unanimously on a proposal from the Commission or on the initiative of a Member
         State and after consulting the European Parliament. After that period, the Council legislates solely on a proposal from the
         Commission and may, acting unanimously, provide for all or parts of the areas covered by Title IV to be governed by the procedure
         referred to in Article EC and adapt the provisions relating to the powers of the Court of Justice.
         
            
 Provisions of this kind reflect the specific nature of the area covered by the contested regulations. Until May 1999, that
         area fell, for the main part, within the procedures established under Title VI of the Treaty on European Union, since the
         framers of the EC Treaty did not wish to confer on the Commission a sole right of initiative in this area at the outset.
         
            
 In the third place, the provisions exhaustively listed in Article of the contested regulations concern clearly circumscribed
         matters. Although the provisions represent a major part of the CCI and the CM, it is none the less the case that they do not
         deal with all aspects of visas and external border control.
         
            
 In the fourth place, it is clear from recital in Regulation No 789/and recital in Regulation No 790/that the
         Council undertook to review the conditions under which the implementing powers reserved by those regulations could be conferred
         on the Commission after a three-year transitional period.
         
            
 For all those reasons, which are sufficiently clear from the preambles to the contested regulations and from the context in
         which they occur, it must be held that the Council could reasonably consider itself to be concerned with a specific case and
         that it duly stated the reasons, in accordance with Article EC, for its decision to reserve to itself, on a transitional
         basis, power to implement a series of provisions exhaustively listed in the CCI and the CM.
         
            
 The fact that recital in Regulation No 789/and recital in Regulation No 790/are worded almost identically is
         not, on its own, such as to call that finding into question, particularly given the close links which undoubtedly exist between
         the area of visas and that of border control.
         
            
 In those circumstances, the first plea advanced by the Commission in support of its application must be rejected.
         
 Second plea in law: implementing power conferred on the Member States  Arguments of the parties
         
            
 By its second plea, the Commission maintains that the procedure for the Member States to amend and update the CCI and the
         CM, provided for in Article of the contested regulations, is contrary to Article EC. That provision, which allows the
         Council only to reserve the right to exercise implementing powers itself or to confer them on the Commission, does not authorise
         such a procedure.
         
            
 It adds that, even if the procedure concerns factual information in the possession of the Member States, that information
         is contained in instruments whose legal basis consists, by virtue of Decision 1999/436, of provisions of the EC Treaty and
         therefore amendments to those instruments must adhere to the normal institutional rules.
         
            
 The Council’s response is that the amendments to the CCI and the CM pursuant to Article of the contested regulations cannot
         be classified as implementing measures but relate to a mechanism for exchanging information. It is evident from recital in Regulation No 789/and recital in Regulation No 790/that what is involved is factual information which can be
         provided only by each Member State. Accordingly, Article EC is of no relevance.
         
 Findings of the Court
         
            
 It is quite clear from Article of the contested regulations that, despite the use of the verb ‘wish’, each Member State
         may itself amend, sometimes in agreement with the other Member States, certain provisions of, or annexes to, the CCI and the
         CM. In the words of recital in Regulation No 789/and recital in Regulation No 790/2001, ‘members of the Council
         and the Commission are informed without delay of all amendments …’, which implies that it is the Member States which have
         the power to make amendments.
         
            
 In that regard, it must be stated that, although Article EC, third indent, governs the issue of uniform implementation
         of the basic instruments adopted by the Council or by the Council and the Parliament, and hence the division of implementing
         powers as between the Council and the Commission, the provision does not concern the division of powers as between the Community
         and the Member States.
         
            
 It is necessary to consider whether, for the purposes of the implementation of certain provisions of, or annexes to, the CCI
         and the CM, the Council was required to use Community procedures or whether power to amend those provisions or annexes could
         be conferred on the Member States without infringing Community law.
         
            
 In this instance, the Council maintains that the provisions which may be amended by the Member States cover only factual information
         which the Member States alone may effectively supply.
         
            
 It is appropriate to bear in mind in that respect that the CCI and the CM were adopted by the Executive Committee at a time
         when the area concerned was a matter for intergovernmental cooperation. Their integration into the framework of the European
         Union with effect from the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam did not, of itself, result in the Member States being
         immediately stripped of the powers which they were entitled to exercise under those instruments in order to ensure their proper
         implementation.
         
            
 In that quite specific and transitional situation, prior to the evolution of the Schengen  acquis  within the legal and institutional framework of the European Union, no objection can be made to the Council having established
         a procedure for the transmission by the Member States of amendments which they are authorised to make, unilaterally or in
         collaboration with the other Member States, to certain provisions of the CCI or the CM, the contents of which depend exclusively
         on information which they alone possess. Such a complaint could succeed only if it were established that the procedure thereby
         put into practice was such as to prejudice the effective or correct implementation of the CCI or the CM.
         
            
 It must none the less be stated that the Commission, which has not disputed either that the information given in the provisions
         which may be amended by the Member States is factual or the fact that the information can be provided effectively only by
         the Member States, has not shown, or even attempted to establish, in respect of each of those provisions, that it was appropriate
         to use a uniform updating procedure for the CCI and the CM in order to ensure their proper implementation. It merely examined
         by way of example, in its reply, Annexes and to the CCI.
         
            
 In those circumstances, the Court considers that its review must be limited to an assessment of the legality of Article of Regulation No 789/in so far as it applies to Annexes and to the CCI, alone examined by the Commission in its pleadings.
         
            
 In that regard, Article 2(2) of Regulation No 789/provides that when a Member State wishes to make an amendment to Annex
         4, 5B or 5C to the CCI, in particular, it first submits a proposal for amendment to the other Member States, which may comment
         on the proposal.
         
            
 As regards, first, Annex to the CCI, which includes a list of documents issued by each Member State and entitling the holder
         to entry without a visa, the Commission submits that, by virtue of Article 21(1) and (2) of the CISA, nationals of third countries
         who hold valid residence permits or provisional residence permits issued by a Contracting Party may, on the basis of that
         permit and a valid travel document issued by the same Contracting Party, move freely for up to three months within the Schengen
         territories.
         
            
 Although it is true that amendment of the list in Annex to the CCI has an immediate impact on the conditions under which
         Article 21(1) and (2) of the CISA applies, it is none the less the case that, under Article 21(3), ‘[t]he Contracting Parties
         shall send the Executive Committee [for which the Council has substituted itself, in accordance with Article 2(1) of the Protocol]
         a list of the documents that they issue as valid travel documents, residence permits or provisional residence permits within
         the meaning of this Article’.
         
            
 There is nothing to suggest, in the wording of that provision and in the absence of any other Community provision amending
         in that respect the rules in the CISA prior to the adoption of the contested regulations, that, once the list of documents
         in question has been communicated to the Executive Committee (or to the Council), the Member States are no longer competent
         to determine the nature of the documents valid as residence permits or provisional residence permits.
         
            
 Consequently, the Commission has not established that the amendment of Annex to the CCI required use of a uniform updating
         procedure. 
         
            
 As regards, second, Annex to the CCI, concerning the cases referred to in Article 17(2) of the CISA, in which the issue
         of a visa is subject to consultation with the central authority of the Contracting Party with which the application is lodged
         and, where appropriate, the central authorities of other Contracting Parties, it must be stated, in the first place, that
         in accordance with point 2.of Part II of the CCI, consultation of the national central authority by the diplomatic mission
         or consular post examining the application is provided for ‘in [the cases], and in accordance with the arrangements and deadlines,
         laid down by national law and practice’. Annex 5A to the CCI mentions precisely those cases.
         
            
 The Commission has not succeeded in showing why the use of a uniform procedure for the updating of Annex 5A to the CCI was
         necessary for the proper implementation of point 2.of Part II of the CCI, account being taken of the reference in that provision
         to national law and practice.
         
            
 In the second place, point 2.of Part II of the CCI concerns cases in which the diplomatic mission or consular post with
         whom a visa application is lodged must seek authorisation from its central authority, which must first consult the competent
         central authorities of one or more of the other Contracting Parties. Point 2.provides that ‘until the final list of cases
         of mutual consultation has been approved by the Executive Committee [for which the Council has substituted itself], the list
         annexed to these Common Consular Instructions shall apply’. That list is in fact in Annex 5B.
         
            
 The Commission, which does not dispute that each Member State is responsible for determining visa applications in respect
         of which prior consultation of the central authorities of the other Contracting Parties is required, has not established why,
         until a final list of cases of mutual consultation has been established by the Council, use of a uniform procedure was necessary
         for the proper implementation of point 2.of Part II of the CCI and, in particular, for the updating of Annex 5B to the CCI.
         
            
 In the third place, point 2.of Part II of the CCI, which refers to the list in Annex 5C to the CCI, concerns cases in which
         visa applications are lodged at an embassy or a consular post of a Schengen State, representing another Schengen State.
         
            
 The Commission has not demonstrated, or even tried to establish, why use of a uniform procedure was necessary for the proper
         implementation of point 2.of Part II of the CCI, and, in particular, for the updating of Annex 5C to the CCI.
         
            
 As a consequence, the second plea put forward by the Commission in support of its application must be rejected.
         
            
 Having regard to all of the foregoing considerations, the Commission’s application must be dismissed in its entirety.
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Council has asked for costs to be awarded against the Commission
         and since the latter has been unsuccessful, it must be ordered to pay the costs.
         
 On those grounds, the Court (Full Court) hereby:
         
 
1.
 Dismisses the action; 
 
2.
 Orders the Commission of the European Communities to pay the costs. 
[Signatures]
      
 –
            
Language of the case: English.
Top  
 