
Avis juridique important
|
61987OOrder of the Court of May 1990.  -  Maclaine Watson & Company Limited v Council and Commission of the European Communities.  -  Removal from the register - Action for damages.  -  Case C-241/87.  
European Court reports Page I-Parties
Grounds
Operative part
Keywords
++++Action for damages - Procedure - Abandonment of the proceedings by the parties - Removal from the register  ( EEC Treaty, Art . 178; Rules of Procedure, Art . )  
Parties
In Case C-241/Maclaine Watson & Company Limited, whose registered office is in London, represented by Jeremy Lever QC and K . P . E . Lasok, barrister, assisted by T . W . B . Brentnall, solicitor, of Messrs Elborne Mitchell, London, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the Chambers of Messrs Faltz & Elvinger, rue Heine,  applicant,  v  Council of the European Communities, represented by B . Hoff-Nielsen, Legal Adviser, acting as Agent, assisted by J . P . Carver, solicitor, of Messrs Clifford Chance, London, and P . J . Allot, barrister, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of Joerg Kaeser, Manager of the Legal Directorate of the European Investment Bank, boulevard Konrad-Adenauer, Kirchberg,  and  Commission of the European Communities, represented by G . Campogrande, Legal Adviser, acting as Agent, assisted by J . P . Carver, solicitor, of Messrs Clifford Chance, London, and P . J . Allot, barrister, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of Georgios Kremlis, a member of the Commission' s Legal Department, Wagner Centre, Kirchberg,  defendants,  supported by  United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, represented by T . J . G . Pratt, Principal Assistant Treasury Solicitor, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the British Embassy, boulevard Roosevelt,  intervener,  APPLICATION for compensation for damage arising from the acts and omissions of the European Economic Community in signing the Sixth International Tin Agreement and in participating in the International Tin Council,  THE COURT  composed of : O . Due, President, C . N . Kakouris, F . A . Schockweiler and M . Zuleeg ( Presidents of Chambers ), G . F . Mancini, R . Joliet, T . F . O' Higgins, J . C . Moitinho de Almeida, G . C . Rodríguez Iglesias, F . Grévisse and M . Diez de Velasco, Judges,  Advocate General : M . Darmon  Registrar : J.-G . Giraud  after hearing the views of the Advocate General,  makes the following  Order  
Grounds
By letter lodged at the Court Registry on April 1990, the applicant Maclaine Watson & Company Limited, the Commission and the Council of the European Communities informed the Court that an agreement had been reached in settlement of the dispute between Maclaine Watson & Company Limited and the International Tin Council and that Maclaine Watson & Company Limited wished to withdraw its application .  The parties also informed the Court that they would bear their own costs .  By letter lodged at the Court Registry on April 1990, the intervener, the United Kingdom, took note of the discontinuance of the proceedings between the parties and agreed to bear the costs relating to its intervention .  Pursuant to Article of the Rules of Procedure, the Court takes note of the discontinuance of the proceedings between the parties .  
Operative part
On those grounds,  THE COURT  hereby orders as follows :  ( ) Case C-241/shall be removed from the register;  ( ) The parties shall bear their own costs .  Luxembourg, May .  
Top  
 