
Case C-409/European Commission
v
Hellenic Republic
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Duty‑free imports of military equipment)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Community law – Scope – No general exception excluding measures taken for reasons of public security
(Arts EC, EC, EC, EC, EC, EC and EC)
2.        Own resources of the European Communities – Establishment and making available by the Member States – Duty-free imports of
            military equipment by a Member State
(Council Regulations No 1552/89, as amended by Regulation No 1355/96, Arts and to 11, and No 1150/2000, Arts and to
            11)
1.        Although it is for Member States to take the appropriate measures to ensure their internal and external security, it does
         not follow that such measures are entirely outside the scope of Community law. The only articles in which the Treaty expressly
         provides for derogations applicable in situations which may affect public safety are Articles EC, EC, EC, EC,
         EC, EC and EC, which deal with exceptional and clearly defined cases. It cannot be inferred that the Treaty contains
         an inherent general exception excluding all measures taken for reasons of public security from the scope of Community law.
         The recognition of the existence of such an exception, regardless of the specific requirements laid down by the Treaty, would
         be liable to impair the binding nature of Community law and its uniform application.
      
Furthermore, the derogations provided for in Articles EC and EC must, in the same way as derogations from fundamental
         freedoms, be interpreted strictly. As regards, more particularly, Article EC, although it refers to measures which a Member
         State may consider necessary for the protection of the essential interests of its security or of information the disclosure
         of which it considers contrary to those interests, that article cannot however be read in such a way as to confer on Member
         States a power to depart from the provisions of the Treaty based on no more than reliance on those interests. Consequently
         it is for the Member State which seeks to take advantage of Article EC to prove that it is necessary to have recourse
         to that derogation in order to protect its essential security interests. 
      
(see paras 50-52, 54)
2.        A Member State which has refused to calculate and to make payment to the Commission of the European Communities of the own
         resources which were not collected in the period from January until December 2002, in relation to imports of military
         material which were exempted from customs duties, and has refused to pay default interest arising from the failure to pay
         those own resources to the Commission has failed to fulfil its obligations under, respectively, Article and Articles to
         of Regulation No 1552/implementing Decision 88/on the system of the Communities’ own resources, as amended by Regulation
         No 1355/96, until May 2000, and, after that date, the same articles of Regulation No 1150/2000, implementing Decision 94/728,
         on the system of the Communities’ own resources. 
      
A Member State cannot be allowed to plead the increased cost of military material because of the application of customs duties
         on imports of such material from third countries in order to avoid, at the expense of other Member States who collect and
         pay the customs duties on such imports, the obligations which the principle of joint financing of the Community budget imposes
         on it.
      
(see paras 55, 62, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
December (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Duty‑free imports of military equipment)
In Case C‑409/05,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on November 2005,
European Commission, represented by C. Cattabriga, D. Triantafyllou, H. Støvlbæk and G. Wilms, acting as Agents, with an address for service in
         Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Hellenic Republic, represented by A. Samoni-Rantou, E.-M. Mamouna and K. Boskovits, acting as Agents,
      
defendant,
supported by:
Kingdom of Denmark, represented by J. Bering Liisberg, acting as Agent, 
      
Italian Republic, represented by I. Braguglia, acting as Agent, and by G. De Bellis, avvocato dello Stato, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
         
      
Portuguese Republic, represented by C. Guerra Santos, L. Inez Fernandes and J. Gomes, acting as Agents,
      
Republic of Finland, represented by J. Heliskoski and A. Guimaraes-Purokoski, acting as Agents,
      
interveners,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, A. Tizzano, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, K. Lenaerts, E. Levits and C. Toader, Presidents of Chambers,
         C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Borg Barthet (Rapporteur), M. Ilešič, J. Malenovský and U. Lõhmus, Judges,
      
Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on November 2008,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on February 2009,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities asks the Court to declare that, by refusing to calculate and
         to make payment of own resources which were not collected in the period from January until December 2002, in relation
         to imports of military material which were exempted from customs duties, and by refusing to pay default interest arising from
         the failure to pay those own resources to the Commission, the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under,
         respectively, Article and Articles to of Council Regulation (EEC, Euratom) No 1552/of May implementing Decision
         88/376/EEC, Euratom on the system of the Communities’ own resources (OJ L 155, p. 1), as amended by Council Regulation
         (EC, Euratom) No 1355/of July (OJ L 175, p. 3; ‘Regulation No 1552/89’), until May 2000, and, after that
         date, the same articles of Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1150/of May implementing Decision 94/728/EC, Euratom
         on the system of the Communities’ own resources (OJ L 130, p. 1).
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation 
Article 2(1) of Council Decision 88/376/EEC, Euratom, of June on the system of the Communities’ own resources (OJ
         L 185, p. 24) and of Council Decision 94/728/EC, Euratom, of October on the system of the European Communities’
         own resources (OJ L 293, p. 9), provides:
      
‘Revenue from the following shall constitute own resources entered in the budget of the Communities:
…
(b)      Common Customs Tariff duties and other duties established or to be established by the institutions of the Communities in respect
         of trade with non-member countries and customs duties on products coming under the Treaty establishing the European Coal and
         Steel Community;
      
...’
Article of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/of October establishing the Community Customs Code (OJ L 302,
         p. 1, the ‘Community Customs Code’), provides:
      
‘1.      Duties legally owed where a customs debt is incurred shall be based on the Customs Tariff of the European Communities.
…
3.      The Customs Tariff of the European Communities shall comprise:
(a)      the combined nomenclature of products;
...
(c)      the rates and other items of charge normally applicable to products covered by the combined nomenclature as regards:
–        customs duties
…
(d)      the preferential tariff measures contained in agreements which the Community has concluded with certain countries or groups
         of countries and which provide for the granting of preferential tariff treatment;
      
(e)      preferential tariff measures adopted unilaterally by the Community in respect of certain countries, groups of countries or
         territories;
      
(f)      autonomous suspensive measures providing for a reduction in or relief from import duties chargeable on certain products;
(g)      other tariff measures provided for by other Community legislation.
...’
Article 217(1) of the Community Customs Code states:
      
‘Each and every amount of import duty or export duty resulting from a customs debt, hereinafter called “amount of duty”, shall
         be calculated by the customs authorities as soon as they have the necessary particulars, and entered by those authorities
         in the accounting records or on any other equivalent medium (entry in the accounts).
      
...’
In the context of making available to the Commission the Communities’ own resources, the Council of the European Union adopted
         Regulation No 1552/89, applicable during the period at issue in this case until May 2000. That regulation was replaced
         as from May by Regulation No 1150/which consolidates Regulation No 1552/but does not alter its content. 
      
Article of Regulation No 1552/provides:
      
‘1.      For the purpose of applying this Regulation, the Community’s entitlement to the own resources referred to in Article 2(1)(a)
         and (b) of Decision 88/376/EEC, Euratom shall be established as soon as the conditions provided for by the customs regulations
         have been met concerning the entry of the entitlement in the accounts and the notification of the debtor.
      
1a.      The date of the establishment referred to in paragraph shall be the date of entry in the accounting ledgers provided for
         by the customs regulations.
      
…’
Article 9(1) of that regulation provides:
      
‘In accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 10, each Member State shall credit own resources to the account opened
         in the name of the Commission with its Treasury or the body it has appointed. 
      
This account shall be kept free of charge.’ 
Under Article 10(1) of that regulation:
      
‘After deduction of 10% by way of collection costs in accordance with Article 2(3) of Decision 88/376/EEC, Euratom, entry
         of the own resources referred to in Article 2(1)(a) and (b) of that Decision shall be made at the latest on the first working
         day following the 19th day of the second month following the month during which the entitlement was established in accordance
         with Article of this Regulation.
      
...’
Article of Regulation No 1552/provides:
      
‘Any delay in making the entry in the account referred to in Article 9(1) shall give rise to the payment of interest by the
         Member State concerned at the interest rate applicable on the Member State’s money market on the due date for short-term public
         financing operations, increased by two percentage points. This rate shall be increased by 0.of a percentage point for each
         month of delay. The increased rate shall be applied to the entire period of delay.’
      
Under Article of Regulation No 1150/2000:
      
‘Regulation (EEC, Euratom) No 1552/shall be repealed. 
References to the said Regulation shall be construed as references to this Regulation and should be read in accordance with
         the correlation table set out in Part A of the Annex.’
      
Thus, apart from the fact that Regulations Nos 1552/and 1150/contain references to Decision 88/and Decision 94/respectively, Article and Articles to of those two regulations are, in essence, identical.
      
The rate of 10% specified in Article 10(1) of Regulation No 1150/was raised to 25% by Council Decision 2000/597/EC, Euratom,
         of September on the system of the European Communities’ own resources (OJ L 253, p. 42). 
      
Recital (1) in the preamble of that decision states:
      
‘The European Council meeting in Berlin on and March concluded, inter alia, that the system of the Communities’
         own resources should be equitable, transparent, cost-effective, simple and based on criteria which best express each Member
         State’s ability to contribute.’
      
Council Regulation No 150/of January suspending import duties on certain weapons and military equipment (OJ L 25, p. 1), adopted on the basis of Article EC, states in recital (5) of the preamble:
      
‘In order to take account of the protection of the military confidentiality of the Member States it is necessary to lay down
         specific administrative procedures for the granting of the benefit of the suspension of duties. A declaration by the competent
         authority of the Member State for whose forces the weapons or military equipment are destined, which could also be used as
         a customs declaration as required by the Customs Code, would constitute an appropriate guarantee that these conditions are
         fulfilled. The declaration should be given in the form of a certificate. It is appropriate to specify the form which such
         certificates must take and to allow also the use of means of data processing techniques for the declaration.’
      
Article of that regulation provides:
      
‘This Regulation lays down the conditions for the autonomous suspension of import duties on certain weapons and military equipment
         imported by or on behalf of the authorities in charge of the military defence of the Member States from third countries.’
      
Article 3(2) of that regulation states: 
      
‘Notwithstanding paragraph 1, for reasons of military confidentiality, the certificate and the imported products may be submitted
         to other authorities designated by the importing Member State for this purpose. In such cases the competent authority issuing
         the certificate shall send before January and July of each year a summary report to the customs authorities of its Member
         State on such imports. The report shall cover a period of six months immediately preceding the month on which the report has
         to be submitted. It shall contain the number and issuing date of the certificates, the date of imports and the total value
         and gross weight of the products imported with the certificates.’ 
      
Article of Regulation No 150/states that that regulation is to apply as from January 2003.
      
 Pre-litigation procedure
By letter of formal notice dated October the Commission commenced infringement proceedings against the Hellenic Republic
         and asked that Member State to calculate and pay own resources related to the imports at issue which were not paid in the
         period from January until December and to pay the interest arising thereon. 
      
In its reply of August relating to infringement proceedings commenced on December in respect of the same facts,
         a reply which was however sent on October 2003, the Hellenic Republic contended that Article 296(1)(b) EC permitted it
         to exempt imports of military material from customs duties in order to protect the essential interests of its security. 
      
On October 2004, after consideration of the Hellenic Republic’s reply, the Commission issued a reasoned opinion calling
         upon that Member State to take the measures necessary to achieve compliance within a period of two months from the date of
         receipt. In its reply of February the Hellenic Republic repeated and expanded upon the arguments previously submitted.
         
      
Taking into account what the Hellenic Republic had said, the Commission decided to bring this action.
      
By order dated September the President of the Court allowed the applications for leave to intervene of the Kingdom
         of Denmark, the Italian Republic, the Portuguese Republic and the Republic of Finland in support of the forms of order sought
         by the Hellenic Republic.
      
 The action
 Admissibility
First, the Hellenic Republic raises an objection of inadmissibility on the ground that the action is procedurally flawed,
         because the wrong legal remedy has been chosen. The Member State states that, given that it has relied on Article EC in
         order to justify not paying the customs duties relating to the relevant imports of military material, the Commission was not
         entitled to bring this action on the basis of Article EC, but was obliged to use the special procedure provided for in
         the second paragraph of Article EC.
      
It is evident that, while the Hellenic Republic refers to that objection of inadmissibility in its defence, the appropriate
         form of order is however only presented in the rejoinder, and consequently, in accordance with Article of the Court’s Rules
         of Procedure, that objection must be declared to be inadmissible since the applicant has been denied the opportunity to rebut
         it.
      
Irrespective of considerations relating to the Rules of Procedure, it must be observed that the Commission’s objective in
         the present action is to obtain a declaration of a failure to fulfil obligations under Articles and to of Regulations
         Nos 1552/and 1150/2000. Article EC is applicable only if the Commission alleges improper use of the powers provided
         for in Articles EC and EC.
      
Secondly, at the hearing, the representative of the Greek Government raised an objection of inadmissibility by arguing that
         it is not possible to obtain by means of an action for failure to fulfil obligations a decision of the Court requiring a Member
         State to adopt specific measures.
      
Suffice it to say in that regard that, as is clear from the very wording of the Commission’s application, the latter restricted
         itself to seeking a declaration that the alleged failure to fulfil obligations had taken place, without asking the Court to
         impose specific measures on the Member State concerned.
      
Consequently, the Commission’s action must be declared admissible.
      
 Substance
 Arguments of the parties 
The Commission claims that the Hellenic Republic is wrong to rely on Article EC to justify the refusal to pay customs
         duties, since the collection of such duties does not threaten the essential security interests of that Member State.
      
As a preliminary point, the Commission stated that it is not putting in issue the specific geographical position of the Hellenic
         Republic, but rather that Member State’s need to exempt imports of military material from customs duties in order to protect
         its essential security interests. 
      
The Commission considers that measures which establish derogations or exceptions, such as in particular Article EC, must
         be interpreted strictly. Accordingly, the Member State concerned which claims that Article EC applies and which proposes
         to derogate from Article of the Community Customs Code, where the general principle of the levying of duties as fixed under
         Article EC is stated, and consequently from the Common Customs Tariff applicable to the imports in question, should demonstrate
         that it can satisfy all the conditions laid down in Article EC. 
      
According to the Commission, it is for the Greek authorities to provide specific and detailed evidence that the collection
         of customs duties on the imports at issue in this case threatens essential interests of the security of the Hellenic Republic.
      
In that regard, an increase in the stock of military material or its modernisation and a significant reduction of resources
         allocated to the equipment programme do not constitute such proof. The same is true of the reliance on how much is spent on
         ‘defence’ expenditure when no reference is made to verified relevant data. 
      
The Commission rejects as unfounded the Hellenic Republic’s argument relating to the fear of disclosure of information affecting
         military confidentiality during the inspection procedure since, firstly, anyone can obtain access, via the internet, to detailed
         information on, for example, the type of weapons which have been exported to the Hellenic Republic and, secondly, the purpose
         of these infringement proceedings is restricted solely to the principle of payment of customs duties. The Commission also
         states that, in any event, implementation of the Community customs system requires the active involvement of Community and
         national officials, who are bound by an obligation of confidentiality when dealing with sensitive data.
      
The Commission rejects as untenable the argument that its inaction, after the commencement of the infringement proceedings
         against the Hellenic Republic in relation to imports of material intended for both civil and military use, is evidence of
         an implied decision to take no further action in relation to the infringement at issue in this case. The Hellenic Republic
         cannot claim that there has been a breach of the principle of protection of legitimate expectations on the view that that
         inaction signified the Commission’s acceptance of the exemption at issue in this case, since the two proceedings, although
         in appearance very similar, are different and the Commission has, in relation to infringement proceedings, a wide discretion.
         
      
The Commission adds that the legal basis of Regulation No 150/is directly to be found in Article EC relating to the
         establishment of customs duties and not in Article EC, which, even under the new legislation, cannot justify the exemption
         at issue.
      
According to the Commission, the failure to collect the customs duties in question creates a disparity among the Member States
         in relation to their respective contributions to the Community budget. That failure is evidence of a disregard by that Member
         State of its obligations in respect of the joint co‑financing of the Community budget. 
      
Lastly, the Commission considers that the repayment of customs duties to Member States which have correctly applied the Common
         Customs Tariff cannot compensate for the budgetary disparity in treatment which they have suffered. The Commission, as guardian
         of the Treaties, cannot condone an infringement of this kind of the Community legislation, which is detrimental to the Community
         budget. 
      
The Hellenic Republic considers that it is clear from the very wording of Article 296(1)(b) EC that the Treaty intended to
         confer on Member States a significant discretion in relation to measures which they may take for the protection of the essential
         interests of their security and which are connected with the products to which the provisions of Article 296(1)(b) EC apply.
         Accordingly, Article 296(1)(b) EC allows Member States to derogate from Article EC and from the Community Customs Code
         in the case of imports of equipment exclusively intended for military purposes where the objective of those imports is the
         protection of the essential interests of the security of the Member State concerned, taking into account the specific situation
         of that Member State. 
      
Accordingly, to justify the failure to collect customs duties on the imports of military material in the period concerned,
         the Hellenic Republic contends that the exceptions provided for in Article 296(1)(a) and (b) EC are applicable, since the
         implementation of the Community customs legislation to those imports would have jeopardised its essential security interests.
      
The Hellenic Republic considers that the question of whether or not there was an infringement of the customs legislation before
         the entry into force of Regulation No 150/has not been definitively resolved. Moreover, whether a funding debt has been
         incurred is dependent, according to the Hellenic Republic, on whether the corresponding customs debt has been incurred. 
      
The Hellenic Republic states that the payment of customs duties when military equipment is imported not only has a significant
         impact on the national armaments programme but also has direct effects on its defence capacity, thereby putting directly at
         risk the protection of essential interests of its security, within the meaning of Article EC. 
      
The Hellenic Republic considers that it has a wide discretion as to the choice of measures necessary for the protection of
         its essential security interests. In that regard, the fact that Regulation No 150/takes account of the essential security
         interests of Member States by providing, from January 2003, for a suspension of customs duties when military equipment is
         imported does not detract from the possibility of applying Article EC where Member States satisfy the conditions laid
         down in that article.
      
In that regard, the Hellenic Republic is further of the opinion that, by the adoption of Regulation No 150/2003, the Community
         legislature upheld the need to respect the security interests of Member States and their right to rely on confidentiality
         where that is required, and did so by means of specific administrative procedures as part of the rules relating to the suspension
         of customs duties. 
      
The Hellenic Republic considers that it has supplied to the Commission as much information as it could supply, since additional
         information would harm its essential security interests, and that it is clear from the information which has been sent that
         the payment of customs duties would have affected its defence capacity, for example by causing reductions in the programme
         for air force supply and maintenance taking into account the particularly high cost of aircraft interceptions.
      
Further, the Hellenic Republic considers that it is impossible to calculate accurately the customs duties which are payable
         without also communicating information about the type of material imported, since that information is also the basis of calculation
         for the customs nomenclature. 
      
 Findings of the Court
The Community Customs Code provides for the charging of customs duties on imports of products for military use, such as those
         at issue, from third countries. There is no provision of the Community customs legislation which, in respect of the period
         of imports at issue, namely from January to December 2002, provided for any specific exemption from customs duties
         on imports of products of that type. Consequently, in respect of that period, nor was there any express exemption from the
         obligation to make payment to the competent authorities of the duties which were payable, accompanied, as appropriate, by
         payment of default interest.
      
It can moreover be inferred from the fact that Regulation No 150/provided for the suspension of customs duties on certain
         weapons and military equipment from January that the Community legislature started from the assumption that an obligation
         to pay those customs duties existed prior to that date.
      
The Hellenic Republic has not at any time denied the existence of the imports at issue during the period under consideration.
         The Hellenic Republic has confined itself to challenging the Community’s entitlement to own resources while arguing that,
         pursuant to Article EC, the obligation to pay customs duties on armaments imported from third countries would cause serious
         damage to its essential security interests. 
      
According to the Court’s settled case-law, although it is for Member States to take the appropriate measures to ensure their
         internal and external security, it does not follow that such measures are entirely outside the scope of Community law (see
         Case C‑273/Sirdar [1999] ECR I‑7403, paragraph 15, and Case C‑285/Kreil [2000] ECR I‑69, paragraph 15). As the Court has already held, the only articles in which the Treaty expressly provides for
         derogations applicable in situations which may affect public safety are Articles EC, EC, EC, EC, EC, EC
         and EC, which deal with exceptional and clearly defined cases. It cannot be inferred that the Treaty contains an inherent
         general exception excluding all measures taken for reasons of public security from the scope of Community law. The recognition
         of the existence of such an exception, regardless of the specific requirements laid down by the Treaty, would be liable to
         impair the binding nature of Community law and its uniform application (see Case C‑186/Dory [2003] ECR I-2479, paragraph and case-law there cited).
      
Furthermore, the derogations provided for in Articles EC and EC must, in accordance with settled case-law in respect
         of derogations from fundamental freedoms (see, inter alia, Case C‑503/Commission v Spain [2006] ECR I‑1097, paragraph 45; Case C‑490/Commission v Germany [2007] ECR I‑6095, paragraph 86; and Case C‑141/Commission v Germany [2008] ECR I‑6935, paragraph 50) be interpreted strictly.
      
As regards, more particularly, Article EC, it must be observed that, although that Article refers to measures which a
         Member State may consider necessary for the protection of the essential interests of its security or of information the disclosure
         of which it considers contrary to those interests, that Article cannot however be read in such a way as to confer on Member
         States a power to depart from the provisions of the Treaty based on no more than reliance on those interests. 
      
Furthermore, in the area of value added tax, the Court declared in Case C‑414/Commission v Spain [1999] ECR I‑that there had been a failure to fulfil obligations on the ground that the Kingdom of Spain had not shown
         that the exemption from that tax on imports and acquisitions of arms, ammunition and equipment exclusively for military use,
         an exemption provided for by Spanish legislation, was justified, under Article 296(1)(b) EC, by the need to protect the essential
         interests of the security of that Member State.
      
Consequently it is for the Member State which seeks to take advantage of Article EC to prove that it is necessary to have
         recourse to that derogation in order to protect its essential security interests.
      
In the light of those considerations, a Member State cannot be allowed to plead the increased cost of military material because
         of the application of customs duties on imports of such material from third countries in order to avoid, at the expense of
         other Member States who collect and pay the customs duties on such imports, the obligations which the principle of joint financing
         of the Community budget imposes on it. 
      
As regards the argument that the Community customs procedures are not capable of safeguarding the security of the Hellenic
         Republic of, in the light of the confidentiality requirements contained in agreements entered into with exporting States,
         it must be stated, as correctly observed by the Commission, that the implementation of the Community customs system requires
         the active involvement of Community and national officials, who are bound when necessary by an obligation of confidentiality,
         when dealing with sensitive data, which is capable of protecting the essential security interests of Member States. 
      
Furthermore, the level of specificity to be attained in the declarations which Member States must periodically complete and
         send to the Commission is not such as to lead to damage to the interests of those States in respect of either security or
         confidentiality.
      
In those circumstances, and in accordance with Article EC which obliges Member States to facilitate the achievement of
         the Commission’s task of ensuring compliance with the Treaty, Member States are obliged to make available to the Commission
         the documents necessary to permit inspection to ensure that the transfer of the Community’s own resources is correct. However,
         as the Advocate General stated in point of his Opinion, such an obligation does not mean that Member States may not, on
         a case-by-case basis and by way of exception, on the basis of Article EC, either restrict the information sent to certain
         parts of a document or withhold it completely.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the Hellenic Republic has not shown that the conditions necessary for the application of Article
         EC are satisfied. 
      
Lastly, as regards the Hellenic Republic’s arguments seeking to show that, because of the Commission’s prolonged inaction
         and the adoption of Regulation No 150/2003, that Member State could legitimately consider that the Commission would not bring
         this action since the Commission had tacitly accepted the existence of an appropriate derogation, it must be observed that
         the Commission did not at any stage of the proceedings abandon its position in principle.
      
In the declaration which the Commission made during the negotiations relating to Regulation No 150/2003, it expressed its
         firm intention to maintain its claim to the collection of customs duties which should have been paid for periods prior to
         the entry into force of that regulation and reserved the right to take the appropriate action in that regard.
      
It follows from the foregoing that, by refusing to calculate and to pay to the Commission own resources which were not collected
         in the period from January until December 2002, in relation to imports of military material which were exempted
         from customs duties, and by refusing to pay default interest arising from the failure to pay those own resources to the Commission,
         the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under, respectively, Article and Articles to of Regulation
         No 1552/89, until May 2000, and, after that date, the same articles of Regulation No 1150/2000.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs to be awarded against the Hellenic
         Republic and the latter has been unsuccessful, the Hellenic Republic must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
In accordance with the first paragraph of Article 69(4) of the Rules of Procedure the Kingdom of Denmark, the Italian Republic,
         the Portuguese Republic and the Republic of Finland, which have intervened in the proceedings, are to bear their own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, by refusing to calculate and to make payment to the European Commission of the own resources which were not
            collected in the period from January until December 2002, in relation to imports of military material which were
            exempted from customs duties, and by refusing to pay default interest arising from the failure to pay those own resources
            to the European Commission, the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under, respectively, Article and
            Articles to of Council Regulation (EEC, Euratom) No 1552/of May implementing Decision 88/376/EEC, Euratom
            on the system of the Communities’ own resources, as amended by Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1355/of July 1996,
            until May 2000, and, after that date, the same articles of Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1150/of May implementing Decision 94/728/EC, Euratom on the system of the Communities’ own resources;
2.      Orders the Hellenic Republic to pay the costs;
3.      Orders the Kingdom of Denmark, the Italian Republic, the Portuguese Republic and the Republic of Finland to bear their own
            costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Greek.
      
Top  
 