
Case C-293/Jersey Produce Marketing Organisation Ltd
v
States of Jersey
and
Jersey Potato Export Marketing Board
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Royal Court of Jersey)
(Legislation on the export of potatoes from Jersey to the United Kingdom – Act of Accession – Protocol No on the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man – Regulation No 706/– Articles EC, EC and EC – Charges having an effect equivalent to customs duties – Measures having an effect equivalent to quantitative restrictions)
Opinion of Advocate General Léger delivered on May Judgment of the Court (Grand Chamber), November Summary of the Judgment
1.     Accession of new Member States – Act of Accession – Protocol No on the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man – Free movement
            of goods – Treaty Provisions – Scope – Agricultural products – Included – Potatoes grown on the Island of Jersey
(Arts EC, EC, EC and EC; Act of Accession, Protocol No 3, Arts and 2)
2.     Accession of new Member States – Act of Accession – Protocol No on the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man – Free movement
            of goods – The Channel Islands, the Isle of Man and the United Kingdom to be treated as a single Member State for the purposes
            of Articles EC, EC, EC and EC
(Arts EC, EC, EC and EC; Act of Accession, Protocol No 3, Art. 1)
3.     Accession of new Member States – Act of Accession – Protocol No on the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man – Free movement
            of goods – Customs duties – Charges having equivalent effect – Jersey legislation requiring potato producers to pay contributions
            to an exports framework body calculated by reference to the quantities of potatoes exported to the United Kingdom – Not permissible
            – Legislation applying only to exports to the United Kingdom – Irrelevant – Contribution calculated by reference to the area
            cultivated and serving to finance activities undertaken by that body contrary to Article EC – Not permissible 
(Arts EC, EC and EC; Act of Accession, Protocol No 3, Art. 1)
4.     Accession of new Member States – Act of Accession – Protocol No on the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man – Free movement
            of goods – Quantitative restrictions – Measures having equivalent effect – Jersey legislation prohibiting, with penalties
            for non-compliance, potato producers not registered with an exports framework body and who have not entered into a marketing
            agreement with it, and marketing organisations which are not party to a management agreement with that body, from exporting
            to the United Kingdom – Not permissible – Legislation applying only to exports to the United Kingdom – Irrelevant
(Art. EC; Act of Accession, Protocol No 3, Art. 1)
1.     Under Article 1(1) of Protocol No on the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man annexed to the Act concerning the Conditions
         of Accession of the Kingdom of Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Adjustments
         to the Treaties, the Community rules on customs matters and quantitative restrictions are to apply to the Channel Islands
         and the Isle of Man under the same conditions as they apply to the United Kingdom, without distinction according to the nature
         of the goods concerned. Since agricultural products listed in Annex II to the EEC Treaty (now Annex I to the EC Treaty) are
         not subject to any particular treatment in that regard, Articles EC, EC, EC and EC are applicable to potatoes
         grown on the Island of Jersey and to products derived from them on that island.
      
The application of those provisions to agricultural products cannot be made subject to the adoption by the Council, under
         Article 1(2) of Protocol No 3, of the measures judged necessary to ensure the proper operation of the regime put in place
         as regards the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, or to the existence, within the Community, of a common organisation of
         the markets in the sectors concerned. 
      
(see paras 35-36, 38-39, 41)
2.     The Channel Islands, the Isle of Man and the United Kingdom must be treated as one Member State for the purposes of the application
         of Articles EC, EC, EC and EC.
      
(see para. 54)
3.     The combined provisions of Articles EC and EC and Article of Protocol No on the Channel Islands and the Isle of
         Man annexed to the Act concerning the Conditions of Accession of the Kingdom of Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom of
         Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Adjustments to the Treaties are to be interpreted as precluding Jersey legislation
         which confers on an exports framework body the power to impose on Jersey potato producers a contribution, the amount of which
         is fixed by reference to the quantities of potatoes produced by the parties concerned and exported to the United Kingdom.
      
It is in that regard irrelevant that the legislation in question applies only to situations forming part of that Member State’s
         internal trade. The customs union necessarily implies that the free movement of goods should be ensured between Member States
         and, in more general terms, within the customs union, and nothing rules out, in this case, the possibility that potatoes dispatched
         to the United Kingdom might then be re-exported to other Member States.
      
Community law also precludes a contribution levied under the same conditions, the amount of which, however, is fixed by such
         a body by reference to the agricultural area used by the parties concerned for growing potatoes, to the extent to which the
         income therefrom serves to finance activities undertaken by that body contrary to Article EC.
      
(see paras 61, 64-65, 67, 85, operative part 2-3)
4.     The combined provisions of Articles EC and of Protocol No on the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man annexed to the
         Act concerning the Conditions of Accession of the Kingdom of Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
         Northern Ireland and the Adjustments to the Treaties are to be interpreted as precluding Jersey legislation which:
      
– on the one hand, prohibits, with penalties imposed for non-compliance, Jersey producers from offering for export or exporting
         their potatoes to the United Kingdom market unless they are registered with an exports framework body and have entered into
         a marketing agreement with it for the purpose of determining, in particular, the areas which may be planted with crops for
         export as well as the identity of those authorised to acquire those crops, and,
      
– on the other hand, prohibits, also with penalties imposed for non-compliance, all marketing organisations from effecting
         such exports unless they are party to a management agreement with that same framework body for the purpose of determining,
         in particular, the identity of the sellers from whom it is permissible for them to obtain their supplies.
      
It is in that regard irrelevant that such legislation concerns only exports to the United Kingdom since nothing rules out
         that potatoes dispatched to the United Kingdom might then be re-exported to other Member States.
      
(see paras 79, 85, operative part 1)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
November (*)
      
(Legislation on the export of potatoes from Jersey to the United Kingdom – Act of Accession – Protocol No on the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man – Regulation No 706/– Articles EC, EC and EC – Charges having an effect equivalent to customs duties – Measures having an effect equivalent to quantitative restrictions)
In Case C-293/02,
REFERENCE under Article EC for a preliminary ruling from the Royal Court of Jersey (Channel Islands), made by decision
         of August 2002, received at the Court on August 2002, in the proceedings
      
Jersey Produce Marketing Organisation Ltd
v
States of Jersey,
      
Jersey Potato Export Marketing Board,
and
Top Produce Ltd,
Fairview Farm Ltd,
interveners,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Rosas, J. Malenovský, Presidents of Chambers, J.-P. Puissochet, R.
         Schintgen, N. Colneric (Rapporteur), S. von Bahr, G. Arestis, A. Borg Barthet, M. Ilešič, J. Klučka and U. Lõhmus, Judges,
      
Advocate General: P. Léger,
Registrar: M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on September 2004,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Jersey Produce Marketing Organisation Ltd, by T. Le Cocq, Advocate, and M. Sheridan and J. Simor, Barristers,
–       the States of Jersey, by S. Nicolle QC, R. Plender QC, W. Bailhache, HM Attorney General for Jersey, and M. Jarvis, Barrister,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by X. Lewis, acting as Agent,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on May 2005,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles EC, EC, EC and EC.
The reference was submitted in the course of proceedings between, on the one hand, Jersey Produce Marketing Organisation Limited
         (hereinafter ‘JPMO’) and, on the other hand, the States of Jersey and the Jersey Potato Export Marketing Board (hereinafter
         ‘the PEMB’) concerning the compatibility with Community law of the Jersey Potato Export Marketing Scheme Act (hereinafter
         ‘the Act’), enacted by the States of Jersey.
      
 Legal framework
 Community legislation
Article 23(1) EC provides:
‘The Community shall be based upon a customs union which shall cover all trade in goods and which shall involve the prohibition
         between Member States of customs duties on imports and exports and of all charges having equivalent effect, and the adoption
         of a common customs tariff in their relations with third countries.’
      
Under Article EC:
‘Customs duties on imports and exports and charges having equivalent effect shall be prohibited between Member States. This
         prohibition shall also apply to customs duties of a fiscal nature.’
      
Article EC states:
‘Quantitative restrictions on imports and all measures having equivalent effect shall be prohibited between Member States.’
In the terms of Article EC:
‘Quantitative restrictions on exports, and all measures having equivalent effect, shall be prohibited between Member States.’
Article 299(4) EC provides:
‘The provisions of this Treaty shall apply to the European territories for whose external relations a Member State is responsible.’
Under paragraph of that article: 
‘Notwithstanding the preceding paragraphs:
…
(c) this Treaty shall apply to the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man only to the extent necessary to ensure the implementation
         of the arrangements for those islands set out in the Treaty concerning the accession of new Member States to the European
         Economic Community and to the European Atomic Energy Community signed on January 1972.’
      
Article of Protocol No on the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man (OJ L 73, p. 164, hereinafter ‘Protocol No 3’)
         annexed to the Act concerning the Conditions of Accession of the Kingdom of Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom of Great
         Britain and Northern Ireland to the European Economic Community and to the European Atomic Energy Community and the Adjustments
         to the Treaties (OJ L 73, p. 14) (hereinafter ‘the Act of Accession’) provides:
      
‘1. The Community rules on customs matters and quantitative restrictions, in particular those of the Act of accession, shall
         apply to the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man under the same conditions as they apply to the United Kingdom. In particular
         customs duties and charges having equivalent effect between those territories and the Community as originally constituted
         and between those territories and the new Member States shall be progressively reduced in accordance with the timetable laid
         down in Articles and of the Act of accession.
      
2. In respect of agricultural products and products processed therefrom which are the subject of a special trade regime, the
         levies and other import measures laid down in Community rules and applicable by the United Kingdom shall be applied to third
         countries.
      
Such provisions of Community rules, in particular those of the Act of accession, as are necessary to allow free movement and
         observance of normal conditions of competition in trade in these products shall also be applicable.
      
The Council, acting by a qualified majority on a proposal from the Commission, shall determine the conditions under which
         the provisions referred to in the preceding subparagraphs shall be applicable to these territories.’
      
Council Regulation (EEC) No 706/of March concerning Community arrangements applicable to the Channel Islands and
         the Isle of Man for trade in agricultural products (OJ L 68, p. 1), as amended by Council Regulation (EEC) No 1174/of April (OJ L 107, p. 1), (hereinafter ‘Regulation No 706/73’) was adopted on the basis of the third subparagraph
         of Article 1(2) of Protocol No 3. Article provides:
      
‘1. Community rules applicable to the United Kingdom for trade in agricultural products covered by Annex II to the Treaty
         establishing the European Economic Community and in goods covered by Regulation No 170/67/EEC and Regulation (EEC) No 1059/69,
         shall apply to the islands, with the exception of rules on refunds and on compensatory amounts granted on exports by the United
         Kingdom.
      
2. For the purpose of applying the rules referred to in paragraph 1, the United Kingdom and the islands shall be treated as
         a single Member State.
      
…’
Under Article 3(1) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/of October establishing the Community Customs Code (OJ L 302, p. 1):
      
‘The customs territory of the Community shall comprise:
–       the territory of the Kingdom of Belgium,
…
–       the territory of the Portuguese Republic,
–       the territory of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and of the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man.’
 National legislation
It is apparent from the explanations provided by the referring court that the Act was adopted as a result of growers’
         complaints regarding their low profit margins on the sale of Jersey Royal potatoes, the island’s main outdoor crop which is,
         for the most part, marketed in the United Kingdom. That situation was attributable in particular to the competition between
         the marketing organisations and the growers’ inability to negotiate or influence the terms on which those organisations sold
         their crops. There is said to be a lack of transparency with regard to the terms of business offered by the marketing organisations.
      
Paragraph of the Act defines ‘export’ as ‘the sending for sale of potatoes outside of the Island whether directly or
         via some other place to a destination in the United Kingdom, the Bailiwick of Guernsey or the Isle of Man for consumption
         there’, and the meaning of ‘potato’ includes, under that provision, any product produced or derived from potatoes whether
         consumable or not.
      
By virtue of the Act, producers are prohibited from ‘exporting potatoes’ unless they are registered with the PEMB and
         have entered into a marketing agreement with it. For their part, marketing organisations are prohibited from receiving ‘potatoes’
         for ‘export’ if they are not a party to a current management agreement with the PEMB.
      
Under Article 23(1)(a) of the Agricultural Marketing (Jersey) Law (hereinafter, ‘the Law’), if any person sells
         or offers to sell or invites an offer to buy any regulated produce in contravention of the provisions of any Scheme he commits
         an offence for which the maximum penalty is a fine of £or imprisonment for up to six months or both.
      
In addition, it is clear from Paragraphs to and of the Act, and from Article of the Law, that the PEMB
         is empowered to impose penalties on registered producers in respect of breaches of the marketing agreements into which they
         have entered with that body, and, after two breaches, to communicate their identity to the Agriculture and Fisheries Committee
         of the States of Jersey which can in that case remove those concerned from the register, depriving them of the right to enter
         into such agreements.
      
According to the observations submitted to the Court by JPMO, the States of Jersey and the PEMB, the marketing agreements
         which the latter makes with producers must contain, in particular, terms relating to the area of land to be used for cultivation
         of potatoes for ‘export’, to the identity of the persons authorised by the PEMB to receive such potatoes, and, further, to
         the quality and husbandry standards to be met.
      
It is also clear from those observations that the management agreements made between the PEMB and the marketing organisations
         must, in particular, include terms covering the identity of the producers registered with the PEMB whose potatoes those organisations
         may market, the quality standards to be attained and the procedures applicable to the ‘export’ or other handling of potatoes
         that are surplus to actual or estimated market requirements. Such agreements must also specify the bases upon which the marketing
         organisation charges producers for its services, charges purchasers of the potatoes, and collects and transmits to the producers
         the price paid to it by the purchasers. The said agreements must, likewise, identify any factors that may lead that organisation
         to deal with a third party on a basis other than market price transactions; any performance-related bonuses or penalties which
         might operate in relation to that organisation; and the advertising or promotional duties to be carried out and expenses incurred
         by the PEMB or the marketing organisation.
      
According to JPMO, which has not been contradicted on those points by the States of Jersey, it follows, in addition, from
         the Act that the PEMB has discretion whether or not to enter into a marketing agreement with a producer or a management
         agreement with a marketing organisation. Under the same Act the PEMB is also, among other things, empowered to buy, process,
         sell and transport potatoes, to promote their production and marketing and cooperation, research or education in connection
         with them, to lend to any registered producers and to require them to provide statistical information.
      
Under Paragraph of the Act, the PEMB may by resolution require all registered producers to contribute to a special
         fund intended to cover the PEMB’s main costs and expenses and to contribute to reimbursing any losses incurred by the PEMB,
         irrespective of whether those producers are or are not, at that time, party to a marketing agreement with the PEMB.
      
The Commission, in its written observations, and JPMO at the hearing, stated, without being contradicted on that point by
         the States of Jersey, that that paragraph also provides that the contribution is to be calculated as the PEMB may from time
         to time elect, either by reference to the weight in tonnes of the potatoes sold by the producer for ‘export’ or by reference
         to the area used by him for the production of potatoes during the preceding calendar year.
      
 The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
JPMO and Top Produce Ltd, respectively the applicant and the first intervener in the main proceedings, are two of the four
         marketing organisations operating on Jersey. Together they handle about 80% of the exports of Jersey Royal potatoes to the
         United Kingdom. The second intervener in the main proceedings and Top Produce Ltd’s parent company, Fairview Farm Ltd, is
         one of some producers of Jersey Royal potatoes on the island.
      
Before the referring court, JPMO, Top Produce Ltd and Fairview Farm Ltd claim, first, that although the Act purports
         only to regulate exports to the United Kingdom, it could, contrary to Articles EC and EC, have actual or potential restrictive
         effects on trade between the Member States. In particular, the Act applies not only to direct exports to the United Kingdom,
         but also to the sending of potatoes to another Member State for processing or straightforward transit prior to being forwarded
         to the United Kingdom.
      
The referring court considered in that regard that the expression ‘directly or via some other place’ in Paragraph of the
         Act serves only to ensure that no distinction is made, in so far as the application of that legislation is concerned,
         between potatoes transported on ferries travelling directly to the United Kingdom and those transported via ports in France
         or another State. That court therefore held that the Act does not apply to situations where potatoes are sent to another
         Member State for processing, for example washing, packaging or bagging, for onward transmission to the United Kingdom for
         sale and consumption there. According to the referring court, the only remaining question, therefore, submitted in that regard
         is whether the Act contravenes Article EC by reason of the fact that it applies to potatoes sent directly from Jersey
         to the United Kingdom which travel via another Member State but without leaving the carrying vessel.
      
Secondly, JPMO, Top Produce Ltd and Fairview Farm Ltd submit that the Act also infringes Articles EC, EC, EC
         and EC, because it has the effect of hampering trade between Jersey and the United Kingdom.
      
Those companies submit that those provisions apply to such trade by virtue of Protocol No and, in particular, Article 1(1)
         thereof. In addition, even if Jersey and the United Kingdom are to be treated as a single Member State for the purposes of
         applying Articles EC, EC, EC and EC, those provisions are also intended to govern trade between two territories
         of the same Member State (see, in particular, Case C‑163/Legros and Others [1992] ECR I-4625; Joined Cases C‑363/and C‑407/to C‑411/Lancry and Others [1994] ECR I‑3957, and Joined Cases C‑485/and C‑486/Simitzi [1995] ECR I‑2655).
      
In the main proceedings, the payment of levies to the PEMB and the imposition of penalties for breach of the Act constitute
         charges having an effect equivalent to customs duties prohibited by Article EC. Furthermore, the scheme established by
         the Act, by making the opportunity to trade subject to registration and to entering into marketing and management agreements
         such as those which it prescribes, gives rise to obstacles to imports and exports prohibited by Articles EC and EC.
      
The States of Jersey and the PEMB object that, as follows particularly from Article EC, Article of Protocol No and
         Article 1(2) of Regulation No 706/73, the trade in potatoes between Jersey and the United Kingdom is purely internal to that
         Member State with no connection to the situations envisaged by Articles EC, EC, EC and EC. The above-cited judgments
         in Legros and Others, Lancry and Others and Simitzi did not concern Articles EC and EC, while the levies in question in those cases applied without distinction to the
         internal and external trade of a Member State. 
      
In addition, Articles EC and EC cannot apply to the main proceedings, since the levies and penalties laid down by the
         Act are not respectively imposed or inflicted by reason of the fact that the goods crossed a frontier.
      
It is in those circumstances that the Royal Court of Jersey decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Is a statutory Scheme such as that which regulates the export of potatoes from Jersey to the United Kingdom to be considered
         as a measure having an effect equivalent to quantitative restrictions on exports, contrary to Article EC, by reason of
         the fact that potatoes sent directly from Jersey to the United Kingdom may travel via another Member State but without leaving
         the carrying vessel?
      
2.      Is a statutory Scheme such as that regulating the export of potatoes from Jersey to the United Kingdom to be considered incompatible
         with Articles EC, EC, EC and EC in so far as it may affect trade between that island and the United Kingdom (together
         with Guernsey and the Isle of Man) or may entail the imposition of charges arising in connection with such trade?’
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 The second question
By its second question, with which it is appropriate, as suggested both by JPMO and the Commission, to deal first, the referring
         court wishes to ascertain whether Articles EC, EC, EC and EC are to be interpreted as precluding a scheme such
         as that implemented by the Act.
      
In order to reply to that question, it is necessary, first of all, to decide whether those provisions of the EC Treaty are
         applicable to goods such as those covered by the Act, namely potatoes grown on Jersey and products produced or derived
         therefrom whether consumable or not.
      
If that is the case, it will then be necessary to determine whether, for the purposes of the application of those provisions
         of the Treaty, trade in such goods between Jersey and the United Kingdom must be treated as if it were trade in goods between
         Member States, as JPMO maintained, or whether, for the purposes of such application, Jersey and the United Kingdom must be
         treated as if they formed a single Member State, as the States of Jersey argued.
      
Once that second aspect has been clarified, it will be necessary, lastly, to ascertain whether those same provisions of the
         Treaty are to be interpreted as precluding a scheme with characteristics such as those of the Act.
      
 The application of Articles EC, EC, EC and EC to goods such as those covered by the Act
As set forth in Article 1(1) of Protocol No 3, the Community rules on customs matters and quantitative restrictions are to
         apply to the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man under the same conditions as they apply to the United Kingdom. Those rules
         include, in particular, Articles EC, EC, EC and EC.
      
The said Article 1(1) makes no distinction according to the nature of the goods concerned. Therefore, the rules to which it
         refers are to be applied to all the goods usually covered by them. Since agricultural products listed in Annex II to the EEC
         Treaty (now Annex I to the EC Treaty) are not subject to any particular treatment in that regard, they fall within the scope
         of that paragraph. 
      
Article 1(2) of Protocol No cannot affect that conclusion. Under that provision, in respect of agricultural products and
         products processed therefrom which are the subject of a special trade regime, the levies and other import measures laid down
         in Community rules and applicable by the United Kingdom are to be applied to third countries. Such provisions of Community
         rules as are necessary to allow free movement and observance of normal conditions of competition in trade in these products
         are also made applicable. In both those cases, the provisions concerned are to be applicable under conditions to be determined
         by the Council.
      
The said Article 1(2) reflects, essentially, a concern to take proper account of the fact that, within the Community, agricultural
         products fall under the Common Agricultural Policy and may be subject in that regard to a certain number of specific rules.
         It is in view of that fact that Article 1(2) provides for the adoption of the measures judged necessary to ensure the proper
         operation of the regime put in place as regards the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, in particular by making certain of
         those rules applicable to those territories. 
      
On the other hand, that provision cannot be interpreted as meaning that the application of Articles EC, EC, EC and
         EC to agricultural products is subject to the adoption of such measures by the Council or to the existence, within the
         Community, of a common organisation of the markets in the sectors concerned.
      
In that regard, it is also appropriate to point out that, according to the Court’s settled case-law, the absence of a common
         organisation of the market in a particular agricultural sector is irrelevant to the application of Articles EC and EC
         to trade in that sector’s goods; the Court has held that such was particularly the case as regards the Member States which
         adhered to the Community by virtue of the Act of Accession (see, precisely in relation to the potato sector, Case 68/Commission v France [1977] ECR 515, paragraphs to 21; Case 231/Commission v United Kingdom [1979] ECR 1447, paragraphs to 18; and Case 288/Commission v Ireland [1985] ECR 1761, paragraph 23).
      
It follows from all the foregoing that Articles EC, EC, EC and EC are applicable to potatoes grown on the Island
         of Jersey and to products derived from them on that island, which are also covered by the Act.
      
 The question whether the territory of the United Kingdom, the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man can be treated as the territory
         of a single Member State for the purposes of the application of Articles EC, EC, EC and EC 
      
The referring court explained in the context of a previous case that Jersey is a semi-autonomous dependency of the British
         Crown, which is represented on Jersey by the Lieutenant Governor. The United Kingdom Government, on behalf of the Crown, is
         responsible for defence and international relations (see, in that regard, Case C-171/Pereira Roque [1998] ECR I‑4607, paragraph 11).
      
Jersey does not form part of the United Kingdom. It is, for the purposes of Article 299(4) EC, a territory for whose external
         relations that Member State is responsible.
      
Notwithstanding Article 299(4) EC, by virtue of which the Treaty’s provisions are to apply to such territories, Article 299(6)(c)
         EC provides that that Treaty is to apply to the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man only to the extent necessary to ensure
         the implementation of the arrangements for those islands set out in the Act of Accession. The particular regime referred
         to by that provision is set out in Protocol No 3.
      
It is appropriate, first of all, to recall that the Court has previously stated that, just as the distinction between Channel
         Islanders and other citizens of the United Kingdom cannot be likened to the difference in nationality between the nationals
         of two Member States, neither, because of other aspects of the status of those Islands, can relations between the Channel
         Islands and the United Kingdom be regarded as similar to those between two Member States (Pereira Roque, cited above, paragraphs and 42).
      
It must be observed, next, that it is stated in Article 1(1) of Protocol No that the Community rules on customs matters
         and quantitative restrictions are to apply to the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man ‘under the same conditions as they apply
         to the United Kingdom’.
      
Such wording suggests that, for the purposes of the application of those Community rules, the United Kingdom and the Islands
         are, as a rule, to be regarded as a single Member State.
      
The same is true of the statement in the first subparagraph of Article 1(2) of Protocol No 3, which refers to the levies and
         other import measures laid down in Community rules ‘and applicable by the United Kingdom’.
      
It may be noted in that regard that such a construction of Article of Protocol No has also been applied by the Community
         legislature.
      
It is thus clear from Article 3(1) of Regulation No 2913/that the territory of the United Kingdom and of the Channel Islands
         and the Isle of Man forms, together, a part of the Community customs territory.
      
Likewise, Article 1(1) and (2) of Regulation No 706/state that the Community rules the extension of which to those islands
         is provided for by those paragraphs are those ‘applicable to the United Kingdom’ and that for the purpose of such application
         ‘the United Kingdom and the islands shall be treated as a single Member State’.
      
Contrary to JPMO’s suggestion, the statement in Article 1(1) of Protocol No that customs duties and charges having equivalent
         effect are, in accordance with the timetable laid down in the Act of Accession, to be progressively reduced between those
         same islands ‘and the Community as originally constituted’ and between those islands ‘and the new Member States’ does not
         preclude such a construction.
      
In view, particularly, of the abovementioned statement in the same provision that the Community rules in question are to be
         applied to the Channel Islands and to the Isle of Man ‘under the same conditions as they apply to the United Kingdom’, the
         reference in that provision to the ‘new Member States’ must be understood as referring to the Kingdom of Denmark and Ireland,
         to the exclusion of the United Kingdom. That conclusion is, moreover, supported by the fact that that reference appears, as
         has just been pointed out, in a sentence the sole purpose of which is to provide for the progressive reduction of customs
         duties and charges having equivalent effect which existed at the time of the accession. It is common ground that at that
         time trade in goods between the United Kingdom and those islands was not subject to customs duties.
      
It is clear from all the preceding points that, for the purposes of the application of Articles EC, EC, EC and EC, the Channel Islands, the Isle of Man and the United Kingdom must be treated as one Member State.
      
 Articles EC and EC
It is settled case-law that any pecuniary charge, whatever its designation and mode of application, which is imposed unilaterally
         on goods by reason of the fact that they cross a frontier, and which is not a customs duty in the strict sense, constitutes
         a charge having equivalent effect within the meaning of Articles EC and EC, even though such pecuniary charge is not
         levied for the benefit of the State (see, in particular, Joined Cases 2/and 3/Sociaal Fonds voor de Diamantarbeiders [1969] ECR 211, paragraph 18; Case 158/Commission v Denmark [1983] ECR 3573, paragraph 18; Case C‑130/Lamaire [1994] ECR I‑3215, paragraph 13; Joined Cases C‑441/and C‑442/Michaïlidis [2000] ECR I‑7145, paragraph 15, and Case C-234/Nygård [2002] ECR I‑3657, paragraph 19). 
      
It is otherwise only if the charge in question constitutes payment for a service actually rendered in an amount proportionate
         to that service or if it relates to a general system of internal dues applied systematically and in accordance with the same
         criteria to domestic products and imported and exported products alike, or again, subject to certain conditions, if it is
         levied on account of inspections carried out for the purpose of fulfilling obligations imposed by Community law (see, in particular,
         Commission v Denmark, cited above, paragraph 19, and Lamaire, cited above, paragraph 14).
      
In this case, the referring court wishes to be able to determine whether the mandatory contributions which the PEMB may impose
         under the Act, and the financial penalties applicable to producers and marketing organisations which contravene the scheme
         introduced by that act, are capable of constituting charges having an effect equivalent to customs duties within the meaning
         of Articles EC and EC.
      
As regards, first, the contributions which can be imposed by the PEMB on potato producers registered under the Act scheme,
         it is clear from the arguments presented to the Court that the amount thereof may be fixed by the PEMB either by reference
         to the quantities of potatoes produced by the party concerned which were actually exported to the United Kingdom, or by reference
         to the areas used by that party for potato production.
      
It is appropriate to observe, at the outset, that the obligation to register with the PEMB under the scheme established by
         the Act and, therefore, the obligation to pay any contributions decided upon by that body, are imposed on all Jersey
         potato producers who export their produce or have it exported to the United Kingdom.
      
A contribution imposed on the producers thus registered which is calculated by the PEMB by reference to the quantities of
         potatoes produced by the party concerned and exported from Jersey to the United Kingdom certainly constitutes a pecuniary
         charge levied by reason of such exports, which applies to them exclusively without relating to a general system of internal
         dues applied systematically and in accordance with the same criteria, irrespective of the origin, exporting country or destination
         of the goods subject to it, and which does not represent consideration for a specific or individual benefit provided to the
         trader, in an amount proportionate to that service (see, by analogy, Lamaire, paragraph 19).
      
The States of Jersey, however, argued that since the Act governs only ‘exports’ of potatoes from Jersey to the United
         Kingdom for consumption in that Member State and that it therefore applies only to situations forming part of a Member State’s
         internal trade, Articles EC and EC are not applicable to this case.
      
In that regard, it is appropriate to point out that, in paragraph of its judgment in Lancry and Others, cited above, the Court ruled that a charge proportional to their customs value, levied by a Member State on all goods entering
         a region within that State, constitutes a charge having equivalent effect to a customs duty on imports not only in so far
         as it is levied on goods entering that region from other Member States, but also in so far as it is levied on goods entering
         that region from another part of the same State.
      
In paragraphs and of its judgment in Simitzi, cited above, the Court held, moreover, that the same reasoning had to apply in the case of a charge levied on goods despatched
         from one region to other regions of the same State, before concluding that ad valorem charges levied by a Member State on
         goods despatched from one region solely to other regions of the same State constituted charges having an effect equivalent
         to customs duties on exports.
      
The Treaty sought, in that regard, to give general scope and effect to the rule on the elimination of customs duties and charges
         having equivalent effect in order to ensure the free movement of goods. The customs union necessarily implies that the free
         movement of goods should be ensured between Member States and, in more general terms, within the customs union (see Case C-30/Commission v United Kingdom [2003] ECR I-9481, paragraphs and 53).
      
In this case, it must be observed, first, that, in view particularly of the conclusion reached in paragraph of this judgment,
         a contribution such as that in issue in this case which is calculated by the PEMB by reference to the quantities of potatoes
         produced by the party concerned and exported from Jersey to the United Kingdom certainly constitutes a charge imposed on goods
         despatched from one region to another in the same Member State. Second, it must be added that even though the Act covers,
         according to its wording, only potatoes despatched to the United Kingdom for consumption there, that does not rule out the
         possibility that such potatoes, once within the United Kingdom, might then be re-exported to other Member States, with the
         result that the contribution in question may be levied on goods which, after having passed through the United Kingdom in transit,
         are in fact exported to other Member States.
      
In this case, the possible development of such a pattern of re-exports from the United Kingdom to the other Member States
         is certainly conceivable given that, as appears from the information provided to the Court, almost all the Jersey Royal potatoes
         grown on Jersey are traditionally exported to the United Kingdom.
      
It follows from all the foregoing that a contribution such as that at issue in this case, calculated by the PEMB by reference
         to the quantities of potatoes produced by the party concerned and exported to the United Kingdom, contravenes Articles EC and EC.
      
By contrast, if the PEMB chooses to impose a contribution calculated by reference to the areas used for the cultivation of
         potatoes, without distinguishing between potatoes consumed on the Island and those exported, it would not appear, in principle,
         that such a payment can constitute a pecuniary charge levied by reason of the fact that the potatoes are exported.
      
The Commission has, it is true, contended that such contributions are intended to finance, in general, the PEMB’s various
         activities, which are themselves primarily aimed at the arrangements governing potato exports from Jersey to the United Kingdom.
         Such a circumstance does not, however, warrant the conclusion that those contributions must be characterised as charges having
         an effect equivalent to a customs duty prohibited by Article EC. 
      
As regards, secondly, the financial penalties that may be imposed on traders for contravening the provisions of the Act,
         the only purpose of which is to ensure the effective application of those provisions, these cannot be separated from those
         provisions, to which they are ancillary. 
      
However, those financial penalties are connected neither to the provisions of the Act relating to the contribution nor
         to other provisions which might provide for a charge having an effect equivalent to customs duties within the meaning of Article
         EC.
      
 Article EC
It is important to point out, at the outset, that the Act, which applies to ‘exports’ of potatoes and potato products,
         does not seem to include any measure which might be allied to a restriction on imports of any kind, with the result that it
         is not necessary, in this case, to interpret Article EC.
      
As regards Article EC, it is appropriate to note that, according to settled case-law, that provision covers measures which
         have as their specific object or effect the restriction of patterns of exports and thereby the establishment of a difference
         in treatment between the domestic trade of a Member State and its export trade, in such a way as to provide a particular advantage
         for national production or for the domestic market of the State in question, at the expense of the trade or production of
         other Member States (see, inter alia, Case 15/Groenveld [1979] ECR 3409, paragraph 7, and Case C-3/Exportur [1992] ECR I-5529, paragraph 21).
      
In this case, it is common ground that the obligations imposed by the Act are specifically intended to regulate the export
         trade in potatoes to the United Kingdom, whereas the produce intended for consumption on the Jersey market escapes the provisions
         of that Act.
      
In particular, the Act prohibits Jersey producers from offering for export or exporting their potatoes to United Kingdom
         markets, unless they are registered with the PEMB and have entered into a marketing agreement with it which determines, in
         particular, the areas which may be planted with crops for export as well as the identity of those authorised to acquire those
         crops. Non-compliance with those obligations is subject to penalties and may give rise, in case of re‑offending, to suspension
         of the right to be registered and, as a result, of the right to export. The Act likewise prohibits all marketing organisations
         from exporting potatoes to United Kingdom markets, also subject to criminal penalties, unless they are party to a management
         agreement with the PEMB determining, in particular, the identity of the sellers from whom it is permissible for them to obtain
         their supplies. 
      
It is, first of all, clear that such legislation is, by its very nature, likely to interfere with the patterns of exports
         of potatoes grown in Jersey to the United Kingdom markets. Its effect is thus to establish a difference in treatment between
         Jersey’s domestic trade and its export trade to the United Kingdom in such a way as to provide a particular advantage for
         the island’s production or its domestic market, in this case at the expense of the United Kingdom’s trade.
      
In the latter regard, it is clear, in particular, from the information provided by the referring court, that the purpose underlying
         the adoption of the Act was to remedy the complaints of Jersey Royal potato producers who considered themselves to be
         victims of a lack of transparency and excessive competition between marketing organisations and who regarded as insufficient
         the profit margins they made from their produce; as is common ground, that produce is for the most part intended for export
         to the United Kingdom market. 
      
The Act’s effect as an obstacle to exports to the United Kingdom was not, moreover, denied by the States of Jersey which
         argued merely in that regard that since, first, only such exports were affected by the Act and, second, trade between
         Jersey and the United Kingdom had to be treated as a Member State’s domestic trade for the purposes of applying Articles EC and EC, those provisions were not applicable to such legislation.
      
In that connection, it is appropriate, however, to observe that such an analysis disregards the fact, already noted in paragraph
         of this judgment, that, even though the Act covers, according to its wording, only potatoes despatched to the United
         Kingdom for consumption there, there is nothing to rule out the possibility that such potatoes, once within the United Kingdom,
         might then be re-exported to other Member States.
      
It follows that the restrictions introduced by the Act with regard to Jersey Royal potatoes despatched to the United
         Kingdom, the main effect of which, as has been pointed out in paragraphs and of this judgment, is to restrict such patterns
         of export, are, ultimately, also likely to be an obstacle to the export of those goods to other Member States and to have,
         with regard to the latters’ markets, the same negative effect as that observed in respect of the United Kingdom market. 
      
As stated in paragraph of this judgment, the development, in the United Kingdom, of such a pattern of re-exports to other
         Member States of Jersey Royal potatoes from Jersey is certainly conceivable, given that almost all Jersey Royal potatoes are
         exported from Jersey to the United Kingdom and that the scheme put in place by the Act concerning the arrangements in
         respect of that market contributes to the maintenance of such a situation. It is appropriate, in particular, to point out
         in the latter regard that the marketing agreements concluded between the PEMB and registered growers must specify in advance
         the areas to be used for the cultivation of potatoes for export to the United Kingdom. 
      
The States of Jersey also argued in written observations that the scheme put in place by the Act is not disproportionate
         in relation to the objective pursued, which is to promote fairness and transparency in the relationship between producers
         and marketing organisations.
      
In that regard, it is sufficient, however, to point out that such objectives may in any event be pursued by other means which,
         in contrast to those used in the Act, do not involve the introduction of measures having an effect equivalent to a quantitative
         restriction on exports prohibited by Article EC.
      
It is appropriate, finally, to add that a contribution imposed on producers by the PEMB by reference to the areas which they
         use for growing potatoes would be contrary to Community law to the extent to which it serves to finance the activities of
         that body thus held to be contrary to Article EC (see Case 222/Apple and Pear Development Council [1983] ECR 4083, paragraphs and 33).
      
It follows from all the foregoing that the replies to the second question must be as follows:
The combined provisions of Article EC and Article of Protocol No are to be interpreted as precluding legislation such
         as that at issue in the main proceedings which:
      
–       on the one hand, prohibits, with penalties imposed for non-compliance, Jersey producers from offering for export or exporting
         their potatoes to the United Kingdom market unless they are registered with a body such as the PEMB and have entered into
         a marketing agreement with it for the purpose of determining, in particular, the areas which may be planted with crops for
         export as well as the identity of those authorised to acquire those crops, and,
      
–       on the other hand, prohibits, also with penalties imposed for non-compliance, all marketing organisations from effecting such
         exports unless they are party to a management agreement with that same body for the purpose of determining, in particular,
         the identity of the sellers from whom it is permissible for them to obtain their supplies.
      
The combined provisions of Articles EC and EC and Article of Protocol No are to be interpreted as precluding legislation
         such as that at issue in the main proceedings which confers on a body such as the PEMB the power to impose on Jersey potato
         producers a contribution, the amount of which is fixed by reference to the quantities of potatoes produced by the parties
         concerned and exported to the United Kingdom.
      
Community law precludes a contribution levied under the same conditions, the amount of which, however, is fixed by such a
         body by reference to the agricultural area used by the parties concerned for growing potatoes, to the extent to which the
         income therefrom serves to finance activities undertaken by that body contrary to Article EC.
      
 The first question 
Since, as stated in the reply to the second question referred, Article EC is to be interpreted as precluding legislation
         such as the Act in so far as its provisions affect exports from Jersey to the United Kingdom, it is not necessary to
         reply separately to the first question. It is evident that the interpretation given applies, irrespective of whether the goods
         thus exported are despatched directly to the United Kingdom or whether they might pass in transit through a port situated
         in another Member State.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the referring court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      The combined provisions of Article EC and Article of Protocol No on the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man annexed
            to the Act concerning the Conditions of Accession of the Kingdom of Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
            and Northern Ireland and the Adjustments to the Treaties are to be interpreted as precluding legislation such as that at issue
            in the main proceedings which:
–       on the one hand, prohibits, with penalties imposed for non-compliance, Jersey producers from offering for export or exporting
            their potatoes to the United Kingdom market unless they are registered with a body such as the Jersey Potato Export Marketing
            Board and have entered into a marketing agreement with it for the purpose of determining, in particular, the areas which may
            be planted with crops for export as well as the identity of those authorised to acquire those crops, and,
–       on the other hand, prohibits, also with penalties imposed for non-compliance, all marketing organisations from effecting such
            exports unless they are party to a management agreement with that same body for the purpose of determining, in particular,
            the identity of the sellers from whom it is permissible for them to obtain their supplies.
2.      The combined provisions of Articles EC and EC and Article of Protocol No are to be interpreted as precluding legislation
            such as that at issue in the main proceedings which confers on a body such as the Jersey Potato Export Marketing Board the
            power to impose on Jersey potato producers a contribution, the amount of which is fixed by reference to the quantities of
            potatoes produced by the parties concerned and exported to the United Kingdom.
3.      Community law precludes a contribution levied under the same conditions, the amount of which, however, is fixed by such a
            body by reference to the agricultural area used by the parties concerned for growing potatoes, to the extent to which the
            income therefrom serves to finance activities undertaken by that body contrary to Article EC.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 