
Case C-303/Land Baden-Württemberg
v
Metin Bozkurt
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Bundesverwaltungsgericht)
(EEC-Turkey Association Agreement – Family reunification – Article 7, first paragraph, of Decision No 1/of the Association Council – Spouse of a Turkish worker who has cohabited with her for more than five years – Continuing existence of the right of residence after divorce – Conviction of the person concerned for violence towards his ex-wife – Abuse of rights)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        International agreements – EEC-Turkey Association Agreement – Association Council set up by the EEC-Turkey Association Agreement
            – Decision No 1/– Family reunification
(Additional Protocol to the EEC-Turkey Association Agreement, Art. 59; Decision No 1/of the EEC-Turkey Association Council,
            Art. 7, first para.)
2.        International agreements – EEC-Turkey Association Agreement – Association Council set up by the EEC-Turkey Association Agreement
            – Decision No 1/80– Family reunification
(Decision No 1/801/of the EEC-Turkey Association Council, Arts 7, first para., and (14)(1))
1.        The first paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/of the EEC-Turkey Association Council is to be interpreted as meaning
         that a Turkish national, who, as a member of the family of a Turkish worker who is duly registered as belonging to the labour
         force of a Member State and as a result of his residing with his spouse for a continuous period of at least five years, enjoys
         the rights relating to the legal status conferred on the basis of the second indent of that provision, does not lose those
         rights on account of his divorce, which took place after those rights were acquired.
      
Rights legally acquired by a Turkish national on the basis of the first paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/exist regardless
         of the continuing existence of the conditions that were necessary in order to give rise to those rights, with the result that
         the family member who already has rights pursuant to that decision is in a position to consolidate gradually his position
         in the host Member State and to become permanently integrated in that State by leading a life independent of that of the person
         through whom he secured those rights.
      
Such an interpretation of the first paragraph of Article is not incompatible with the requirements of Article of the
         Additional Protocol to the EEC-Turkey Agreement, since the situation of a member of the family of a Turkish migrant worker
         cannot usefully be compared to that of a member of the family of a national of a Member State, having regard to the significant
         differences between their respective legal situations.
      
(see paras 40, 45-46, operative part 1)
2.        It is not an abuse of rights for a Turkish national to rely on a right legally acquired pursuant to the first paragraph of
         Article of Decision No 1/of the EEC-Turkey Association Council even though the person concerned, after acquiring that
         right through his former wife, committed a serious offence against her which gave rise to a criminal conviction.
      
By contrast, Article 14(1) of Decision No 1/does not preclude a measure ordering the expulsion of a Turkish national who
         has been convicted of criminal offences, provided that his personal conduct constitutes a present, genuine and sufficiently
         serious threat to a fundamental interest of society. It is for the competent national court to assess whether that is the
         case. The competent national court must also observe both the principle of proportionality and the fundamental rights of the
         person concerned. In particular, a measure ordering expulsion based on Article 14(1) of Decision No 1/may be taken only
         if the personal conduct of the person concerned indicates a specific risk of new and serious prejudice to the requirements
         of public policy.
      
(see paras 60-61, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
December (*)
      
(EEC-Turkey Association Agreement – Family reunification – Article 7, first paragraph, of Decision No 1/of the Association Council – Spouse of a Turkish worker who has cohabited with her for more than five years – Continuing existence of the right of residence after divorce – Conviction of the person concerned for violence towards his ex-wife – Abuse of rights)
In Case C‑303/08,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Bundesverwaltungsgericht (Germany), made by decision of April 2008, received at the Court on July 2008, in the proceedings
      
Land Baden-Württemberg
v
Metin Bozkurt,
intervener:
Vertreter des Bundesinteresses beim Bundesverwaltungsgericht,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of A. Tizzano, President of the Chamber, J.‑J. Kasel (Rapporteur), A. Borg Barthet, E. Levits and M. Berger, Judges,
Advocate General: E. Sharpston,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        the Land Baden-Württemberg, by M. Schenk, acting as Agent,
–        the German Government, by M. Lumma and N. Graf Vitzthum, acting as Agents,
–        the Danish Government, by J. Bering Liisberg and R. Holdgaard, acting as Agents,
–        the Italian Government, by G. Palmieri, acting as Agent, and W. Ferrante, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by V. Kreuschitz and G. Rozet, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on July 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of the second indent of the first paragraph of Article
         of Decision No 1/of the Association Council of September on the development of the Association (‘Decision No
         1/80’). The Association Council was created by the Agreement establishing an Association between the European Economic Community
         and Turkey which was signed in Ankara on September by the Republic of Turkey on the one hand and the Member States
         of the EEC and the Community on the other, and concluded, approved and confirmed on behalf of the Community by Council Decision
         64/732/EEC of December (OJ C 113, p. 1).
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between the Land Baden-Württemberg (‘the Land’) and Mr Bozkurt, a Turkish national, concerning proceedings to expel him from German territory.
      
 Legal context
Article of the Additional Protocol signed at Brussels on November and concluded, approved and confirmed on behalf
         of the Community by Council Regulation (EEC) No 2760/of December (OJ C 113, p. 17) is worded as follows:
      
‘In the fields covered by this Protocol Turkey shall not receive more favourable treatment than that which Member States grant
         to one another pursuant to the Treaty establishing the Community.’
      
Section of Chapter II of Decision No 1/80, headed ‘Social provisions’, is devoted to ‘[q]uestions relating to employment
         and the free movement of workers’. That section contains Articles to of that decision.
      
Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/provides:
      
‘Subject to Article on free access to employment for members of his family, a Turkish worker duly registered as belonging
         to the labour force of a Member State:
      
–        shall be entitled in that Member State, after one year’s legal employment, to the renewal of his permit to work for the same
         employer, if a job is available;
      
–        shall be entitled in that Member State, after three years of legal employment and subject to the priority to be given to workers
         of Member States of the Community, to respond to another offer of employment, with an employer of his choice, made under normal
         conditions and registered with the employment services of that State, for the same occupation;
      
–        shall enjoy free access in that Member State to any paid employment of his choice, after four years of legal employment.’
Article of Decision No 1/provides:
      
‘The members of the family of a Turkish worker duly registered as belonging to the labour force of a Member State, who have
         been authorised to join him:
      
–        shall be entitled – subject to the priority to be given to workers of Member States of the Community – to respond to any offer
         of employment after they have been legally resident for at least three years in that Member State;
      
–        shall enjoy free access to any paid employment of their choice provided they have been legally resident there for at least
         five years.
      
Children of Turkish workers who have completed a course of vocational training in the host country may respond to any offer
         of employment there, irrespective of the length of time they have been resident in that Member State, provided one of their
         parents has been legally employed in the Member State concerned for at least three years.’
      
Article 14(1) of Decision No 1/is worded as follows:
      
‘The provisions of this section shall be applied subject to limitations justified on grounds of public policy, public security
         or public health.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Mr Bozkurt, who was born in Turkey in 1959, was allowed to enter German territory in April 1992.
      
In September 1993, he married a Turkish national who was in lawful paid employment in Germany and therefore held a permanent
         residence permit there. His wife acquired German citizenship in 1999.
      
Following his marriage, Mr Bozkurt obtained a temporary residence permit in October 1993, which was converted to a permanent
         residence permit in October 1998, that is to say after he had satisfied the five-year residence condition in the second indent
         of paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/80.
      
Since June 2000, Mr Bozkurt has lived separately from his wife. The couple divorced in November 2003.
      
During his residence in Germany Mr Bozkurt has worked for various employers. According to the referring court, it has not
         however been possible to establish the exact periods of employment because he has provided no specific details and documentary
         evidence for that purpose.
      
From the beginning of he was on sick leave for around months, a period during which he was operated on for a brain
         tumour.
      
At the end of that cessation of work, he was dismissed by his employer. He has been unemployed since then and receives subsistence
         allowances under Part II of the Code of Social Law (Sozialgesetzbuch, Teil II). At first he was placed in municipal accommodation
         for the homeless, but since November he has been living in a small apartment which he rents from his brother.
      
After having already been convicted in and for assault causing injury and for damage to property, Mr Bozkurt was,
         in May 2004, found guilty of the rape of and causing bodily injury to his wife during a stay in Turkey in July 2002. As he
         was partially successful on appeal, his sentence was definitively fixed, on January 2005, at two years’ imprisonment, which
         was suspended, with the result that he was released from detention on remand.
      
By decision of July 2005, the Land decided to expel Mr Bozkurt with immediate effect (‘the decision to expel’), basing its decision on his last conviction,
         which confirmed his tendency to employ violence. The Land took the view that he could not rely on rights deriving from Article or of Decision No 1/on the ground that he had
         not found new employment within a reasonable period after losing his job and that he was, moreover, making no genuine efforts
         to that end.
      
Mr Bozkurt brought an action against the decision to expel, and the Verwaltungsgericht Stuttgart (Administrative Court, Stuttgart)
         first ordered that that decision be suspended and then overturned it by judgment of July 2006.
      
The appeal brought by the Land against that judgment was dismissed by judgment of the Verwaltungsgerichtshof Baden-Württemberg (Higher Administrative Court,
         Baden-Württemberg) of March 2007. That court held that, having regard to the periods of lawful residence which Mr Bozkurt
         had already completed in Germany, he was entitled to claim a right of residence on the basis of the second indent of the first
         paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/80. Consequently, the decision to expel was unlawful because it did not comply with
         the conditions applicable to European Union nationals, which must, in accordance with the case-law of the Court, be complied
         with in the case of Turkish nationals who have a right of residence under Decision No 1/80. Furthermore, that court held that
         the facts that Mr Bozkurt had been unemployed since 2000, that it was possible that he might never return to work because
         of serious illness, and that he had spent some nine months in prison did not mean that he had lost his legal rights under
         that provision of Decision No 1/80, having regard to the case-law of the Court according to which the right of residence,
         once it has been acquired, is independent of whether the conditions which led to its being acquired are still satisfied.
      
The Land thereupon appealed on a point of law to the Bundesverwaltungsgericht (Federal Administrative Court), submitting, first, that
         Mr Bozkurt had in the meantime lost his right of residence in Germany on account of his exclusion from the labour market and,
         secondly, that he could not legitimately rely on the first paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/since he had severely
         damaged the physical well-being of the person from whom he derives his rights.
      
Although it agrees with the legal analysis of the Verwaltungsgerichtshof Baden-Württemberg in its judgment of March 2007,
         the Bundesverwaltungsgerichtshof takes the view that, in order to rule on the dispute pending before it, it is necessary to
         ascertain whether, on the date of the decision to expel, Mr Bozkurt could rely on the protection conferred by the first paragraph
         of Article of Decision No 1/80.
      
In that regard, the referring court considers that there is as yet no case-law of the Court on the point as to whether the
         right of residence in a Member State, which has been acquired by a Turkish national as a member of the family of a Turkish
         worker who is duly integrated into the labour force of that State, is lost as a result of a divorce which takes place after
         the right in question has been duly acquired.
      
Furthermore, that court is uncertain whether, having regard to the specific facts of the case in the main proceedings, a Turkish
         national such as Mr Bozkurt may legitimately claim a right of residence on the basis of the first paragraph of Article of
         Decision No 1/without such a claim being regarded as an abuse. More specifically, it must be ascertained whether the beneficiary
         of a right which has been lawfully acquired may be stripped of that right where he has proved a posteriori to be unworthy in relation to the person from whom he had previously derived that right.
      
Taking the view that in those circumstances an interpretation of Decision No 1/was necessary to enable it to reach a decision
         in the case before it, the Bundesverwaltungsgericht decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to
         the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Is the right of residence and employment acquired as a member of the family pursuant to the second indent of the first paragraph
         of Article of Decision No 1/… by the spouse of a Turkish worker who is duly registered as belonging to the labour force
         of a Member State retained even after a divorce?
      
If the reply to the first question is in the affirmative:
2.       Is it an abuse of rights to plead the right of residence derived from his former wife under the second indent of the first
         paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/… where the Turkish national raped and injured his former wife after acquiring
         the legal status and the offence was punished with two years’ imprisonment?’
      
 Consideration of the questions referred
 The first question
It is apparent from the case-file that the Turkish national at issue in the main proceedings satisfied all the necessary conditions
         to be legally entitled to the legal status provided for in the second indent of the first paragraph of Article of Decision
         No 1/before his divorce took place.
      
In those circumstances, the referring court’s question must be understood as asking, in essence, whether the first paragraph
         of Article of Decision No 1/is to be interpreted as meaning that a Turkish national such as the applicant in the main
         proceedings who, as a member of the family of a Turkish worker who is duly registered as belonging to the labour force of
         a Member State and as a result of his residing with his spouse for a continuous period of at least five years, enjoys the
         rights relating to the legal status conferred on the basis of the second indent of that provision, loses those rights on account
         of his divorce, which took place after those rights were acquired.
      
In order to answer that question, it must be observed, in the first place, that, as is apparent from the very wording of the
         first paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/80, the acquisition of the rights provided for in that provision is made subject
         to two prior cumulative conditions, namely, first, that the person concerned must be a member of the family of a Turkish worker
         who is already duly registered as belonging to the labour force of the host Member State and, secondly, that he has been authorised
         by the competent authorities of that State to join that worker there. It is common ground that, in the present case, those
         conditions were met both by Mr Bozkurt and by his spouse.
      
In the second place, in accordance with the scheme established by the contracting parties in the context of that provision,
         the rights conferred by the provision on a Turkish national who satisfies the conditions referred to in the preceding paragraph
         are gradually increased on the basis of the period of time for which the person concerned has actually resided with the Turkish
         worker who is already lawfully present in the host Member State.
      
Thus, after being legally resident for three years, the Turkish national concerned becomes entitled to respond to any offer
         of employment, subject only to the priority to be given to workers of Member States of the European Union (Article 7, paragraph
         1, first indent of Decision No 1/80).
      
After two additional years of lawful residence in the host Member State, the Turkish national enjoys free access to any paid
         employment of his choice (Article 7, first paragraph, second indent of Decision No 1/80). In the present case, Mr Bozkurt
         unquestionably satisfies that criterion.
      
It must be pointed out in that connection that, unlike the scheme provided for under Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/80, which
         is based on legal employment for certain periods, the relevant criterion for the first paragraph of Article of that decision
         to apply is thus lawful residence with the Turkish migrant worker. After so residing for a certain period of time, the person
         concerned receives the right to work, but the first paragraph of Article does not, however, impose an obligation to do so
         or make it a condition for the acquisition of a right guaranteed by Decision No 1/(see, to that effect, inter alia, Case
         C-373/Aydinli [2005] ECR I-6181, paragraphs and 31; Case C-325/Derin [2007] ECR I-6495, paragraph 56; and Case C‑453/Er [2008] ECR I-7299, paragraphs to 34). The situation of a Turkish national such as the person at issue in the main proceedings
         with regard to employment is therefore irrelevant.
      
In the third place, the Court has already held on numerous occasions, first, that the first paragraph of Article of Decision
         No 1/has direct effect and, secondly, that the periods of residence as set out in that provision mean that a concomitant
         right of residence must be acknowledged to exist, without which those periods of residence would be rendered totally ineffective
         (see, inter alia, Er, paragraphs and 26, and Case C-337/Altun [2008] ECR I‑10323, paragraphs and 21).
      
In the fourth place, it should be noted that the scheme of gradual acquisition of rights provided for in the first paragraph
         of Article of Decision No 1/pursues a dual objective.
      
First, before the initial period of three years expires, that provision seeks to enable family members to be with a migrant
         worker, with a view to thus furthering, by means of family reunification, the employment and residence of the Turkish worker
         who is already legally integrated into the host Member State (see, inter alia, Case C-351/Kadiman [1997] ECR I-2133, paragraphs and 36; Case C‑65/Eyüp [2000] ECR I‑4747, paragraph 26; and Case C-467/Cetinkaya [2004] ECR I‑10895, paragraph 25). 
      
Thereafter, the same provision seeks to deepen the lasting integration of the Turkish migrant worker’s family into the host
         Member State by granting to the family member concerned, after three years of legal residence, the possibility of himself
         gaining access to the labour force. The fundamental objective thus pursued is that of consolidating the position of that family
         member, who is, at that stage, already legally integrated into the host Member State, by giving him the means to earn his
         own living in that State and therefore to establish a position which is independent of that of the migrant worker (see, inter
         alia, Eyüp, paragraph 26; Cetinkaya, paragraph 25; Aydinli, paragraph 23; and Derin, paragraphs and 71).
      
The Court has concluded from this that, although the family member is, as a rule and unless he has good reason not to, required
         actually to reside with the migrant worker as long as he does not himself have the right of access to the labour market –
         in other words, until the three-year period has expired –, by contrast that no longer applies where the person concerned has
         legally acquired that right pursuant to the first indent of the first paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/80, and that
         must a fortiori be the case when, after five years, he has an unconditional right to employment (see Derin, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Once the conditions set out in the first paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/are satisfied, that provision confers
         on the family member of a Turkish worker a right of his own of access to the labour market in the host Member State and, concomitantly,
         the right to continue to reside in that State.
      
It is true that those rights have their origin in the position previously held by the related Turkish worker in the territory
         of that State, through which his family member acquired a right of residence.
      
However, as the Commission of the European Communities correctly submits in its written observations, where the family member
         of such a worker has himself secured an individual right under to the first paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/80, he
         has achieved a sufficient level of integration in the host Member State for his position to be regarded as separable from
         that of his relative which made possible his access to the territory of that State, and therefore as independent of the position
         of that relative (see, to that effect, Derin, paragraphs and 71, and Altun, paragraphs and 63).
      
That interpretation is also dictated in the light of the purpose of Decision No 1/taken a whole, regarding which it has
         repeatedly been held that it seeks to improve the situation of Turkish migrants in the host State by promoting the gradual
         integration in that State of Turkish nationals who satisfy the conditions laid down in one of the provisions of that decision
         and therefore enjoy the rights conferred on them by the decision (see, inter alia, Case C‑329/Ergat [2000] ECR I-1487, paragraphs and 44; Derin, paragraph 53; and Altun, paragraphs and 29).
      
It is on this view that the Court has held that rights such as those legally acquired by Mr Bozkurt on the basis of the first
         paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/exist regardless of the continuing existence of the conditions which were necessary
         to give rise to those rights (see Ergat, paragraph 40; Cetinkaya, paragraph 31; Aydinli, paragraph 26; Derin, paragraph 53; and Altun, paragraph 36), with the result that the family member who already has rights pursuant to that decision is in a position
         to consolidate gradually his position in the host Member State and to become permanently integrated in that State by leading
         a life independent of that of the person through whom he secured those rights (see, to that effect, inter alia, Ergat, paragraphs and 44).
      
The interpretation referred to in the preceding paragraph is merely the expression of the more general principle of respect
         for acquired rights, set out in the judgment in Case C-237/Kus [1992] ECR I‑6781, paragraphs and 22, a principle according to which, where the Turkish national may legitimately rely
         on rights pursuant to a provision of Decision No 1/80, those rights are no longer dependent on the continuing existence of
         the circumstances which gave rise to them, as no condition of that nature is laid down by that decision. In the Kus case, the circumstance in question was, as a matter of fact, a marriage which had allowed the Turkish national concerned
         to enter the territory of the host Member State and was followed by a divorce which took place at a time when the person concerned
         had already acquired rights, in that case under Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/80. It should be noted that, by means of paragraph
         of the judgment in Case C‑355/Eroglu [1994] ECR I‑5113, that same principle was made applicable in the context of Article of Decision No 1/(see, to the same
         effect, inter alia, Ergat, paragraph 40; Aydinli, paragraph 26; Derin, paragraph 50; and Altun, paragraphs and 43).
      
As regards, in the fifth place, the circumstances which result in the loss of the rights conferred by the first paragraph
         of Article of Decision No 1/on members of a Turkish worker’s family who fulfil the conditions laid down in that paragraph,
         it is also settled case-law that there can be only two kinds of restrictions on those rights, namely, either a restriction
         based on the fact that the presence of the Turkish migrant in the host Member State constitutes, on account of his personal
         conduct, a genuine and serious threat to public policy, public security or public health, in accordance with Article 14(1)
         of that decision, or a restriction based on the fact that the person concerned has left the territory of that State for a
         significant length of time without legitimate reason (see, inter alia, Er, paragraph 30, and Altun, paragraph 62).
      
The exhaustive nature of the restrictions set out in the preceding paragraph has been reaffirmed consistently by the Court
         (see, inter alia, Cetinkaya, paragraph 38; Derin, paragraph 54; Er, paragraph 30; and Altun, paragraph 62).
      
From all the foregoing explanations, it follows that the divorce of the spouses, if it takes place after the family member
         concerned has duly acquired the rights conferred by the first paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/80, is irrelevant with
         regard to the continuing existence of those rights for the person entitled, even if, initially, that person could secure them
         only through his ex-spouse.
      
Lastly, it must be pointed out that the interpretation given in the preceding paragraph is not incompatible with the requirements
         of Article of the Additional Protocol signed on November 1970. As the Advocate-General stated at points to of
         her Opinion, on similar grounds to those set out on by the Court in paragraphs to of Derin and in paragraph of the judgment in Case C‑349/Polat [2007] ECR I-8167, the situation of a member of the family of a Turkish migrant worker cannot usefully be compared to that
         of a member of the family of a national of a Member State, having regard to the significant differences between their respective
         legal situations (see, to that effect, Case C‑462/Bekleyen [2010] ECR I-0000, paragraphs to and 43).
      
In view of the foregoing, the answer to the first question is therefore that the first paragraph of Article of Decision
         No 1/is to be interpreted as meaning that a Turkish national such as the applicant in the main proceedings who, as a member
         of the family of a Turkish worker who is duly registered as belonging to the labour force of a Member State and as a result
         of his residing with his spouse for a continuous period of at least five years, enjoys the rights relating to the legal status
         conferred on the basis of the second indent of that provision, does not lose those rights on account of his divorce, which
         took place after those rights were acquired.
      
 The second question
It is settled case-law that European Union law cannot be relied on for abusive or fraudulent ends and that the national courts
         may, case by case, take account – on the basis of objective evidence – of abuse or fraudulent conduct on the part of the persons
         concerned in order, where appropriate, to deny them the benefit of the provisions of that law (see, inter alia, Case C-212/Centros [1999] ECR I-1459, paragraph 25; Case C-255/Halifax and Others [2006] ECR I-1609, paragraph 68; and Case C-16/Tum and Dari [2007] ECR I-7415, paragraph 64). 
      
Thus the Court has ruled that periods in which a Turkish national was employed only as a result of fraudulent conduct which
         led to a conviction cannot be regarded as legal in respect of the application of Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/80, as the
         person concerned did not, in actual fact, satisfy the conditions laid down by that provision and did not therefore legally
         have a right under that decision (see Case C‑285/Kol [1997] ECR I-3069, paragraphs and 27, and Case C‑37/Savas [2000] ECR I-2927, paragraph 61).
      
It cannot be accepted that a Turkish national should seek to procure improperly the enjoyment of advantages guaranteed by
         one of the provisions of Decision No 1/80.
      
However, in the present case, it is apparent from the file submitted to the Court by the referring court that the national
         courts which ruled on the substance of the case currently pending before the Bundesverwaltungsgericht expressly stated that
         Mr Bozkurt was legally entitled to the legal status provided for in the second indent of the first paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/80. Moreover, there has been no mention before the Court of any factor capable of suggesting that, in the
         main proceedings, the marriage was a sham contracted with the sole aim of enjoying abusively advantages provided for by the
         law governing the association between the EEC and Turkey.
      
In those circumstances, it is clear that, in the main proceedings, Mr Bozkurt is merely exercising rights which are expressly
         conferred on him by Decision No 1/and for the acquisition of which he has satisfied all the necessary conditions.
      
The fact that such a Turkish national relies fully on the rights guaranteed by that decision, which he has previously legally
         acquired, cannot, as such, be considered to constitute an abuse of rights.
      
The referring court, without however asking a question on the interpretation of Article 14(1) of Decision No 1/80, nevertheless
         enquires whether, in the particular circumstances of the case in the main proceedings, Mr Bozkurt’s claim to the legal status
         acquired pursuant to the first paragraph of Article of that decision is liable to conflict with public policy, having regard
         to the serious criminal offence which he committed, after acquiring that legal status, against the very person who enabled
         him to obtain that status.
      
In that regard, it must be pointed out that it is Article 14(1) of Decision 1/which establishes the relevant legal framework
         for assessing to what extent a Turkish national who has been convicted of criminal offences may be deprived, by means of expulsion
         from the host Member State, of the rights which he derives directly from that decision (see, inter alia, Derin, paragraph 74).
      
When determining the scope of the public policy exception provided for in that provision, reference should, according to settled
         case-law, be made to the interpretation given to that exception in the field of freedom of movement for workers who are nationals
         of a Member State of the European Union (see, inter alia, Polat, paragraph 30).
      
The Court has always emphasised that that exception is a derogation from the fundamental principle of freedom of movement
         for persons, which must be interpreted strictly, and that its scope cannot be determined unilaterally by the Member States
         (see, inter alia, Polat, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
According to the settled case-law of the Court, reliance by a national authority on the concept of public policy presupposes
         the existence, in addition to the perturbation of the social order which any infringement of the law involves, of a genuine
         and sufficiently serious threat to a fundamental interest of society (Polat, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Furthermore, measures taken on grounds of public policy or of public security are to be based exclusively on the personal
         conduct of the individual concerned. Such measures can thus not be ordered automatically on general preventive grounds following
         a criminal conviction (Polat, paragraphs and 35).
      
The existence of a previous criminal conviction can, therefore, only be taken into account in so far as the circumstances
         which gave rise to that conviction are evidence of personal conduct constituting a present threat to the requirements of public
         policy (Polat, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
It is therefore for the national authorities concerned to assess on a case-by-case basis the personal conduct of the offender
         and whether it constitutes a present, genuine and sufficiently serious threat to public policy and security, and those authorities
         are also required to observe both the principle of proportionality and the fundamental rights of the person concerned. In
         particular, a measure ordering expulsion based on Article 14(1) of Decision No 1/may be taken only if the personal conduct
         of the person concerned indicates a specific risk of new and serious prejudice to the requirements of public policy (see Derin, paragraph 74).
      
In view of all of the foregoing considerations, the answer to the second question is that:
      
–        it is not an abuse of rights for a Turkish national such as the applicant in the main proceedings to rely on a right legally
         acquired pursuant to the first paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/even though the person concerned, after acquiring
         that right through his former wife, committed a serious offence against her which gave rise to a criminal conviction;
      
–        by contrast, Article 14(1) of Decision No 1/does not preclude a measure ordering the expulsion of a Turkish national who
         has been convicted of criminal offences, provided that his personal conduct constitutes a present, genuine and sufficiently
         serious threat to a fundamental interest of society. It is for the competent national court to assess whether that is the
         case in the main proceedings.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      The first paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/of September on the development of the Association, adopted by
            the Association Council created by the Agreement establishing an Association between the European Economic Community and Turkey,
            is to be interpreted as meaning that a Turkish national such as the applicant in the main proceedings, who, as a member of
            the family of a Turkish worker who is duly registered as belonging to the labour force of a Member State and as a result of
            his residing with his spouse for a continuous period of at least five years, enjoys the rights relating to the legal status
            conferred on the basis of the second indent of that provision, does not lose those rights on account of his divorce, which
            took place after those rights were acquired.
2.      It is not an abuse of rights for a Turkish national such as the applicant in the main proceedings to rely on a right legally
            acquired pursuant to the first paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/even though the person concerned, after acquiring
            that right through his former wife, committed a serious offence against her which gave rise to a criminal conviction.
By contrast, Article 14(1) of Decision No 1/does not preclude a measure ordering the expulsion of a Turkish national who
            has been convicted of criminal offences, provided that his personal conduct constitutes a present, genuine and sufficiently
            serious threat to a fundamental interest of society. It is for the competent national court to assess whether that is the
            case in the main proceedings.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 