
Avis juridique important
|
61998OOrder of the President of the Court of October 2000.  -  Commission of the European Communities v Hellenic Republic.  -  Removal from the register.  -  Case C-197/98.  
European Court reports Page I-Parties
Grounds
Operative part
Parties
In Case C-197/98,Commission of the European Communities, represented by M. Patakia and B. Mongin, of its Legal Service, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of C. Gómez de la Cruz, of its Legal Service, Wagner Centre, Kirchberg,applicant,supported byUnited Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, represented by J.E. Collins, Assistant Treasury Solicitor, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the British Embassy, Boulevard Roosevelt,intervener,vHellenic Republic, represented by A. Samoni-Rantou and S. Vodina, Legal Adviser and Hearings Officer respectively in the Community Law Section of the Special Legal Department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the Greek Embassy, Val Sainte-Croix,defendant,APPLICATION for a declaration that, by not taking the necessary measures to comply with the judgment of the Court of Justice of March in Case C-365/Commission v Greece [1995] ECR I-and, in particular, by failing to adopt or communicate to the Commission the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply fully with Council Directive 89/48/EEC of December on a general system for the recognition of higher-education diplomas awarded on completion of professional education and training of at least three years' duration (OJ L 19, p. 16), the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC),THE PRESIDENT OF THE COURTafter hearing Advocate General Fennelly,makes the followingOrder 
Grounds
By application lodged at the Court Registry on May 1998, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action under Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC) for a declaration that, by not taking the necessary measures to comply with the judgment of the Court of Justice of March in Case C-365/Commission v Greece [1995] ECR I-and, in particular, by failing to adopt or communicate to the Commission the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply fully with Council Directive 89/48/EEC of December on a general system for the recognition of higher-education diplomas awarded on completion of professional education and training of at least three years' duration (OJ L 19, p. 16), the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC).By document lodged at the Court Registry on August 2000, the applicant informed the Court pursuant to Article of the Rules of Procedure that it wished to withdraw its application and requested the Court pursuant to the first subparagraph of Article 69(5) of the Rules of Procedure to order the Hellenic Republic to pay the costs.By a letter lodged at the Court on August 2000, the Greek Government stated that it had taken note of the Commission's decision to withdraw its action and informed the Court that it had no observations to make in that regard.Under the first subparagraph of Article 69(5) of the Rules of Procedure, a party who discontinues or withdraws from proceedings is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the other party's pleadings. However, upon application by the party who discontinues or withdraws from proceedings, the costs are to be borne by the other party if this appears justified by the conduct of that party.In the present case, the application and the subsequent withdrawal of the Commission were the result of the conduct of the Hellenic Republic which did not adopt the measures necessary to comply with its obligations until after the Commission brought its action.The Hellenic Republic should therefore be ordered to pay the costs.Pursuant to the first subparagraph of Article 69(4) of the Rules of Procedure, it is appropriate to order the United Kingdom to bear its own costs. 
Operative part
On those grounds,THE PRESIDENT OF THE COURThereby orders:1. Case C-197/is removed from the register.2. The Hellenic Republic shall pay the costs.3. The United Kingdom shall bear its own costs. 
Top  
 