
Judgment of the Court (Third Chamber) of June – Commission v France
(Case C‑327/08)
Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directives 89/665/EEC and 92/13/EEC – Review procedures concerning the award of public contracts – Guarantee of effective review – Minimum period to be ensured between notification to the unsuccessful candidates and tenderers of the decision to award a
         contract and the signature of the contract concerned
      
1.                     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Examination of the merits by the Court – Situation to be taken into consideration
            – Situation on expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion (Art. EC) (see para. 22)
2.                     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Right of the Commission to bring judicial proceedings – Assessment of the expediency
            of taking action  – To be exercised at its discretion (Art. EC) (see para. 26)
3.                     Approximation of laws – Review procedures in respect of the award of public supply and public works contracts in the water,
            energy, transport and telecommunications sectors – Directives 89/and 92/– Member States under an obligation to provide
            for review procedures in respect of decisions awarding contracts (Council Directives 89/and 92/13) (see paras 39, 41,
            43-44)
4.                     Approximation of laws – Review procedures in respect of the award of public supply and public works contracts in the water,
            energy, transport and telecommunications sectors – Directives 89/and 92/– Member States under an obligation to provide
            for review procedures in respect of decisions awarding contracts (Council Directives 89/and 92/13) (see paras 55-58, 60,
            operative part)
Re: 
Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Infringement of Article 2(1) of Council Directive 89/665/EEC of December
                  on the coordination of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the application of review procedures
                  to the award of public supply and public works contracts (OJ L 395, p. 33), as amended by Council Directive 92/50/EEC
                  (OJ L 209, p. 1) and of Article 2(1) of Council Directive 92/13/EEC of February coordinating the laws, regulations
                  and administrative provisions relating to the application of Community rules on the procurement procedures of entities operating
                  in the water, energy, transport and telecommunications sectors (OJ L 76, p. 14) – Minimum time-limit to be complied with
                  between the notice of award of contract to the candidates and tenderers and the signature of the relevant contract.
               
Operative part 
The Court:
1.
	Declares that, by adopting and maintaining in force Article 1441-of the new Code of Civil Procedure, as amended by Article
                     48-1º of Decree No 2005-of October concerning contracts awarded by the contracting authorities referred to in
                     Article of Order No 2005-of June on contracts awarded by certain public bodies or private persons not subject
                     to the Public Procurement Code, in so far as that provision imposes on the contracting authority or entity a ten-day period
                     within which to respond to a formal challenge – the bringing of any pre-contractual proceedings before that response being
                     precluded – and where that period does not have the effect of suspending the period which must be ensured between the notification
                     to the unsuccessful candidates and tenderers of the decision to award the contract and the signature of that contract, the
                     French Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Council Directive 89/665/EEC of December on the coordination
                     of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the application of review procedures to the award of public
                     supply and public works contracts, as amended by Council Directive 92/50/EEC of June 1992, and Council Directive 92/13/EEC
                     of February coordinating the laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the application of Community
                     rules on the procurement procedures of entities operating in the water, energy, transport and telecommunications sectors;
                  
2.
	Dismisses the action as to the remainder;
3.
	Orders the Commission of the European Communities and the French Republic to bear their own costs.
Top  
 