
Order of the President of the Court of January – Provincia di Ascoli Piceno and Comune di Monte Urano v Council
(Case C‑462/P(I))
Appeal – Intervention – Interest in the result of the case
1.                     Procedure – Intervention – Conditions of admissibility – Interest in the result of the case – Meaning – Need for a direct
            and existing interest (Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 40, second para.) (see paras 5-6)
2.                     Procedure – Proof – Burden of proof – Obligation to prove matters within common knowledge – None (Art. 225(1) EC; Statute
            of the Court of Justice, Art. 58, first para.) (see para. 9)
3.                     Appeals – Grounds – Mistaken assessment of the facts – Inadmissibility – Review by the Court of the assessment of the evidence
            – Possible only where the clear sense of the evidence has been distorted (Art. 225(1) EC; Statute of the Court of Justice,
            Art. 58, first para.) (see para. 11)
4.                     Appeals – Production of new evidence – Inadmissible (Art. 225(1) EC; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 58, first para.)
            (see para. 12)
5.                     Procedure – Assimilation of regional and local authorites to Member States – Excluded (see para. 15)
Re: 
Appeal against the order of the Court of First Instance (President of the Second Chamber) of September in Case T‑407/Zhejiang Aokang Shoes
 v 
Council
 rejecting an application for leave to intervene in an action for the annulment of Council Regulation (EC) No 1472/of
                  October imposing a definitive anti-dumping duty and collecting definitely the provisional duty imposed on imports of
                  certain footwear with uppers of leather originating in the People’s Republic of China and Vietnam (OJ L 275, p. 1).
               
Operative part: 
The Court:
1.
	Dismisses the appeal;
2.
	Orders the Provincia di Ascoli Piceno and the Comune di Monte Urano to bear their own costs.
Top  
 