
ORDER OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)
November (*)
      
(Appeal — Community trade mark — Figurative mark including the word elements ‘Solidfloor The professional’s choice’ — Opposition by the proprietor of the national figurative mark, trade name and domain name including the word elements ‘SOLID
         floor’ — Refusal to register by the Board of Appeal — Likelihood of confusion — Regulation (EC) No 207/— Article 8(1)(b) — Weak distinctive character of earlier trade mark)
      
In Case C‑190/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, brought on April 2015,
Fetim BV, established in Amsterdam (Netherlands), represented by L. Bakers, advocaat,
      
appellant,
the other parties to the proceedings being:
Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM),
defendant at first instance,
Solid Floor Ltd, established in London (United Kingdom), represented by S. Malynicz, Barrister,
      
intervener at first instance,
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
composed of A. Arabadjiev, President of the Chamber, J.-C. Bonichot and S. Rodin (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: M. Szpunar,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
makes the following
Order
By its appeal, Fetim BV (‘Fetim’) asks the Court to set aside the judgment of the General Court of the European Union of February
         in Fetim v OHIM — Solid Floor (Solidfloor The professional’s choice) (T‑395/12, EU:T:2015:92, ‘the judgment under appeal’), by which that court dismissed its action for annulment of the decision
         of the Second Board of Appeal of the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM) of June
         (Case R 884/2011-2), given in opposition proceedings between Solid Floor Ltd and Fetim (‘the decision at issue’).
      
Legal context
Article 8(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EC) No 207/of February on the Community trade mark (OJ L 78, p. 1)
         provides:
      
‘1. Upon opposition by the proprietor of an earlier trade mark, the trade mark applied for shall not be registered:
...
b)      if because of its identity with, or similarity to, the earlier trade mark and the identity or similarity of the goods or services
         covered by the trade marks there exists a likelihood of confusion on the part of the public in the territory in which the
         earlier trade mark is protected; the likelihood of confusion includes the likelihood of association with the earlier trade
         mark.’
      
Background to the dispute 
On February 2007, Fetim, the appellant, filed an application for registration of a Community trade mark at OHIM under Council
         Regulation (EC) No 40/of December on the Community trade mark (OJ L 11, p. 1), now repealed and replaced by
         Regulation No 207/2009. 
      
Registration as a mark was sought for the following figurative sign:
      
The goods in respect of which registration was sought fall within Class of the Nice Agreement concerning the International
         Classification of Goods and Services for the Purposes of the Registration of Marks of June 1957, as revised and amended,
         and correspond to the following description: ‘Building materials, not of metal, parquet flooring of plastic and wood, flooring
         of wood, cork and laminate; subfloors; transportable floors, not of metal’. 
      
On December 2007, Solid Floor Ltd filed a notice of opposition, under Article of Regulation No 40/94, now Article of Regulation No 207/2009, to registration of the sign as a trade mark in respect of the goods referred to in paragraph above.
      
The opposition was, in the first place, based on the earlier figurative mark registered on October in the United Kingdom
         both for ‘solid wood flooring; wooden parquet flooring’ in Class within the meaning of the Nice Agreement cited in paragraph above and ‘installation of wood flooring’ in Class of the Nice Agreement, reproduced below:
      
The opposition was, in the second place, based on the trade name Solid Floor Ltd and on the domain name ‘Solid Floor Ltd’,
         used in the course of trade in the United Kingdom for the following goods and services: ‘Non-metallic building materials;
         building components; wood; wood products for use in building; non-metallic flooring; floorboards; floor coverings; parquet
         flooring; plywood boards for flooring; floor panels; decking; floor tiles; slate flooring; stone flooring, parts and fittings
         for all the aforesaid goods; carpets, rugs, mats and matting, linoleum and other materials for covering existing floors; wall
         hangings (non-textile); retail services in respect of the foregoing; floor construction and installation services; flooring
         installation services; carpentry services; maintenance and repair services all relating to floor coverings’.
      
The ground relied on in support of the opposition was, inter alia, that set out in Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/(now Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 207/2009).
      
By decision of February 2011, the Opposition Division of OHIM rejected the opposition.
      
On April 2011, Solid Floor Ltd filed a notice of appeal at OHIM, pursuant to Articles to of Regulation No 207/2009,
         against that decision.
      
By the decision at issue, the Second Board of Appeal of OHIM (‘the Board of Appeal’) annulled the Opposition Division’s decision,
         upheld the opposition in its entirety and refused the Community trade mark application.
      
The Board of Appeal held, in the first place, that the goods in question were partially identical and partially similar. 
      
In the second place, it found that the trade mark for which registration is sought and the earlier trade mark were highly
         similar from a visual and phonetic point of view and from a conceptual point of view in respect of their common word element.
         
      
The Board of Appeal concluded that, given the overall impression created by the signs at issue, the level of similarity of
         the goods and the imperfect recollection and interdependence principles, there was a likelihood of confusion between those
         signs on the part of the relevant public, which consisted, in the present case, of the public at large and professionals in
         the field at issue. 
      
The proceedings before the General Court and the judgment under appeal
On September 2012, Fetim brought an action for annulment of the decision at issue before the General Court. In support of
         its action, it raised a single plea in law, alleging infringement of Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 207/2009.
      
By the judgment under appeal, the General Court dismissed the action as unfounded.
      
Form of order sought on appeal
By its appeal, Fetim claims that the Court should:
      
–        set aside the judgment under appeal;
–        uphold its action against the decision at issue, and
–        order OHIM to pay the costs. 
The appeal 
Under Article of its Rules of Procedure, where an appeal is, in whole or in part, manifestly inadmissible or manifestly
         unfounded, the Court of Justice may at any time, acting on a proposal from the Judge-Rapporteur and after hearing the Advocate
         General, decide by reasoned order to dismiss that appeal in whole or in part.
      
It is appropriate to apply that provision to the present case.
      
In support of its appeal, Fetim puts forward a single ground of appeal, divided into three parts, alleging infringement of
         Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 207/2009.
      
The first part of the single ground of appeal
By the first part of the single ground of appeal, Fetim claims that the General Court infringed Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation
         No 207/by not having regard to the ‘case history’ of the earlier trade mark. 
      
In particular, Fetim submits that the General Court cannot confer a greater degree of protection upon a national trade mark
         than that which it enjoys at national level. According to Fetim, it follows that OHIM and the General Court were bound by
         the finding of the United Kingdom Intellectual Property Office (‘the UK IPO’) that the earlier trade mark was of a weak distinctive
         character and was so exclusively with regard to its figurative elements and not the word elements ‘solid floor’.
      
In that regard, it should be recalled that it is settled case-law of the Court that the Community trade mark regime is an
         autonomous system with its own set of rules and objectives peculiar to it and applies independently of any national system,
         and the legality of decisions of the Boards of Appeal of OHIM must be evaluated solely on the basis of Regulation No 207/2009,
         as it is interpreted by the EU judicature (see judgment in Reber Holding v OHIM, C‑141/P, EU:C:2014:2089, paragraph and the case-law cited). 
      
In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the General Court held, in accordance with that case-law, that it was neither
         bound by national case-law, by the analysis carried out by the UK IPO in the proceedings for the registration of the earlier
         trade mark, nor by the UK IPO’s decision of January 2010, which did not concern the earlier mark. 
      
Thus, the General Court could reasonably conclude, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, in the first place, that
         the weak distinctive character of the word element ‘solid floor’ of the earlier trade mark did not necessarily imply that
         that element cannot constitute a dominant element provided that, because, in particular, of its position in the sign or its
         size, it is capable of making an impression on consumers and of being remembered by them, and, in the second place, that the
         Board of Appeal did not err in law by finding that the distinctiveness of those word elements was higher than that of the
         figurative elements on the basis that the average consumer refers more readily to goods by quoting the name of the mark at
         issue than by describing the figurative element.
      
Consequently, given that the General Court correctly applied the settled case-law cited in paragraph above, the first part
         of the single ground of appeal must be rejected as manifestly unfounded. 
      
The second part of the single ground of appeal 
Fetim claims that the General Court applied an incorrect legal criterion in comparing the earlier trade mark and the trade
         mark for which registration is sought. 
      
Thus, Fetim submits that, in assessing the similarity between the earlier trade mark and the trade mark for which registration
         is sought, the General Court erred in not attributing to the element ‘the professional’s choice’ all the importance it deserved.
         In so doing, the General Court arrived at the erroneous conclusion that the two trade marks were similar from a visual, phonetic
         and conceptual point of view. 
      
In that regard, it should be recalled that, under Article TFEU and the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of
         the Court of Justice of the European Union, an appeal lies on points of law only. The General Court thus has exclusive jurisdiction
         to find and appraise the relevant facts. The appraisal of those facts thus does not, save where it distorts them, constitute
         a point of law which is subject, as such, to review by the Court of Justice on appeal (see judgment in Media-Saturn-Holding v OHIM, C‑92/P, EU:C:2011:15, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
It should be noted that the second part of the single ground of appeal seeks, in essence, to contest, first, the General Court’s
         findings concerning the dominant element of the trade mark for which registration is sought and, second, the manner in which
         that court weighed up the various elements of the signs at issue.
      
However, in the first place, in contesting the facts found by the General Court concerning the dominant element of the trade
         mark for which registration is sought, Fetim merely calls into question the General Court’s assessment of the facts without
         invoking any distortion of the material in the file. However, that assessment does not constitute a point of law which is
         subject, as such, to review by the Court of Justice (see order in Marszałkowski v OHIM, C‑177/P, EU:C:2014:183, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
In the second place, in accordance with the case-law of the Court, the General Court’s weighing up of the various elements
         of the signs at issue is factual in nature (see judgment in United States Polo Association v OHIM, C‑327/P, EU:C:2012:550, paragraph 61).
      
In the light of all the foregoing considerations, the second part of the single ground of appeal must be rejected as manifestly
         inadmissible.
      
The third part of the single ground of appeal 
By the third part of the single ground of appeal, Fetim claims that the General Court infringed Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation
         No 207/in failing to have regard to all the relevant circumstances for assessing the likelihood of confusion.
      
In particular, Fetim claims that the General Court failed to have regard to the fact that the distinctiveness of the word
         elements of that trade mark is virtually non-existent. 
      
In accordance with the settled case-law of the Court, it should be noted that the existence of a likelihood of confusion on
         the part of the public must be assessed globally, taking into account all factors relevant to the circumstances of the case.
         Whereas the evaluation of those factors is an issue of fact that cannot be reviewed by the Court, failure to take all of those
         factors into account constitutes an error of law and may, as such, be raised before the Court in the context of an appeal
         (see, to that effect, judgment in Union Investment Privatfonds v UniCredito Italiano, C‑317/P, EU:C:2011:405, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
In this regard, it is settled case-law of the Court that the risk that the public might believe that the goods or services
         in question come from the same undertaking or from economically linked undertakings constitutes a likelihood of confusion
         within the meaning of Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 207/(see order in Adler Modemärkte v OHIM, C‑343/P, EU:C:2015:310, paragraph and the case-law cited). 
      
In addition, the global assessment of the likelihood of confusion, in relation to the visual, aural or conceptual similarity
         of the marks in question, must be based on the overall impression given by the marks, bearing in mind, in particular, their
         distinctive and dominant elements (see judgment in Becker v Harman International Industries, C‑51/P, EU:C:2010:368, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Furthermore, although it is true that the more distinctive the earlier mark the greater the likelihood of confusion will be,
         such a likelihood of confusion cannot, however, be precluded where the distinctive character of the earlier mark is weak (see,
         to that effect, order in Messer Group v Air Products and Chemicals, C‑579/P, EU:C:2010:18, paragraph 70).
      
In the present case, the General Court, first, found in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that the assessment of the
         relevant public was not disputed by Fetim. 
      
Second, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the General Court upheld the Board of Appeal’s finding that the goods
         and services at issue were partially identical and partially similar.
      
Third, having stated in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that it was not bound by the elements taken from national
         case-law with regard to the distinctiveness of the earlier trade mark, the General Court, in paragraphs to of that judgment,
         assessed the visual, phonetic and conceptual similarity between the trade marks at issue and concluded that they were similar
         from a visual and conceptual point of view and highly similar from a phonetic point of view.
      
The General Court therefore arrived at the conclusion, in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, that despite
         the weak distinctive character of the earlier trade mark there was a likelihood of confusion between the trade mark for which
         registration is sought and the earlier trade mark, having regard, first, to the partial identity and partial similarity of
         the goods and services in question and, second, to the similarity of the signs at issue.
      
In so doing, the General Court carried out an overall assessment of the likelihood of confusion in the light of the relevant
         case-law and did not err in law. 
      
If accepted, Fetim’s contention would have the effect of disregarding the notion of the similarity of the marks in favour
         of one based on the distinctive character of the earlier mark, which would then be given undue importance. Such a result would
         not, however, be consistent with the very nature of the global assessment that the competent authorities are required to undertake
         by virtue of Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 207/(see, to that effect, orders in L’Oréal v OHIM, C‑235/P, EU:C:2006:271, paragraph 45; Hrbek v OHIM, C‑42/P, EU:C:2012:765, paragraph 62; and Adler Modemärkte v OHIM, C‑343/P, EU:C:2015:310, paragraph 61).
      
Consequently, the third part of the single ground of appeal must be rejected as manifestly unfounded.
      
It follows from all the foregoing considerations that the appeal must be dismissed. 
      
 Costs
Under Article of the Rules of Procedure, applicable to the procedure on appeal pursuant to Article 184(1) of those rules,
         a decision as to costs is to be given in the order which closes the proceedings.
      
As the present order has been adopted prior to notification of the appeal to the defendant at first instance and, therefore,
         before the latter could have incurred costs, Fetim should be ordered to bear its own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Sixth Chamber) hereby orders:
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
2.      Fetim BV shall bear its own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 