
Case C-422/Georgetown University and Others 
v
Comptroller General of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the High Court of Justice (England and Wales), Chancery Division (Patents Court))
(Medicinal products for human use – Supplementary protection certificate – Regulation (EC) No 469/– Article – Conditions for obtaining a certificate – Concept of a ‘product protected by a basic patent in force’ – Criteria – Existence of further or different criteria for a medicinal product comprising more than one active ingredient or for a vaccine
         against multiple diseases (‘Multi-disease vaccine’ or ‘multivalent vaccine’))
      
Summary of the Judgment
Approximation of laws – Uniform legislation – Industrial and commercial property – Patent law – Supplementary protection certificate
            for medicinal products – Conditions for granting – Product covered by a basic patent in force
(European Parliament and Council Directive No 469/2009, Arts 3(b), (c) and (d), and 5)
Article 3(b) of Regulation No 469/concerning the supplementary protection certificate for medicinal products must be
         interpreted as meaning that, provided the other requirements laid down in Article are also met, that provision does not
         preclude the competent industrial property office of a Member State from granting a supplementary protection certificate for
         an active ingredient specified in the wording of the claims of the basic patent relied on, where the medicinal product for
         which the marketing authorisation is submitted in support of the supplementary protection certificate application contains
         not only that active ingredient but also other active ingredients.
      
If the holder of such a basic patent relating to an innovative active ingredient or an innovative combination of active ingredients
         were to be refused a supplementary protection certificate on the ground that, in the commercial version of the medicinal product
         which places that active ingredient or that combination on the market for the first time, the active ingredient or the combination
         coexists in the medicinal product alongside other active ingredients or combinations which have other therapeutic purposes
         and may or may not be protected by another basic patent in force, the fundamental objective of Regulation No 469/2009, which
         is to ensure sufficient protection to encourage pharmaceutical research and play a decisive role in the continuing improvement
         in public health, could be undermined.
      
In accordance with Article of Regulation No 469/2009, a supplementary protection certificate granted in connection with
         a product which has obtained authorisation to be placed on the market as a medicinal product confers, upon the expiry of the
         patent, the same rights as were conferred by the basic patent in relation to the product, within the limits of the protection
         conferred by the basic patent, as provided for in Article of the regulation. Accordingly, if, during the period in which
         the patent was valid, the patent holder could oppose, on the basis of his patent, all use or certain uses of his product in
         the form of a medicinal product consisting of such a product or containing it, the supplementary protection certificate granted
         in relation to that product would confer on the holder the same rights for all uses of the product, as a medicinal product,
         which were authorised before the expiry of the certificate.
      
However, in such a situation, first, only the authorisation in respect of the first medicinal product placed on the European
         Union market comprising, among its active ingredients, the active ingredient which is the subject of the application may be
         regarded as the first marketing authorisation for that ‘product’ as a medicinal product within the meaning of Article 3(d)
         of Regulation No 469/2009.
      
Second, where a patent protects a product, in accordance with Article 3(c) of Regulation No 469/2009, only one certificate
         may be granted for that basic patent.
      
(see paras 28, 32-35, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
November (*)
      
(Medicinal products for human use – Supplementary protection certificate – Regulation (EC) No 469/– Article – Conditions for obtaining a certificate – Concept of a ‘product protected by a basic patent in force’ – Criteria – Existence of further or different criteria for a medicinal product comprising more than one active ingredient or for a vaccine
         against multiple diseases (‘Multi-disease vaccine’ or ‘multivalent vaccine’))
      
In Case C‑422/10,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the High Court of Justice of England and Wales, Chancery Division
         (Patents Court) (United Kingdom), made by decision of July 2010, received at the Court on August 2010, in the proceedings
      
Georgetown University,
University of Rochester,
Loyola University of Chicago,
v
Comptroller General of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks,
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of J.-C. Bonichot, President of the Chamber, A. Prechal, L. Bay Larsen, C. Toader (Rapporteur), and E. Jarašiūnas,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: K. Sztranc-Sławiczek, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on May 2011,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Georgetown University, the University of Rochester and Loyola University of Chicago, by J. Miles, acting as Agent, and D.
         Alexander, QC,
      
–        the Portuguese Government, by L. Inez Fernandes and P. Antunes, acting as Agents,
–        the European Commission, by F. Bulst and J. Samnadda, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on July 2011,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article of Regulation (EC) No 469/of the European
         Parliament and of the Council of May concerning the supplementary protection certificate for medicinal products (OJ
         L 152, p. 1).
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between Georgetown University, the University of Rochester and Loyloa University
         of Chicago, the applicants in the main proceedings, and the Comptroller of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks (‘the Patent Office’)
         concerning the latter’s refusal to grant some of the applicants’ applications for supplementary protection certificates (‘SPCs’).
      
 Legal context
 European Union law
Recital and recitals to in the preamble to Regulation No 469/are worded as follows: 
      
‘(1)      Council Regulation (EEC) No 1768/of June concerning the creation of a supplementary protection certificate for
         medicinal products [OJ L 182, p. 1] has been substantially amended several times. In the interests of clarity and rationality
         the said Regulation should be codified. 
      
…
(4)      At the moment, the period that elapses between the filing of an application for a patent for a new medicinal product and authorisation
         to place the medicinal product on the market [“MA”] makes the period of effective protection under the patent insufficient
         to cover the investment put into the research. 
      
(5)      This situation leads to a lack of protection which penalises pharmaceutical research. 
(6)      There exists a risk of research centres situated in the Member States relocating to countries that offer greater protection.
(7)      A uniform solution at Community level should be provided for, thereby preventing the heterogeneous development of national
         laws leading to further disparities which would be likely to create obstacles to the free movement of medicinal products within
         the Community and thus directly affect the functioning of the internal market. 
      
(8)      Therefore, the provision of a [SPC] granted, under the same conditions, by each of the Member States at the request of the
         holder of a national or European patent relating to a medicinal product for which [MA] has been granted is necessary. A regulation
         is therefore the most appropriate legal instrument. 
      
(9)      The duration of the protection granted by the certificate should be such as to provide adequate effective protection. For
         this purpose, the holder of both a patent and a certificate should be able to enjoy an overall maximum of years of exclusivity
         from the time the medicinal product in question first obtains [MA] in the Community. 
      
(10)      All the interests at stake, including those of public health, in a sector as complex and sensitive as the pharmaceutical sector
         should nevertheless be taken into account. For this purpose, the certificate cannot be granted for a period exceeding five
         years. The protection granted should furthermore be strictly confined to the product which obtained authorisation to be placed
         on the market as a medicinal product.’ 
      
Article of Regulation No 469/2009, headed ‘Definitions’, provides as follows:
      
‘For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions shall apply: 
(a)      “medicinal product” means any substance or combination of substances presented for treating or preventing disease in human
         beings …; 
      
(b)      “product” means the active ingredient or combination of active ingredients of a medicinal product;
(c)      “basic patent” means a patent which protects a product as such, a process to obtain a product or an application of a product,
         and which is designated by its holder for the purpose of the procedure for grant of a certificate; 
      
(d)      “certificate” means the supplementary protection certificate; 
…’
Article of Regulation No 469/2009, entitled ‘Scope’, is worded as follows:
      
‘Any product protected by a patent in the territory of a Member State and subject, prior to being placed on the market as
         a medicinal product, to an administrative authorisation procedure as laid down in Directive 2001/81/EC of the European Parliament
         and of the Council of November on the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use [OJ L 311, p.
         67] or Directive 2001/82/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of November on the Community code relating
         to veterinary medicinal products [OJ L 311, p. 1] may, under the terms and conditions provided for in this Regulation,
         be the subject of a certificate.’ 
      
Article of Regulation No 469/2009, entitled ‘Conditions for obtaining a certificate’, provides as follows:
      
‘A certificate shall be granted if, in the Member State in which the application referred to in Article is submitted and
         at the date of that application: 
      
(a)      the product is protected by a basic patent in force; 
(b)      a valid authorisation to place the product on the market as a medicinal product has been granted in accordance with Directive
         2001/83/EC or Directive 2001/82/EC, as appropriate; 
      
(c)      the product has not already been the subject of a certificate; 
(d)      the authorisation referred to in point (b) is the first authorisation to place the product on the market as a medicinal product.’
         
      
Article of Regulation No 469/2009, entitled ‘Subject matter of protection’, is worded as follows: 
      
‘Within the limits of the protection conferred by the basic patent, the protection conferred by a certificate shall extend
         only to the product covered by the authorisation to place the corresponding medicinal product on the market and for any use
         of the product as a medicinal product that has been authorised before the expiry of the certificate.’ 
      
Article of Regulation No 469/2009, entitled ‘[e]ffects of the certificate’, provides that ‘[s]ubject to the provisions of
         Article 4, the certificate shall confer the same rights as conferred by the basic patent and shall be subject to the same
         limitations and the same obligations’. 
      
 The European Patent Convention
Under the heading ‘Extent of Protection’, Article of the Convention on the Grant of European Patents, signed on October
         1973, in the amended version applicable at the time of the facts in the main proceedings (‘the European Patent Convention’),
         provides as follows:
      
‘(1)      The extent of the protection conferred by a European patent or a European patent application shall be determined by the claims.
         Nevertheless, the description and drawings shall be used to interpret the claims. 
      
(2)      For the period up to grant of the European patent, the extent of the protection conferred by the European patent application
         shall be determined by the claims contained in the application as published. However, the European patent as granted or as
         amended in opposition, limitation or revocation proceedings shall determine retroactively the protection conferred by the
         application, in so far as such protection is not thereby extended.’ 
      
Article of the Protocol on the Interpretation of Article of the European Patent Convention, which forms an integral part
         of the convention in accordance with Article 164(1) thereof, provides as follows: 
      
‘Article should not be interpreted as meaning that the extent of the protection conferred by a European patent is to be
         understood as that defined by the strict, literal meaning of the wording used in the claims, the description and drawings
         being employed only for the purpose of resolving an ambiguity found in the claims. Nor should it be taken to mean that the
         claims serve only as a guideline and that the actual protection conferred may extend to what, from a consideration of the
         description and drawings by a person skilled in the art, the patent proprietor has contemplated. On the contrary, it is to
         be interpreted as defining a position between these extremes which combines a fair protection for the patent proprietor with
         a reasonable degree of legal certainty for third parties.’ 
      
 National law
Section of the United Kingdom Patents Act (‘UK Patents Act 1977’), headed ‘[m]eaning of infringement’, provides as
         follows:
      
‘(1)      Subject to the provisions of this section, a person infringes a patent for an invention if, but only if, while the patent
         is in force, he does any of the following things in the United Kingdom in relation to the invention without the consent of
         the proprietor of the patent, that is to say: 
      
(a)      where the invention is a product, he makes, disposes of, offers to dispose of, uses or imports the product or keeps it whether
         for disposal or otherwise; 
      
…’ 
Section of the UK Patents Act 1977, headed ‘[e]xtent of invention’, is worded as follows: 
      
‘(1)      For the purposes of this Act an invention … for which a patent has been granted, shall, unless the context otherwise requires,
         be taken to be that specified in a claim of the specification of the … patent … as interpreted by the description and any
         drawings contained in that specification, and the extent of the protection conferred by a patent … shall be determined accordingly.
      
…
(3)      The Protocol on the Interpretation of Article of the European Patent Convention (which Article contains a provision corresponding
         to subsection (1) above) shall, as for the time being in force, apply for the purposes of subsection (1) above as it applies
         for the purposes of that Article.’ 
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
On June 1993, Georgetown University filed an application for a European patent entitled ‘Papillomavirus vaccine’, registered
         by the European Patents Office (EPO) under number EP for a human papillomavirus (PV) Lprotein capable of inducing
         neutralising antibodies against papillomavirus virions. There are many human papillomavirus (HPV) genotypes, which are grouped
         according to the similarity of their DNA sequences. Types and are responsible for condylomas, whereas types and are responsible for precancerous lesions in the genital region and also cervical cancer. 
      
The Georgetown University patent claims include a vaccine for the prevention of papillomavirus infection, comprising at least
         that protein, or fragment thereof, of, among others, HPV‑16, HPV‑or HPV‑and HPV‑together. That patent was granted
         on December and is due to expire on June 2013. 
      
On December 2007, relying on the MA granted to Sanofi Pasteur MSD SNC on September for the medicinal product Gardasil,
         containing HPV‑6, HPV‑11, HPV‑and HPV‑purified proteins obtained from yeast cells (Saccharomyces cerevisiae), Georgetown
         University files four SPC applications, identifying the product as ‘the recombinant Lprotein’ of HPV‑6, HPV‑11, HPV‑and
         HPV‑(SCP/GB07/079, SCP/GB07/073, SCP/GB07/and SCP/GB07/078), respectively. Moreover, relying on the MA granted to GlaxoSmithKline
         Biologicals SA on September for the medicinal product Cervarix, containing HPV‑and HPV‑purified proteins obtained
         from insect cells (Trichoplusia ni), Georgetown University filed two SPC applications identifying the product as ‘the recombinant
         Lprotein of papillomavirus type as expressed by an insect cell’ (SCP/GB07/071) and ‘the recombinant Lprotein of papillomavirus
         type as expressed by an insect cell’ (SPC/GB07/70), respectively. 
      
Those applications were all rejected by decision of the Patent Office of December for failure to comply with the condition
         laid down in Article 3(b) of Regulation No 469/2009, since the medicinal product for which the MA was granted contained more
         active ingredients than those for which SPC protection was sought. Georgetown University challenged those decisions before
         the referring court. As regards two other applications filed by Georgetown University, relying on the MAs for Gardasil and
         Cervarix, respectively, and identifying the product as ‘the recombinant Lprotein of papillomavirus’ types HPV‑6, HPV‑11,
         HPV‑and HPV‑(SCP/GB07/074) and types and alone (SCP/GB07/072), the Patent Office informed Georgetown University
         that those applications complied with the conditions laid down in the regulation and SPCs could therefore be granted but would
         be delayed pending the outcome of its appeals before the referring court in respect of the six applications referred to above.
         
      
On March 1994, the University of Rochester filed an application for a patent entitled ‘Production of human papillomavirus
         capsid protein and virus-like particles’, registered by the EPO under number EP for ‘a method of expressing the human
         papillomavirus capsid protein coding sequence of type ([HPV]-6), type ([HPV]-11) …’. The patent claims include, first,
         a ‘purified recombinant human papilloma virus-like particle or capsomere which comprises human papillomavirus ([HPV]-16)
         Lcapsid protein expressed from an Lprotein coding sequence …’ and, second, ‘… a multivalent vaccine comprising a virus-like
         particle from different human papilloma viruses’. That patent was granted on May and is due to expire on March 2014.
         
      
By decisions of and October 2009, the Patent Office granted the University of Rochester SPCs based on the MAs for Gardasil
         and Cervarix, respectively, and identifying the product as ‘the combination of the virus-like particles of the recombinant
         Ll protein of human papillomavirus types 6, 11, and 18’ (SCP/GB07/018) and ‘the combination of the virus-like particles
         of the recombinant Ll protein of human papillomavirus types et 18’ (SCP/GB07/076). However, the Patents Office refused,
         by decision of December 2009, to grant a SPC based on the MA for Cervarix identifying the product as ‘the virus-like particle
         of the recombinant Lprotein of human papillomavirus type as expressed in an insect cell’ (SCP/GB07/075), for failure
         to comply with the condition laid down in Article 3(b) of Regulation No 469/2009. 
      
On October 1995, Loyola University of Chicago filed an application for a patent entitled ‘Papilloma virus-like particles,
         fusion proteins and process for producing same’, registered by the EPO under number EP 0809700. The patent claims include
         ‘recombinant-produced papilloma virus-like particles that are formed after expression of the viral structure proteins Ll or
         Ll and L2, characterised in that one or more sections of the Ll protein are deleted, wherein the ability to form virus-like
         particles remains’. That patent was granted on May and is due to expire on October 2015. 
      
By decision of October 2009, the Patent Office granted a SPC to Loyola University of Chicago identifying the product as
         ‘the combination of the virus-like particle of the recombinant Lprotein of human papillomavirus types and 18’ based on
         the MA for Cervarix (SCP/GB07/077). However, by decision of December 2009, the Patent Office refused to grant a SPC based
         on the MA for Cervarix identifying the product as ‘the virus-like particle of the recombinant Lprotein of human papillomavirus
         type as expressed in an insect cell’ (SCP/GB07/069), since the application thus worded, based on the MA for Cervarix, failed
         to comply with the conditions laid down in Article 3(b) of Regulation No 469/2009. 
      
The High Court of Justice of England and Wales, Chancery Division (Patents Court), before which the applicants in the main
         proceedings brought actions for annulment of the Patent Office’s decisions refusing to grant SPCs on the ground that the medicinal
         products for which the MA was granted contained more active ingredients than those specified in the respective SPC applications,
         decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following question to the Court for a preliminary ruling, which is worded in
         the same terms as the sixth question referred by the Court of Appeal (England and Wales) (Civil Division) in Case C 322/10.
         
      
‘Does … Regulation [No 469/2009] and, in particular, Article 3(b), permit the grant of a [SPC] for a single active ingredient
         or combination of active ingredients where:
      
(a)      a basic patent in force protects the single active ingredient or combination of active ingredients within the meaning of Article
         3(a) of … Regulation [No 469/2009]; and 
      
(b)      a medicinal product containing the single active ingredient or combination of active ingredients together with one or more
         other active ingredients is the subject of a valid authorisation granted in accordance with Directive 2001/83/EC or Directive
         2001/82/EC which is the first [MA] that places the single active ingredient or combination of active ingredients on the market?’
         
      
By order of the President of the Court of January 2011, Cases C‑322/and C‑422/were joined for the purposes of the
         oral procedure and the judgment, in accordance with Article of the Court’s Rules of Procedure. However, in view of the
         factual differences between the situations at issue in the main proceedings, by order of the President of the Fourth Chamber
         of the Court of October 2011, those cases were disjoined, pursuant to Article of those rules, for the purposes of the
         judgment.
      
 Consideration of the question referred 
By its question, the referring court asks, in essence, whether Article 3(b) of Regulation No 469/may be interpreted as
         not precluding the competent industrial property office of a Member State from granting a SPC for an active ingredient specified
         in the wording of the claims of the basic patent relied on, where the medicinal product for which the MA is submitted in support
         of the SPC application contains not only that active ingredient but also other active ingredients.
      
First, it must be noted that the fundamental objective of Regulation No 469/is to ensure sufficient protection to encourage
         pharmaceutical research, which plays a decisive role in the continuing improvement in public health (see Case C‑392/Farmitalia [1999] ECR I‑5553, paragraph 19, and Case C‑482/AHP Manufacturing [2009] ECR I‑7295, paragraph 30).
      
The reason given for the adoption of that Regulation is the fact that the period of effective protection under the patent
         is insufficient to cover the investment put into pharmaceutical research and the regulation thus seeks to make up for that
         insufficiency by creating a SPC for medicinal products (see Case C‑181/Biogen [1997] ECR I‑357, paragraphs 26, and AHP Manufacturing, paragraph 30).
      
Moreover, as is apparent in particular from subparagraphs and of paragraph of the explanatory memorandum to the proposal
         for Council Regulation (EEC) of April concerning the creation of a supplementary protection certificate for medicinal
         products (COM(90) final) (‘the explanatory memorandum’), the protection conferred by a SPC is largely intended to cover
         the cost of research leading to the discovery of new ‘products’, that term being used as a common denominator covering the
         three different types of patent which can confer entitlement to a SPC. Further, if the conditions laid down in Regulation
         No 469/are met, even a patent protecting the process by which a ‘product’ within the meaning of the regulation is obtained
         may, in accordance with Article of the regulation, enable a SPC to be granted and, in that case, in accordance with Article
         of the regulation and as stated at paragraph of the explanatory memorandum, the SPC confers the same rights as conferred
         by the basic patent as regards the process by which the product is obtained, and, if the law applicable to that patent so
         provides, the protection of the process by which the product is obtained will be extended to the product thus obtained (Case
         C‑322/Medeva [2011] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 32). 
      
As the referring court stated and as is apparent from the observations submitted to the Court, at present medicinal products
         placed on the market, in particular for complex diseases, often consist of combinations of active ingredients for multiple
         therapeutic uses which can be administered to patients in a single preparation. Similarly, vaccines are often developed, in
         particular having regard to the recommendations of the health authorities of the Member States, in the form of multivalent
         vaccines (Medeva, paragraph 33). 
      
If the holder of such a basic patent relating to an innovative active ingredient or an innovative combination of active ingredients
         were to be refused a SPC on the ground that, in the commercial version of the medicinal product which places that active ingredient
         or that combination on the market for the first time, the active ingredient or the combination coexists in the medicinal product
         alongside other active ingredients or combinations which have other therapeutic purposes and may or may not be protected by
         another basic patent in force, the fundamental objective of Regulation No 469/2009, which is to ensure sufficient protection
         to encourage pharmaceutical research and play a decisive role in the continuing improvement in public health, could be undermined
         (Medeva, paragraph 34). 
      
It is clear that such an outcome cannot be compatible with the fundamental objectives pursued by Regulation No 469/by
         the creation of a SPC for medicinal products (Medeva, paragraph 36). 
      
The requirement in Regulation No 469/that the ‘product’ must be covered, as a medicinal product, by a MA confirms that
         approach in that that requirement does not in itself rule out the possibility that the MA may cover other active ingredients
         contained in such a medicinal product. Moreover, in accordance with Article of Regulation No 469/2009, a SPC is intended
         to protect the ‘product’ covered by the MA, not the medicinal product as such (Medeva, paragraph 37). 
      
Furthermore, such a situation corresponds to that described at paragraphs and of the explanatory memorandum, in which
         the Commission of the European Communities stated, first, that the requirement that the product must have obtained a valid
         MA is met ‘if the proprietary medicinal product containing it has been granted the [MA] concerned’ and, second, that in such
         a situation, ‘where the product authorised consists of a combination of compound X and another active ingredient, only compound
         X will be protected by the certificate’ (Medeva, paragraph 38). 
      
In accordance with Article of Regulation No 469/2009, a SPC thus granted in connection with such a product confers, upon
         the expiry of the patent, the same rights as were conferred by the basic patent in relation to the product, within the limits
         of the protection conferred by the basic patent, as provided for in Article of the regulation. Accordingly, if, during the
         period in which the patent was valid, the patent holder could oppose, on the basis of his patent, all use or certain uses
         of his product in the form of a medicinal product consisting of such a product or containing it, the SPC granted in relation
         to that product would confer on the holder the same rights for all uses of the product, as a medicinal product, which were
         authorised before the expiry of the certificate (Medeva, paragraph 39). 
      
However, it should be added that, in such a situation, first, only the authorisation in respect of the first medicinal product
         placed on the European Union market comprising, among its active ingredients, the active ingredient which is the subject of
         the application may be regarded as the first MA for that ‘product’ as a medicinal product within the meaning of Article 3(d)
         of Regulation No 469/(Medeva, paragraph 40). 
      
Second, where a patent protects a product, in accordance with Article 3(c) of Regulation No 469/2009, only one certificate
         may be granted for that basic patent (see Biogen, paragraph 28, and Medeva, paragraph 41).
      
In view of the foregoing, the answer to the question referred is that Article 3(b) of Regulation No 469/must be interpreted
         as meaning that, provided the other requirements laid down in Article are also met, that provision does not preclude the
         competent industrial property office of a Member State from granting a SPC for an active ingredient specified in the wording
         of the claims of the basic patent relied on, where the medicinal product for which the MA is submitted in support of the SPC
         application contains not only that active ingredient but also other active ingredients.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable. 
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby rules:
Article 3(b) of Regulation (EC) No 469/of the European Parliament and of the Council of May concerning the supplementary
            protection certificate for medicinal products must be interpreted as meaning that, provided the other requirements laid down
            in Article are also met, that provision does not preclude the competent industrial property office of a Member State from
            granting a supplementary protection certificate for an active ingredient specified in the wording of the claims of the basic
            patent relied on, where the medicinal product for which the marketing authorisation is submitted in support of the supplementary
            protection certificate application contains not only that active ingredient but also other active ingredients.
[Signatures]
*  Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 