
Case C-446/Test Claimants in the FII Group Litigation
v
Commissioners of Inland Revenue
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the High Court of Justice of England and Wales, Chancery Division
(Freedom of establishment – Free movement of capital – Directive 90/435/EEC – Corporation tax – Payment of dividends – Prevention or mitigation of a series of charges to tax – Exemption – Dividends received from companies resident in another Member State or a non‑member country – Tax credit – Advance corporation tax – Equal treatment – Claim for repayment or claim for damages)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Free movement of capital – Tax legislation
(Arts EC and EC)
2.        Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Free movement of capital – Tax legislation
(Arts EC and EC)
3.        Free movement of capital – Restrictions – Tax legislation
(Art. EC)
4.        Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Free movement of capital – Tax legislation
(Arts EC and EC)
5.        Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Free movement of capital – Tax legislation 
(Arts EC and EC)
6.        Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Tax legislation
(Art. EC)
7.        Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Free movement of capital – Tax legislation
(Arts EC and EC)
8.        Free movement of capital – Restriction on capital movements to or from non-member countries 
(Arts EC and 57(1) EC)
9.        Community law – Rights conferred on individuals – Infringement by a Member State – Obligation to make good damage caused to
            individuals
10.      Community law – Rights conferred on individuals – Infringement by a Member State – Obligation to make good damage caused to
            individuals
1.        Articles EC and EC must be interpreted as meaning that, where a Member State has a system for preventing or mitigating
         the imposition of a series of charges to tax or economic double taxation as regards dividends paid to residents by resident
         companies, it must treat dividends paid to residents by non-resident companies in the same way.
      
(see para. 72, operative part 1)
2.        Articles EC and EC do not preclude legislation of a Member State which exempts from corporation tax dividends which
         a resident company receives from another resident company, when that State imposes corporation tax on dividends which a resident
         company receives from a non-resident company in which the resident company holds at least 10% of the voting rights, while
         at the same time granting a tax credit in the latter case for the tax actually paid by the company making the distribution
         in the Member State in which it is resident, provided that the rate of tax applied to foreign-sourced dividends is no higher
         than the rate of tax applied to nationally-sourced dividends and that the tax credit is at least equal to the amount paid
         in the Member State of the company making the distribution, up to the limit of the amount of the tax charged in the Member
         State of the company receiving the distribution. 
      
The mere fact that, compared with an exemption system, an imputation system imposes additional administrative burdens on taxpayers,
         with evidence being required as to the amount of tax actually paid in the State in which the company making the distribution
         is resident, cannot be regarded as a difference in treatment which is contrary to freedom of establishment or free movement
         of capital, since particular administrative burdens imposed on resident companies receiving foreign-sourced dividends are
         an intrinsic part of the operation of a tax credit system. 
      
(see paras 53, 60, 73, operative part 1)
3.        Article EC precludes legislation of a Member State which exempts from corporation tax dividends which a resident company
         receives from another resident company, where that State levies corporation tax on dividends which a resident company receives
         from a non-resident company in which it holds less than 10% of the voting rights, without granting the company receiving the
         dividends a tax credit for the tax actually paid by the company making the distribution in the State in which the latter is
         resident.
      
Such a difference in treatment constitutes a restriction on free movement of capital in that it has the effect of discouraging
         companies resident in the Member State concerned from investing their capital in companies established in another Member State.
         In addition, it also has a restrictive effect as regards companies established in other Member States in that it constitutes
         an obstacle to their raising of capital in the Member State concerned.
      
Irrespective of the fact that a Member State may, in any event, choose between a number of systems in order to prevent or
         mitigate the imposition of a series of charges to tax on distributed profits, the difficulties that may arise in determining
         the tax actually paid in another Member State cannot justify a restriction on the free movement of capital such as that which
         arises under the legislation at issue.
      
(see paras 64-65, 70, 74, operative part 1)
4.        Articles EC and EC preclude legislation of a Member State which allows a resident company receiving dividends from another
         resident company to deduct from the amount which the former company is liable to pay by way of advance corporation tax the
         amount of that tax paid by the latter company, whereas no such deduction is permitted in the case of a resident company receiving
         dividends from a non‑resident company as regards the corresponding tax on distributed profits paid by the latter company in
         the State in which it is resident.
      
That system leads, in practice, to a company receiving foreign-sourced dividends being less favourably treated than a company
         receiving nationally‑sourced dividends. On a subsequent payment of dividends, the former is obliged to account for advance
         corporation tax in full, whereas the latter has to pay the tax only to the extent to which the distribution paid to its own
         shareholders exceeds that which the company has itself received.
      
The fact of not having to pay advance corporation tax represents a cash‑flow advantage, in so far as the company concerned
         may retain the sums which it would otherwise have had to pay by way of advance corporation tax until corporation tax is payable.
      
Nor can such a difference in treatment be justified by the need to preserve the cohesion of the tax system in place in the
         Member State concerned on the basis of a direct link between the tax advantage made available, namely the tax credit granted
         to a resident company receiving dividends from another resident company, and the corresponding tax liability, namely the advance
         corporation tax paid by the latter when it makes the distribution. The need for such a direct link must in fact lead to the
         same tax advantage being granted to companies receiving dividends from non‑resident companies, since those companies are also
         obliged to pay corporation tax on distributed profits in the State in which they are resident. 
      
(see paras 84, 86, 93, 112, operative part 2)
5.        Articles EC and EC do not preclude legislation of a Member State which provides that any relief for tax paid abroad
         made available to a resident company which has received foreign‑sourced dividends is to reduce the amount of corporation tax
         against which that company may offset advance corporation tax when a subsequent distribution of dividends is made to its own
         shareholders. 
      
The fact that a company receiving foreign‑sourced dividends which is entitled to relief for foreign tax has to suffer a reduction
         as regards the amount of corporation tax against which surplus advance corporation tax may be offset will give rise to discrimination
         as between such a company and a company receiving nationally-sourced dividends only where the former company does not, in
         fact, have the same ability as the latter to offset the surplus advance corporation tax against the amount of corporation
         tax for which it is liable. 
      
(see paras 120, 125, 138, operative part 3)
6.        Article EC precludes legislation of a Member State which allows a resident company to surrender to resident subsidiaries
         the amount of advance corporation tax paid which cannot be offset against the liability of that company to corporation tax
         for the current accounting period or previous or subsequent accounting periods, so that those subsidiaries may offset it against
         their liability to corporation tax, but does not allow a resident company to surrender such an amount to non-resident subsidiaries
         where the latter are taxable in that Member State on the profits which they made there. 
      
(see para. 139, operative part 3)
7.        Articles EC and EC preclude legislation of a Member State which, while exempting from advance corporation tax resident
         companies paying dividends to their shareholders which have their origin in nationally-sourced dividends received by them,
         allows resident companies distributing dividends to their shareholders which have their origin in foreign-sourced dividends
         received by them to elect to be taxed under a regime which permits them to recover the advance corporation tax paid but, first,
         obliges those companies to pay that advance corporation tax and subsequently to claim repayment and, secondly, does not provide
         a tax credit for their shareholders, whereas those shareholders would have received such a tax credit in the case of a distribution
         made by a resident company which had its origin in nationally-sourced dividends.
      
While it is true that a Member State must be allowed some time to take into account, in determining the amount ultimately
         due by way of corporation tax, all of the taxes already levied on the profits distributed, this cannot justify legislation
         which refuses completely to allow a resident company receiving a payment of foreign-sourced dividends to offset the tax charged
         on profits distributed abroad against the amount due in respect of advance corporation tax, whereas, for nationally‑sourced
         dividends, that amount is automatically deducted from the tax paid, albeit only in advance, by a resident company making a
         distribution.
      
As regards the fact that shareholders of resident companies distributing foreign-sourced dividends are not entitled to a tax
         credit under such legislation, the risk of economic double taxation arises not only in the case of dividends paid by a resident
         company subject to an obligation to account for advance corporation tax on dividends distributed by it, but also in the case
         of dividends paid by a non-resident company, the profits of which are also subject to corporation tax in the State in which
         it is resident, at the rates and according to the rules applying there. 
      
(see paras 156, 158-159, 172-173, operative part 4)
8.        Article 57(1) EC is to be interpreted as meaning that where, before December 1993, a Member State has adopted legislation
         which contains restrictions on capital movements to or from non-member countries which are prohibited by Article EC and,
         after that date, adopts measures which, while also constituting a restriction on such movements, are essentially identical
         to the previous legislation or do no more than restrict or abolish an obstacle to the exercise of the Community rights and
         freedoms arising under that previous legislation, Article EC does not preclude the application of those measures to non-member
         countries when they apply to capital movements involving direct investment, including investment in real estate, establishment,
         the provision of financial services or the admission of securities to capital markets. Holdings in a company which are not
         acquired with a view to the establishment or maintenance of lasting and direct economic links between the shareholder and
         that company and do not allow the shareholder to participate effectively in the management of that company or in its control
         cannot, in this connection, be regarded as direct investments.
      
(see para. 196, operative part 5)
9.        In the absence of Community legislation, it is for the domestic legal system of each Member State to designate the courts
         and tribunals having jurisdiction and to lay down the detailed procedural rules governing actions for safeguarding rights
         which individuals derive from Community law, including the classification of claims brought by injured parties before the
         national courts and tribunals. Those courts and tribunals are, however, obliged to ensure that individuals should have an
         effective legal remedy enabling them to obtain reimbursement of the tax unlawfully levied on them and the amounts paid to
         that Member State or withheld by it directly against that tax. 
      
As regards other loss or damage which a person may have sustained by reason of a breach of Community law for which a Member
         State is liable, the latter is obligated to make reparation for the loss or damage caused to individuals in the conditions
         set out in the case‑law of the Court, namely that the rule of law infringed must be intended to confer rights on individuals,
         that the breach must be sufficiently serious, and that there must be a direct causal link between the breach of the obligation
         resting on the State and the loss or damage sustained by those affected, but that does not preclude the state from being liable
         under less restrictive conditions.
      
Subject to the right of reparation which flows directly from Community law where the conditions referred to in the case-law
         are satisfied, it is on the basis of the rules of national law on liability that the State must make reparation for the consequences
         of the loss and damage caused, provided that the conditions for reparation of loss and damage laid down by national law are
         not less favourable than those relating to similar domestic claims and are not so framed as to make it, in practice, impossible
         or excessively difficult to obtain reparation. 
      
(see paras 209, 219-220, operative part 6)
10.      In order to determine whether a breach of Community law is sufficiently serious, capable of rendering a Member State liable
         for harm caused to individuals it is necessary to take account of all the factors which characterise the situation brought
         before the national court. Those factors include, in particular, the clarity and precision of the rule infringed, whether
         the infringement and the damage caused were intentional or involuntary, whether any error of law was excusable or inexcusable,
         and the fact that the position taken by a Community institution may have contributed towards the adoption or maintenance of
         national measures or practices contrary to Community law.
      
On any view, a breach of Community law will clearly be sufficiently serious if it has persisted despite a judgment finding
         the infringement in question to be established, or a preliminary ruling or settled case-law of the Court on the matter from
         which it is clear that the conduct in question constituted an infringement.
      
In an area such as direct taxation the national court should assess the matters referred to above, in particular the clarity
         and precision of the rules infringed and whether any errors of law were excusable or inexcusable, in the light of the fact
         that the consequences arising from the freedoms of movement guaranteed by the Treaty have been only gradually made clear,
         in particular by the principles identified by the Court. 
      
(see paras 204, 213-215, 217)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
December (*)
      
(Freedom of establishment – Free movement of capital – Directive 90/435/EEC – Corporation tax – Payment of dividends – Prevention or mitigation of a series of charges to tax – Exemption – Dividends received from companies resident in another Member State or a non‑member country – Tax credit – Advance corporation tax – Equal treatment – Claim for repayment or claim for damages)
In Case C-446/04,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC by the High Court of Justice of England and Wales, Chancery Division
         (United Kingdom), made by decision of October 2004, received at the Court on October 2004, in the proceedings
      
Test Claimants in the FII Group Litigation
v
Commissioners of Inland Revenue,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Rosas, K. Lenaerts (Rapporteur), P. Kūris and E. Juhász,
         Presidents of Chambers, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, G. Arestis, A. Borg Barthet and M. Ilešič, Judges,
      
Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed,
Registrar: K. Sztranc, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on November 2005,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Test Claimants in the FII Group Litigation, by G. Aaronson QC, P. Farmer and D. Cavender, Barristers, instructed by S. Whitehead
         and M. Anderson, Solicitors,
      
–        the United Kingdom Government, represented initially by E. O’Neill and subsequently by C. Gibbs, acting as Agents, and by
         G. Barling QC, D. Ewart and S. Stevens, Barristers,
      
–        Ireland, by D. O’Hagan, acting as Agent, and by G. Clohessy BL and A. Collins SC,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by R. Lyal, acting as Agent,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on April 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles EC and EC, together with Articles 4(1)
         and of Council Directive 90/435/EEC of July on the common system of taxation applicable in the case of parent companies
         and subsidiaries of different Member States (OJ L 225, p. 6).
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between companies resident in the United Kingdom and the Commissioners of Inland
         Revenue concerning the tax treatment of dividends received from companies which are not resident in that Member State.
      
 Legal framework
 Community legislation
Article 4(1) of Directive 90/435, in its original version, provides:
      
‘Where a parent company, by virtue of its association with its subsidiary, receives distributed profits, the State of the
         parent company shall, except when the latter is liquidated, either:
      
–        refrain from taxing such profits, or
–        tax such profits while authorising the parent company to deduct from the amount of tax due that fraction of the corporation
         tax paid by the subsidiary which relates to those profits and, if appropriate, the amount of the withholding tax levied by
         the Member State in which the subsidiary is resident, pursuant to the derogations provided for in Article 5, up to the limit
         of the amount of the corresponding domestic tax.’
      
Pursuant to Article of that directive, the Member State of a parent company may not charge withholding tax on the profits
         which such a company receives from a subsidiary.
      
Article of Directive 90/states:
      
‘1.      The term “withholding tax” as used in this Directive shall not cover an advance payment or prepayment (précompte) of corporation tax to the Member State of the subsidiary which is made in connection with a distribution of profits to its
         parent company.
      
2.      This Directive shall not affect the application of domestic or agreement-based provisions designed to eliminate or lessen
         economic double taxation of dividends, in particular provisions relating to the payment of tax credits to the recipients of
         dividends.’
      
 National legislation
Under the tax legislation in force in the United Kingdom, the profits made during an accounting period by every company resident
         in that Member State, and by each company which is not resident there but which conducts trading activities through a branch
         or agency there, are subject to corporation tax in that State. 
      
From onwards, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland operated a system of taxation known as ‘partial
         imputation’, under which, in order to avoid economic double taxation when a resident company distributed profits, part of
         the corporation tax paid by that company was imputed to its shareholders. Until April 1999, the basis of that system was,
         on the one hand, advance payment of corporation tax by the company making the distribution, and, on the other hand, a tax
         credit granted to shareholders who had received a dividend. In addition, a United Kingdom-resident company was exempt from
         corporation tax on dividends received from another United Kingdom-resident company.
      
 Advance corporation tax
Under section of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act (‘ICTA’), in the version in force at the time of the facts in
         the main proceedings, a company resident in the United Kingdom which paid dividends to its shareholders was liable to pay
         advance corporation tax (‘ACT’), calculated by reference to the amount or value of the distribution made.
      
A company had the right to set the ACT paid in respect of a distribution made during a particular accounting period against
         the amount of mainstream corporation tax for which it was liable in respect of that accounting period, subject to certain
         restrictions. If the liability of a company for corporation tax was insufficient to allow the ACT to be set off in full, the
         surplus ACT could be carried back to a previous accounting period or carried forward to a later one, or surrendered to subsidiaries
         of that company, which could set it off against the amount for which they themselves were liable in respect of corporation
         tax. Surplus ACT could be surrendered only to United Kingdom-resident subsidiaries.
      
A group of companies in the United Kingdom could also elect to be taxed as a group, in which case companies belonging to that
         group could postpone payment of ACT until the parent company in the group made a distribution by way of dividend. That regime,
         which formed the subject-matter of the judgment in Joined Cases C-397/and C-410/Metallgesellschaft and Others [2001] ECR I‑1727, is not at issue in these proceedings.
      
 The case of resident shareholders receiving dividends from resident companies 
Under section of ICTA, where a United Kingdom-resident company received dividends from a company that was also resident
         in that Member State, it was not liable to corporation tax in respect of those dividends.
      
In addition, by virtue of section 231(1) of ICTA, every payment of dividends subject to ACT by a resident company to another
         resident company gave rise to a tax credit in favour of the latter company equal to the fraction of the ACT paid by the former
         company. In terms of section 238(1) of ICTA, the dividend received and the tax credit together constituted ‘franked investment
         income’ (‘FII’) in the hands of the company receiving the dividends.
      
A United Kingdom-resident company which received dividends from another resident company, the payment of which gave rise to
         entitlement to a tax credit, could recover the amount of ACT paid by the latter company and deduct it from the amount of ACT
         which it itself had to pay when making a distribution to its own shareholders, with the result that it was liable for ACT
         only on the excess.
      
Under Schedule F of ICTA, individual shareholders resident in the United Kingdom were liable to income tax on dividends received
         from a company resident in that Member State. Those shareholders were, nevertheless, entitled to a tax credit equal to the
         fraction of the ACT paid by that company. That tax credit could be deducted from the amount owed by that shareholder by way
         of income tax on the dividend or could be paid to that person in cash if the amount of the tax credit exceeded the amount
         of his tax liability.
      
 The case of resident shareholders receiving dividends from non-resident companies 
When a United Kingdom-resident company received dividends from a company resident outside the United Kingdom, it was liable
         to corporation tax on those dividends.
      
In such a case, the company receiving those dividends was not entitled to a tax credit and the dividends paid did not qualify
         as franked investment income. However, in terms of sections and of ICTA, it was entitled to relief for tax paid by
         the company making the distribution in the State in which the latter was resident. Such relief was granted either under the
         legislation in force in the United Kingdom or under a double taxation convention (‘DTC’) concluded by the United Kingdom with
         the other State.
      
Thus, the national legislation allowed withholding taxes paid on dividends from a non-resident company to be offset against
         the liability of a resident company receiving dividends to corporation tax. Where a resident company receiving dividends either
         directly or indirectly controlled, or was a subsidiary of, a company which directly or indirectly controlled 10% or more of
         the voting rights in the company making the distribution, the relief extended to the underlying foreign corporation tax on
         the profits out of which the dividends were paid. Relief on that foreign tax was available only on the amount due in the United
         Kingdom by way of corporation tax on the income concerned.
      
Similar provisions applied under the DTCs concluded by the United Kingdom.
      
When a resident company itself paid dividends to its own shareholders, it was liable to account for ACT.
      
As regards the ability to offset ACT paid on such a distribution against the amount for which the resident company was liable
         in respect of corporation tax, the fact that such a resident company received dividends from a non-resident company was liable
         to result in surplus ACT for two reasons.
      
First, as mentioned in paragraph of this judgment, the payment of dividends by a non-resident company did not give rise
         to a tax credit which could be deducted from the amount of ACT for which the resident company was liable when it paid dividends
         to its own shareholders.
      
Secondly, when a resident company was entitled to relief on foreign tax paid by that non-resident company abroad, the offsetting
         of that tax against the amount due by way of corporation tax reduced the amount that the resident company might deduct from
         the ACT for which it was liable.
      
 The FID regime
From July 1994, a resident company receiving dividends from a non‑resident company could elect that a dividend which it
         paid to its shareholders be treated as a ‘foreign income dividend’ (‘FID’). ACT was payable on the FID but, to the extent
         to which the FID matched the foreign dividends received, the resident company could claim repayment of the surplus ACT.
      
While ACT was payable within days of the end of the quarter in which the dividend was paid, surplus ACT was repayable when
         the resident company became liable for mainstream corporation tax, namely nine months after the end of the accounting period.
      
When a FID was paid to an individual shareholder, the latter ceased to be entitled to a tax credit, but was treated for income
         tax purposes as having received income which had borne tax at the lower rate. Tax‑exempt shareholders, such as United Kingdom
         pension funds which received a FID, were also not entitled to a tax credit.
      
For dividends paid after April 1999, the ACT system and the FID regime were abolished.
      
 The main proceedings and the questions referred for preliminary ruling
The main proceedings are part of a group litigation concerning franked investment income (‘Franked Investment Income Group
         Litigation’) consisting of a number of claims brought before the Chancery Division of the High Court of Justice of England
         and Wales by companies resident in the United Kingdom which hold shares in companies resident in another Member State or in
         a non-member country.
      
The cases selected by the national court as test cases for the purposes of the present reference concern claims brought by
         companies resident in the United Kingdom which form part of the British American Tobacco group (‘BAT’) (‘the claimants in
         the main proceedings’). The parent company in the group held, directly or indirectly, 100% of the capital of other companies
         which themselves held 100% of the capital of companies established in a number of Member States of the European Union and
         the European Economic Area, as well as in non-member countries.
      
The cases concern, first, dividends paid by those non-resident companies to the claimants in the main proceedings since the
         accounting period which ended on September and, according to the order for reference, at least until the date on which
         the order was made, secondly, dividends paid by the parent company of the BAT group to its shareholders from the same accounting
         period until March 1999, thirdly, payments of ACT by the claimants in the main proceedings from that accounting period
         until April and, fourthly, FIDs paid between September and September 1997.
      
The claimants in the main proceedings seek repayment of and/or compensation for losses arising from the application to them
         of the United Kingdom legislation, in particular with regard to:
      
–        corporation tax paid on foreign dividend receipts and for reliefs and tax credits applied against those liabilities which,
         were it not for the imposition of corporation tax, could have been used or carried forward to be used against other tax liabilities;
      
–        the ACT paid on distributions to their shareholders of foreign‑sourced dividends, to the extent to which the ACT remained
         surplus;
      
–        in the latter case, the loss of use of the money concerned between the date of payment of the ACT and the date on which ACT
         was set off against the mainstream corporation tax liability, and
      
–        as regards the payment of FIDs, the loss of use of the money paid as ACT between the date of payment of the ACT and the date
         of its repayment and the enhanced payments the claimants in the main proceedings had to make to their shareholders to compensate
         for the lack of any tax credit in their hands.
      
In those circumstances, the High Court of Justice of England and Wales, Chancery Division, decided to stay the proceedings
         and refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Is it contrary to Article or [Article] EC for a Member State to keep in force and apply measures which exempt from corporation
         tax dividends received by a company resident in that Member State (“the resident company”) from other resident companies and
         which subject dividends received by the resident company from companies resident in other Member States (“non‑resident companies”)
         to corporation tax (after giving double taxation relief for any withholding tax payable on the dividend and, under certain
         conditions, for the underlying tax paid by the non-resident companies on their profits in their country of residence)? 
      
2.      Where a Member State has a system which in certain circumstances imposes advance corporation tax … on the payment of dividends
         by a resident company to its shareholders and grants a tax credit to shareholders resident in that Member State in respect
         of those dividends, is it contrary to Article or [Article] EC or Article 4(1) or [Article] of [Directive 90/435] for
         the Member State to keep in force and apply measures which provide for the resident company to pay dividends to its shareholders
         without being liable to pay ACT to the extent that it has received dividends from companies resident in that Member State
         (either directly or indirect1y through other companies resident in that Member State) and do not provide for the resident
         company to pay dividends to its shareholders without being liable to pay ACT to the extent that it has received dividends
         from non-resident companies? 
      
3.      Is it contrary to the provisions of EC law referred to in Question above for the Member State to keep in force and apply
         measures which provide for the ACT liability to be set against the liability of the dividend-paying company, and that of other
         companies in the group resident in that Member State, to corporation tax in that Member State upon their profits: 
      
(a)      but which do not provide for any form of set-off of the ACT liability or some equivalent relief (such as the refund of ACT)
         in respect of profits earned, whether in that State or in other Member States, by companies in the group which are not residents
         in that Member State; and/or
      
(b)      which provide that any double tax relief which a company resident in that Member State enjoys reduces the liability to corporation
         tax against which the ACT liability can be set? 
      
4.      Where the Member State has measures which in certain circumstances provide for resident companies, if they so elect, to recover
         the ACT paid on distributions to their shareholders to the extent that distributions are received by the resident companies
         from non-resident companies (including for this purpose companies resident in third countries), is it contrary to Article
         [EC], [Article] EC or Article 4(1) or [Article] of [Directive 90/435] for those measures:
      
(a)      to oblige the resident companies to pay ACT and to reclaim it subsequently; and 
(b)      not to provide for the shareholders of the resident companies to receive a tax credit which they would have received on a
         dividend from a resident company which had not itself received dividends from non-resident companies? 
      
5.      Where, prior to December 1993, a Member State adopted the measures outlined in Questions and 2, and after that date it
         adopted the further measures outlined in Question 4, and if the latter measures constitute a restriction prohibited by Article
         [EC], is that restriction to be taken to be a new restriction not already existing on December 1993? 
      
6.      In the event of any of the measures set out in Questions to being in breach of any of the Community provisions referred
         to herein, then in circumstances where the resident company or other companies in the same group of companies make the following
         claims in respect of the relevant breaches: 
      
(i)      a claim for the repayment of corporation tax unlawfully levied in the circumstances to which Question relates; 
(ii)      a claim for the reinstatement (or compensation for the loss) of reliefs applied against the corporation tax unlawfully levied
         in the circumstances to which Question relates;
      
(iii) a claim for repayment of (or compensation for) ACT which could not be set off against the company’s corporation tax liability
         or otherwise relieved and which would not have been paid (or would have been relieved) but for the breach;
      
(iv)      a claim, where the ACT has been set off against corporation tax, for loss of use of money between the date of payment of the
         ACT and such set-off; 
      
(v)      a claim for repayment of corporation tax paid by the company or by another group company where any of those companies incurred
         a corporation tax liability by disclaiming other reliefs in order to allow its ACT liability to be set off against its corporation
         tax liability (the limits imposed on set-off of ACT resulting in a residual corporation tax liability); 
      
(vi)      a claim for loss of use of money due to corporation tax having been paid earlier than would otherwise have been the case or
         for reliefs subsequently lost in the circumstances set out in (v) above; 
      
(vii) a claim by the resident company for payment of (or compensation for) surplus ACT which that company has surrendered to another
         company in the group and which remained unrelieved when that other company was sold, demerged or went into liquidation; 
      
(viii) a claim, where ACT has been paid but subsequently reclaimed under the provisions described in Question 4, for loss of use
         of money between the date of payment of the ACT and the date on which it was reclaimed; 
      
(ix)      a claim for compensation where the resident company elected to reclaim the ACT under the arrangements described in Question
         and compensated its shareholders for the inability to receive a tax credit by increasing the amount of the dividend,
      
in respect of each of those claims set out above, is it to be regarded as: 
–        a claim for repayment of sums unduly levied which arise as a consequence of, and adjunct to, the breach of the abovementioned
         Community provisions; or 
      
–        a claim for compensation or damages such that the conditions set out in Joined Cases C-46/and C-48/Brasserie du Pêcheur and Factortame [[1996] ECR I-1029] must be satisfied; or 
      
–        a claim for payment of an amount representing a benefit unduly denied? 
7.      In the event that the answer to any part of Question is that the claim is a claim for payment of an amount representing
         a benefit unduly denied: 
      
(a)      is such a claim a consequence of, and an adjunct to, the right conferred by the abovementioned Community provisions; or 
(b)      must the conditions for recovery laid down in … Brasserie du Pêcheur and Factortame be satisfied; or 
      
(c)      must some other conditions be met? 
8.      Does it make any difference to the answers to Questions or whether as a matter of domestic law the claims referred to
         in Question are brought as restitutionary claims or are brought or have to be brought as claims for damages? 
      
9.      What guidance, if any, does the Court of Justice think it appropriate to provide in the present case as to which circumstances
         the national court ought to take into consideration when it comes to determine whether there is a sufficiently serious breach
         within the meaning of the judgment in … Brasserie du Pêcheur and Factortame, in particular as to whether, given the state of the case-law of the Court of Justice on the interpretation of the relevant
         Community provisions, the breach was excusable or as to whether in any particular case there is a sufficient causal link to
         constitute a “direct causal link” within the meaning of that judgment?’ 
      
The national court takes the view that it follows from Article 57(1) EC that, as regards non-member countries, a restriction
         on the free movement of capital that existed on December cannot be regarded as contrary to Article EC. As Questions
         to concern rules which existed prior to that date, the scope of those questions is confined to intra-European Community
         situations.  As Questions and relate to provisions introduced after that date, they relate, as regards the application
         of Article EC, both to intra-Community situations and situations involving non-member countries.
      
 The questions referred
 Question By Question 1, the national court essentially asks whether Articles EC and EC preclude legislation of a Member State
         which makes dividends received by a resident company from a company which is also resident in that State (‘nationally-sourced
         dividends’) exempt from corporation tax, when it imposes that tax on dividends received by a resident company from a company
         which is not resident in that State (‘foreign‑sourced dividends’), while granting relief in the latter case for all withholding
         tax levied in the State in which the company making the distribution is resident and, where the resident company receiving
         the dividends holds, directly or indirectly, 10% or more of the voting rights in the company making the distribution, relief
         against corporation tax paid by the company making the distribution on the profits underlying the dividends.
      
According to the claimants in the main proceedings, such national legislation is contrary to Articles EC and EC since,
         first, it is liable to discourage resident companies from establishing subsidiaries or investing in the capital of companies
         in other Member States and, secondly, it cannot be justified either by a difference between the situation of foreign‑sourced
         dividends and that of nationally-sourced dividends, or by the objective of ensuring the cohesion of the national tax system.
         
      
The first point to be made is that, according to well-established case‑law, although direct taxation falls within their competence,
         the Member States must none the less exercise that competence consistently with Community law (see, inter alia, Case C-35/Verkooijen [2000] ECR I‑4071, paragraph 32; Metallgesellschaft and Others, paragraph 37; and Case C-471/Keller Holding [2006] ECR I-2107, paragraph 28).
      
It should be pointed out in that regard that national legislation which makes the receipt of dividends by a resident company
         liable to tax, where not only the tax base but also the ability to deduct from that tax a tax paid in the State in which the
         company making the distribution is resident depends on whether the source of the dividends is national or otherwise and the
         extent of the holding which the company receiving the dividend has in the company paying it, may fall within both Article
         EC on freedom of establishment and Article EC on the free movement of capital.
      
The order for reference shows that the cases chosen as test cases in the proceedings before the national court concern United
         Kingdom-resident companies which received dividends from non-resident companies that are wholly owned by them. As the nature
         of the interest in question will confer on the holder definite influence over the company’s decisions and allow it to determine
         the company’s activities, the provisions of the EC Treaty on freedom of establishment will apply (Case C-251/Baars [2000] ECR I-2787, paragraphs and 22; Case C‑436/X and Y [2002] ECR I‑10829, paragraphs and to 68; and Case C‑196/Cadbury Schweppes and Cadbury Schweppes Overseas [2006] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 31).
      
As the Advocate General stated at point of his Opinion, the nature of the holdings of the other companies which are parties
         to the dispute has not been put before the Court. It may therefore be that the dispute also relates to the effect of the national
         legislation at issue in the main proceedings on the situation of resident companies which received dividends on the basis
         of a holding which does not give them definite influence over the decisions of the company making the distribution and does
         not allow them to determine its activities. That legislation must therefore also be considered in the light of the Treaty
         provisions on the free movement of capital.
      
 Freedom of establishment
As regards, in the first place, the situation of the claimants in the main proceedings, it should be pointed out that freedom
         of establishment, which Article EC grants to Community nationals and which includes the right to take up and pursue activities
         as self-employed persons and to set up and manage undertakings, under the conditions laid down for its own nationals by the
         law of the Member State where such establishment is effected, entails, in accordance with Article EC, for companies or
         firms formed in accordance with the law of a Member State and having their registered office, central administration or principal
         place of business within the European Community, the right to exercise their activity in the Member State concerned through
         a subsidiary, a branch or an agency (see, in particular, Case C-307/Saint-Gobain ZN [1999] ECR I-6161, paragraph 35; Case C-446/Marks & Spencer [2005] ECR I-10837, paragraph 30; and Cadbury Schweppes and Cadbury Schweppes Overseas, paragraph 41).
      
In the case of companies, it should be borne in mind that their registered office for the purposes of Article EC serves,
         in the same way as nationality in the case of individuals, as the connecting factor with the legal system of a State. Acceptance
         of the proposition that the Member State in which a company seeks to establish itself may freely apply different treatment
         merely by reason of its registered office being situated in another Member State would deprive Article EC of all meaning
         (see, to that effect, Case 270/Commission v France [1986] ECR 273, paragraph 18; Case C-330/Commerzbank [1993] ECR I‑4017, paragraph 13; Metallgesellschaft and Others, paragraph 42; and Marks & Spencer, paragraph 37). Freedom of establishment thus aims to guarantee the benefit of national treatment in the host Member State,
         by prohibiting any discrimination based on the place in which companies have their seat (see, to that effect, Commission v France, paragraph 14, and Saint‑Gobain ZN, paragraph 35).
      
In the case of the main proceedings, as regards a resident company receiving dividends from another company in which it holds,
         directly or indirectly, at least 10% of the voting rights, the national legislation at issue provides for a different tax
         treatment, according to whether the dividends received are paid by a company which is also resident in the United Kingdom
         or by a company which is resident in another Member State. In the former case, the dividends received are exempt from corporation
         tax, while in the latter they are subject to corporation tax but give rise to an entitlement to relief for all tax withheld
         on the payment of those dividends in the State in which the company making the distribution is resident and for corporation
         tax paid by that company on the underlying profits.
      
According to the claimants in the main proceedings, the fact that the relevant United Kingdom legislation applies, where dividends
         are paid to a resident company, an exemption system in the case of nationally‑sourced dividends and an imputation system in
         the case of foreign-sourced dividends, leads to the latter being less favourably treated for tax purposes than the former.
      
It must be pointed out, first of all, that a Member State which wishes to prevent or mitigate the imposition of a series of
         charges to tax on distributed profits may choose between a number of systems. In the case of shareholders receiving those
         dividends, those systems do not necessarily have the same result. Thus, under an exemption system, a shareholder who receives
         a dividend is not, in principle, liable to tax on the dividends received, irrespective of the rate of tax to which the underlying
         profits are subject to tax in the hands of the company making the distribution and the amount of that tax which that company
         has in fact paid. By contrast, under an imputation system, such as the system at issue in the main proceedings, a shareholder
         may offset tax due on the dividends paid only to the extent of the amount of tax which the company making the distribution
         has actually had to pay on the underlying profits, and that amount may be offset only up to the limit of the amount of tax
         for which the shareholder is liable.
      
As regard dividends paid to a parent company resident in a Member State by a company resident in another Member State in which
         that parent company holds a minimum of 25% of the capital, Article 4(1) of Directive 90/expressly leaves it open to Member
         States to choose between an exemption system and an imputation system. The directive provides that where such a parent company
         receives distributed profits from its subsidiary, the State of the parent company is, except when the latter is liquidated,
         either to refrain from taxing such profits or to tax them while authorising that company to deduct from the amount of tax
         due that fraction of the corporation tax paid by the subsidiary which relates to those profits and, if appropriate, the amount
         of the withholding tax levied by the Member State in which the subsidiary is resident, up to the limit of the amount of the
         corresponding domestic tax.
      
However, in structuring their tax system and, in particular, when they establish a mechanism for preventing or mitigating
         the imposition of a series of charges to tax or economic double taxation, Member States must comply with the requirements
         of Community law and especially those imposed by the Treaty provisions on free movement.
      
It is thus clear from case-law that, whatever the mechanism adopted for preventing or mitigating the imposition of a series
         of charges to tax or economic double taxation, the freedoms of movement guaranteed by the Treaty preclude a Member State from
         treating foreign-sourced dividends less favourably than nationally-sourced dividends, unless such a difference in treatment
         concerns situations which are not objectively comparable or is justified by overriding reasons in the general interest (see,
         to that effect, Case C‑315/Lenz [2004] ECR I‑7063, paragraphs to 49, and Case C‑319/Manninen [2004] ECR I‑7477, paragraphs to 55). Likewise, as regards the decisions which Directive 90/leaves in the hands of
         the Member States, the Court has pointed out that these may be exercised only in compliance with the fundamental provisions
         of the Treaty, in particular those relating to freedom of establishment (Keller Holding, paragraph 45).
      
As regards the question whether a Member State may operate an exemption system for nationally-sourced dividends when it applies
         an imputation system to foreign‑sourced dividends, it must be stated that it is for each Member State to organise, in compliance
         with Community law, its system for taxing distributed profits and, in particular, to define the tax base and the tax rate
         which apply to the company making the distribution and/or the shareholder receiving them, in so far as they are liable to
         tax in that Member State.
      
Thus, Community law does not, in principle, prohibit a Member State from avoiding the imposition of a series of charges to
         tax on dividends received by a resident company by applying rules which exempt those dividends from tax when they are paid
         by a resident company, while preventing, through an imputation system, those dividends from being liable to a series of charges
         to tax when they are paid by a non-resident company.
      
In order for the application of an imputation system to be compatible with Community law in such a situation, it is necessary,
         first of all, that the foreign-sourced dividends are not subject in that Member State to a higher rate of tax than the rate
         which applies to nationally‑sourced dividends.
      
Next, that Member State must prevent foreign-sourced dividends from being liable to a series of charges to tax, by offsetting
         the amount of tax paid by the non-resident company making the distribution against the amount of tax for which the recipient
         company is liable, up to the limit of the latter amount.
      
Thus, when the profits underlying foreign-sourced dividends are subject in the Member State of the company making the distribution
         to a lower level of tax than the tax levied in the Member State of the recipient company, the latter Member State must grant
         an overall tax credit corresponding to the tax paid by the company making the distribution in the Member State in which it
         is resident.
      
Where, conversely, those profits are subject in the Member State of the company making the distribution to a higher level
         of tax than the tax levied by the Member State of the company receiving them, the latter Member State is obliged to grant
         a tax credit only up to the limit of the amount of corporation tax for which the company receiving the dividends is liable.
         It is not required to repay the difference, that is to say, the amount paid in the Member State of the company making the
         distribution which is greater than the amount of tax payable in the Member State of the company receiving it.
      
Against that background, the mere fact that, compared with an exemption system, an imputation system imposes additional administrative
         burdens on taxpayers, with evidence being required as to the amount of tax actually paid in the State in which the company
         making the distribution is resident, cannot be regarded as a difference in treatment which is contrary to freedom of establishment,
         since particular administrative burdens imposed on resident companies receiving foreign-sourced dividends are an intrinsic
         part of the operation of a tax credit system.
      
The claimants in the main proceedings none the less point out that when, under the relevant United Kingdom legislation, a
         nationally‑sourced dividend is paid, it is exempt from corporation tax in the hands of the company receiving it, irrespective
         of the tax paid by the company making the distribution, that is to say, it is also exempt when, by reason of the reliefs available
         to it, the latter has no liability to  tax or pays corporation tax at a rate lower than that which normally applies in the
         United Kingdom.
      
That point is not contested by the United Kingdom Government, which argues, however, that the application to the company making
         the distribution and to the company receiving it of different levels of taxation occurs only in highly exceptional circumstances,
         which do not arise in the main proceedings.
      
In that respect, it is for the national court to determine whether the tax rates are indeed the same and whether different
         levels of taxation occur only in certain cases by reason of a change to the tax base as a result of certain exceptional reliefs.
      
It follows that, in the case of the national legislation at issue in the main proceedings, the fact that nationally-sourced
         dividends are subject to an exemption system and foreign-sourced dividends are subject to an imputation system does not contravene
         the principle of freedom of establishment laid down under Article EC, provided that the tax rate applied to foreign-sourced
         dividends is not higher than the rate applied to nationally-sourced dividends and that the tax credit is at least equal to
         the amount paid in the Member State of the company making the distribution, up to the limit of the tax charged in the Member
         State of the company receiving the dividends.
      
 Free movement of capital
With respect, in the second place, to dividends paid to resident companies by a company in which they hold 10% or more of
         the voting rights, without that holding conferring on them a definite influence over the decisions of that company or allowing
         them to determine its activities, it is clear that those companies are also subject in the United Kingdom, first, when they
         receive nationally-sourced dividends, to an exemption system and, secondly, when they receive foreign-sourced dividends, to
         an imputation system.
      
According to the claimants in the main proceedings, that situation gives rise to a difference in treatment which discourages
         United Kingdom‑resident companies from investing in the capital of companies resident in other Member States and constitutes,
         in the absence of any objective justification, an infringement of Article EC on the free movement of capital.
      
It is sufficient to state in that regard that, as was held in paragraphs to of this judgment, legislation such as that
         at issue in the main proceedings does not discriminate against companies receiving foreign‑sourced dividends. Accordingly,
         the conclusion arrived at in paragraph of this judgment also applies to the provisions of the Treaty relating to the free
         movement of capital.
      
As regards, lastly, resident companies which received dividends from companies in which they hold fewer than 10% of the voting
         rights, it is clear from the national legislation at issue in the main proceedings that nationally-sourced dividends are exempt
         from corporation tax, whilst foreign-sourced dividends are subject to that tax and are entitled to relief only as regards
         any withholding tax charged on those dividends in the State in which the company making the distribution is resident. 
      
In that regard, it must be held, first of all, that in the context of a tax rule which seeks to prevent or to mitigate the
         taxation of distributed profits, the situation of a shareholder company receiving foreign-sourced dividends is comparable
         to that of a shareholder company receiving nationally-sourced dividends in so far as, in each case, the profits made are,
         in principle, liable to be subject to a series of charges to tax.
      
While, in the case of a resident company receiving dividends from another resident company, the exemption system that applies
         eliminates the risk of the distributed profits being subject to a series of charges to tax, the same is not true for profits
         distributed by non-resident companies. If, in the latter case, the State in which the company receiving the distributed profits
         is resident grants relief on withholding tax levied in the State in which the company making the distribution is resident,
         such relief does no more than eliminate a double legal charge to tax in the hands of the company receiving those profits.
         Conversely, that relief does not extinguish the series of charges to tax which arises when distributed profits are subject
         to tax, first of all, in the form of corporation tax for which the company making the distribution is liable in the State
         in which it is resident and, subsequently, in the form of corporation tax for which the company receiving the distribution
         is liable.
      
Such a difference in treatment has the effect of discouraging United Kingdom-resident companies from investing their capital
         in companies established in another Member State. In addition, it also has a restrictive effect as regards companies established
         in other Member States in that it constitutes an obstacle to their raising of capital in the United Kingdom. In so far as
         income arising from foreign-sourced capital is treated less favourably from a tax point of view than dividends paid by companies
         established in the United Kingdom, shares in companies established in other Member States are less attractive to United Kingdom-resident
         investors than those of companies having their seat in that Member State (see Verkooijen, paragraphs and 35; Lenz, paragraphs and 21; and Manninen, paragraphs and 23).
      
It follows that the difference in treatment arising from legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings as regards
         dividends received by resident companies from non-resident companies in which they hold fewer than 10% of the voting rights
         constitutes a restriction on the free movement of capital which is, in principle, prohibited by Article EC.
      
According to the United Kingdom Government, it is legitimate and proportionate to restrict the availability of the corporation
         tax relief granted to resident companies to the amount of any withholding tax levied on the dividend. There are practical
         obstacles which preclude a company which has a less than 10% shareholding in the company making the distribution from benefiting
         from a tax credit corresponding to the tax actually paid by the latter. Unlike a tax credit for withholding tax, such a tax
         credit could be granted only after lengthy and complex checks had been carried out. It is therefore legitimate to set a threshold
         by reference to the size of the relevant shareholding. The threshold of 10% set by the United Kingdom is, moreover, more generous
         than that of 25% adopted by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Model Convention and, in its
         original version, by Directive 90/435.
      
It is true that, when introducing mechanisms designed to prevent or mitigate distributed profits being liable to a series
         of charges to tax, it is in principle for Member States to determine the category of taxpayers entitled to benefit from those
         mechanisms and, for that purpose, to set thresholds based on the shareholdings which taxpayers have in the companies making
         the distributions in question. It is only in the case of Member State companies having a minimum shareholding of 25% in a
         company of another Member State that Article of Directive 90/435, read in conjunction with Article 3, in the version in
         force at the time of the events in the main proceedings, requires Member States, if they do not exempt profits received by
         a resident parent company from a subsidiary resident in another Member State, to authorise the parent company to deduct from
         the amount of tax due not only the amount of the withholding tax levied by the Member State in which the subsidiary is resident,
         but also the fraction of the tax paid by the subsidiary which relates to those profits.
      
However, while, in the case of shareholdings to which Directive 90/does not apply, Article of that directive accordingly
         does not prevent a Member State from taxing profits paid by a non-resident company to a resident company, without granting
         any relief to the latter in respect of corporation tax paid by the former in the Member State in which it is resident, a Member
         State may exercise the power to do so only to the extent to which, under its national law, dividends which a resident company
         receives from another resident company are also subject to tax in the hands of the company receiving the dividends, without
         the latter being entitled to relief for the corporation tax paid by the company making the distribution.
      
The mere fact that it is for a Member State to determine for such holdings whether, and to what extent, the imposition of
         a series of charges to tax on distributed profits is to be avoided does not of itself mean that it may operate a system under
         which foreign-sourced dividends and nationally-sourced dividends are not treated in the same way.
      
Furthermore, irrespective of the fact that a Member State may, in any event, choose between a number of systems in order to
         prevent or mitigate the imposition of a series of charges to tax on distributed profits, the difficulties that may arise in
         determining the tax actually paid in another Member State cannot justify a restriction on the free movement of capital such
         as that which arises under the legislation at issue in the main proceedings (see, to that effect, Case C‑334/Commission v France [2004] ECR I‑2229, paragraph 29, and Manninen, paragraph 54).
      
It follows that tax legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings is contrary to the principle of the free movement
         of capital laid down under Article EC.
      
The answer to Question must therefore be that Articles EC and EC must be interpreted as meaning that, where a Member
         State has a system for preventing or mitigating the imposition of a series of charges to tax or economic double taxation as
         regards dividends paid to residents by resident companies, it must treat dividends paid to residents by non-resident companies
         in the same way.
      
Articles EC and EC do not preclude legislation of a Member State which exempts from corporation tax dividends which
         a resident company receives from another resident company, when that State imposes corporation tax on dividends which a resident
         company receives from a non-resident company in which the resident company holds at least 10% of the voting rights, while
         at the same time granting a tax credit in the latter case for the tax actually paid by the company making the distribution
         in the Member State in which it is resident, provided that the rate of tax applied to foreign-sourced dividends is no higher
         than the rate of tax applied to nationally-sourced dividends and that the tax credit is at least equal to the amount paid
         in the Member State of the company making the distribution, up to the limit of the amount of the tax charged in the Member
         State of the company receiving the distribution.
      
Article EC precludes legislation of a Member State which exempts from corporation tax dividends which a resident company
         receives from another resident company, where that State levies corporation tax on dividends which a resident company receives
         from a non-resident company in which it holds less than 10% of the voting rights, without granting the company receiving the
         dividends a tax credit for the tax actually paid by the company making the distribution in the State in which the latter is
         resident.
      
 Question By Question 2, the national court essentially asks whether Articles EC and EC, and/or Articles 4(1) and of Directive
         90/must be interpreted as meaning that they preclude national legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings
         which, in granting a tax credit to a resident company receiving dividends from another resident company by reference to the
         ACT paid by the latter in respect of the distribution, allows the former company to pay dividends to its own shareholders
         without being obliged to account for the ACT, whereas a resident company which has received dividends from a non-resident
         company must, in a similar case, pay the ACT in full.
      
It should be noted at the outset that, with regard to distributions of profits received by companies of one Member State from
         subsidiaries resident in other Member States, Directive 90/applies, in accordance with Article 3(1) of the version applying
         at the time of the events in the main proceedings, to parent companies having a minimum holding of 25% in the capital of their
         subsidiaries. As has been noted in paragraph of this judgment, since the order for reference gives no details of the nature
         of the holdings of other companies that are parties to the dispute before the national court, it may be that the dispute also
         involves holdings which do not, on that basis, fall within the material scope of that directive.
      
Furthermore, in so far as the test cases in the main proceedings concern payments of dividends going back to the accounting
         period ending on January 1973, they involve, at least in part, situations which do not come within the temporal scope of
         Directive 90/435.
      
In order to answer the question referred, it is therefore necessary to consider first of all to what extent legislation such
         as that at issue in the main proceedings is compatible with the provisions of the Treaty.
      
 The provisions of the Treaty relating to freedom of establishment and the free movement of capital 
Under the national legislation at issue in the main proceedings, a resident company receiving dividends paid by another resident
         company is entitled to a tax credit equal to the fraction of the amount of ACT paid by the latter company, with the result
         that when the former pays dividends to its own shareholders it may offset the ACT already paid by the latter company against
         the ACT due on that distribution. By contrast, a resident company receiving foreign-sourced dividends is not entitled to such
         a tax credit and must, on making a distribution to its own shareholders, accordingly account for ACT in full.
      
Since that legislation applies to payments of dividends to shareholder companies irrespective of the size of their holding,
         it is capable of coming under both Article EC on the freedom of establishment and Article EC on the free movement of
         capital.
      
However, to the extent to which the holdings in question confer on their owner a definite influence over the decisions of
         the companies concerned and allow it to determine their activities, it is the provisions of the Treaty relating to freedom
         of establishment which apply. The facts of the test cases in the main proceedings indicate that consideration of the national
         legislation at issue in the main proceedings should be approached first from the point of view of Article EC (see paragraph
         of this judgment).
      
As the claimants in the main proceedings contend, the effect of legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings
         is that a resident company which has received foreign-sourced dividends and pays dividends of the same amount to its own shareholders
         must pay ACT in full, whereas a resident company which has received nationally-sourced dividends and pays dividends to its
         own shareholders of the same amount as the dividends received has the benefit of the tax credit granted and is thus no longer
         obliged to pay ACT.
      
In the case of a resident company receiving dividends from another resident company, that system ensures that when the company
         receiving the dividends in turn distributes profits to its own shareholders, ACT is paid only once. The exemption from ACT
         which is thus granted to that company is the same as that to which it is entitled, as regards corporation tax, in respect
         of dividends received from another resident company.
      
It must be held that the fact of not having to pay ACT represents a cash‑flow advantage, in so far as the company concerned
         may retain the sums which it would otherwise have had to pay by way of ACT until corporation tax is payable (Metallgesellschaft and Others, paragraph 44).
      
According to the United Kingdom Government, that difference in treatment does not constitute discrimination prohibited by
         Community law, since it is not based on a distinction between nationally-sourced dividends and foreign-sourced dividends,
         but between dividends on which ACT has been paid and those on which no ACT has been paid. The tax credit granted to a resident
         company receiving dividends from another resident company is designed to prevent economic double taxation in the field of
         ACT. Since, in the case of a company receiving dividends from a non‑resident company, no ACT has been paid by the latter,
         there is no risk of economic double taxation as regards ACT.
      
While it is true that under the national legislation at issue in the main proceedings the amount of ACT which a resident company
         must pay on a distribution by way of dividend to its own shareholders depends on whether that company has, or has not, received
         dividends from a company which has already paid ACT, the fact remains that that system leads, in practice, to a company receiving
         foreign-sourced dividends being less favourably treated than a company receiving nationally‑sourced dividends. On a subsequent
         payment of dividends, the former is obliged to account for ACT in full, whereas the latter has to pay ACT only to the extent
         to which the distribution paid to its own shareholders exceeds that which the company has itself received.
      
Contrary to what the United Kingdom Government contends, a company receiving foreign-sourced dividends is, seen in the light
         of the objective of preventing the imposition of a series of charges to tax which the legislation at issue in the main proceedings
         seeks to avoid, in a comparable situation to that of a company receiving nationally‑sourced dividends, even though only the
         latter receives dividends on which ACT has been paid.
      
As the Advocate General states in points to of his Opinion, the ACT payable by a United Kingdom-resident company is
         nothing more than a payment of corporation tax in advance, even though it is levied in advance when dividends are paid and
         calculated by reference to the amount of those dividends. The ACT which is paid on a distribution by way of dividend may,
         in principle, be set off against the corporation tax which a company must pay on its profits for the corresponding accounting
         period. Likewise, as the Court held when it ruled on the group income scheme established under the same tax legislation which
         was in force in the United Kingdom, the proportion of corporation tax which a resident company need not pay in advance under
         such a scheme when paying dividends to its parent company is, in principle, paid when the liability of the first company to
         corporation tax falls due (see Metallgesellschaft and Others, paragraph 53).
      
In the case of companies which, because their seat is outside the United Kingdom, are not obliged to pay ACT when they pay
         dividends to a resident company, it is clear that they are also liable to corporation tax in the State in which they are resident.
      
That being the case, the fact that a non-resident company has not been required to pay ACT when paying dividends to a resident
         company cannot be relied on in order to refuse that company the opportunity to reduce the amount of ACT which it is obliged
         to pay on a subsequent distribution by way of dividend. The reason why such a non-resident company is not liable to ACT is
         that it is subject to corporation tax, not in the United Kingdom, but in the State in which it is resident. A company cannot
         be required to pay in advance a tax to which it will never be liable (see, to that effect, Metallgesellschaft and Others, paragraphs and 56). 
      
Since both resident companies distributing dividends to other resident companies and non-resident companies making such a
         distribution are subject, in the State in which they are resident, to corporation tax, a national measure which is designed
         to avoid a series of charges to tax on distributed profits only as regards companies receiving dividends from other resident
         companies, while exposing companies receiving dividends from non-resident companies to a cash-flow disadvantage, cannot be
         justified by a relevant difference in the situation of those companies.
      
It cannot be contended, as the United Kingdom Government maintains, that such unequal treatment does not, in fact, exist inasmuch
         as a company resident outside the United Kingdom which has made a distribution by way of dividend without having had to account
         for ACT is in a position to distribute larger amounts to its shareholders. That argument disregards the fact that such a company
         is also subject, in the State in which it is resident, to corporation tax in accordance with the rules and at the rates which
         are applicable there.
      
Nor can the difference in treatment be justified by the need to preserve the cohesion of the tax system in place in the United
         Kingdom on the basis of a direct link between the tax advantage made available, namely the tax credit granted to a resident
         company receiving dividends from another resident company, and the corresponding tax liability, namely the ACT paid by the
         latter when it makes the distribution. The need for such a direct link must in fact lead to the same tax advantage being granted
         to companies receiving dividends from non‑resident companies, since those companies are also obliged to pay corporation tax
         on distributed profits in the State in which they are resident.
      
It follows that Article EC precludes a national measure which allows a resident company which has received dividends from
         another resident company to deduct the amount of ACT paid by the latter company from the amount of ACT for which the former
         company is liable, whereas a resident company which has received dividends from a non-resident company is not entitled to
         make such a deduction in respect of the corporation tax which the lastmentioned company is obliged to pay in the State in
         which it is resident.
      
Since it is possible that the dispute before the national court also concerns resident companies which received dividends
         in respect of a holding which does not confer on them a definite influence over the decisions of the company making the distribution
         and does not allow them to determine its activities, that measure must also be considered in the light of Article EC on
         the free movement of capital.
      
It should be noted in that regard that resident companies receiving foreign-sourced dividends are treated differently, inasmuch
         as they suffer a cash-flow disadvantage which is not justified by a relevant difference in their situation.
      
Such a difference in treatment has the effect of discouraging United Kingdom-resident companies from investing their capital
         in a company established in another Member State and also has a restrictive effect as regards companies established in other
         Member States in that it constitutes an obstacle on their part to the raising of capital in the United Kingdom.
      
As the grounds relied on by the United Kingdom Government in order to justify that impediment to the free movement of capital
         are the same as those which have already been rejected in the examination of the national measure at issue in the main proceedings
         from the point of view of freedom of establishment, it must be held that Article EC is to be interpreted as meaning that
         it also precludes such a measure.
      
 Directive 90/According to the claimants in the main proceedings, the national tax rules referred to in Question of the reference also
         contravene Articles 4(1) and of Directive 90/435.
      
First, they submit, there is a breach of Article 4(1) of the directive in that, unlike a resident parent company receiving
         nationally-sourced dividends, a resident parent company receiving foreign-sourced dividends is obliged, when it makes a distribution
         to its own shareholders, to pay ACT in full and is not entitled to any relief in that respect as regards foreign corporation
         tax paid by the subsidiary on the distributed profits.
      
Secondly, the ACT payable on foreign-sourced dividends constitutes a withholding tax prohibited by Article of Directive
         90/435, and is also not permitted under Article of that directive.
      
It should be noted in that regard that, by virtue of Article 4(1) of Directive 90/435, a Member State which does not exempt
         profits received  by a resident parent company from a subsidiary which is resident in another Member State must authorise
         that parent company to deduct from the amount of tax due the fraction of the tax paid by the subsidiary which relates to those
         profits and, if appropriate, the amount of the withholding tax levied by the Member State in which the subsidiary is resident,
         up to the limit of the amount of the corresponding domestic tax.
      
As appears particularly from the third recital in its preamble, the aim of that directive is, by the introduction of a common
         system of taxation, to eliminate any disadvantage to cooperation between companies of different Member States as compared
         with cooperation between companies of the same Member State and thereby to facilitate the grouping together of companies at
         Community level (Joined Cases C‑283/94, C-291/and C-292/Denkavit and Others [1996] ECR I‑5063, paragraph 22, and Case C-294/Athinaïki Zithopiïa [2001] ECR I‑6797, paragraph 25).
      
As regards the obligation imposed on Member States under Article 4(1) of Directive 90/to offset the tax accounted for
         by a non-resident subsidiary in the Member State in which it is resident against the tax payable by a resident parent company
         on distributed profits, the object of that provision, which is to prevent the imposition of a series of charges to tax on
         distributed profits, can be attained only if the tax system of the first Member State guarantees to the parent company concerned
         that the tax paid abroad by its foreign subsidiary on its distributed profits will be offset in full against the amount due
         by way of corporation tax in that Member State.
      
However, contrary to what the claimants in the main proceedings contend, that provision does not oblige a Member State having
         a system of advance payment of corporation tax, which is payable by a resident parent company when it in turn pays dividends
         received from a non‑resident subsidiary, to ensure that the amount payable in advance is, in every case, to be determined
         by reference to the corporation tax paid by the subsidiary in the State in which it is resident.
      
It should also be stated that, contrary to what the claimants in the main proceedings contend, the national measures at issue
         are not within the scope of the prohibition imposed by Article of Directive 90/on Member States charging any form of
         withholding tax on the profits which a resident parent company receives from its non-resident subsidiary.
      
In that regard, it must be pointed out that, for the purposes of that directive, the expression ‘withholding tax’ is not restricted
         to certain specific types of national taxes and that the categorisation of a tax, duty or charge must be determined by the
         Court, under Community law, according to the objective characteristics by which it is levied, irrespective of its classification
         under national law (see, inter alia, Athinaïki Zythopoiïa, paragraphs and 27, and Case C-58/Océ Van der Grinten [2003] ECR I‑9809, paragraph 46).
      
As regards the prohibition laid down by Article of Directive 90/on Member States levying a withholding tax on profits
         distributed by a resident subsidiary to its parent company, when that parent company is resident in another Member State,
         the Court has already held that any tax on income received in the State in which dividends are distributed is a withholding
         tax on distributed profits where the chargeable event for the tax is the payment of dividends or of any other income from
         shares, the taxable amount is the income from those shares and the taxable person is the holder of the shares (Case C-375/Epson Europe [2000] ECR I-4243, paragraph 23; Athinaïki Zithopiïa, paragraphs and 29; and Océ Van der Grinten, paragraph 47).
      
The expression ‘withholding tax’ must be given a similar interpretation for the purposes of Article of Directive 90/435.
         There is thus a ‘withholding tax’ for the purposes of that article in the case of every tax on income received by a parent
         company from a subsidiary established in another Member State, the chargeable event being the payment of dividends or of any
         other income from shares, where the taxable amount is the income from those shares and the taxable person is the holder of
         those shares.
      
As the United Kingdom Government points out, a resident company is obliged to account for ACT when it pays dividends to its
         own shareholders. The chargeable event for the ACT which a company receiving foreign-sourced dividends must pay is therefore
         not the receipt of those dividends but the payment of those dividends to its own shareholders.
      
It follows that the ACT which a company receiving foreign-sourced dividends must pay on a subsequent distribution by way of
         dividend is not within the scope of the prohibition on levying withholding tax laid down under Article of Directive 90/435.
      
The answer to Question must therefore be that Articles EC and EC preclude legislation of a Member State which allows
         a resident company receiving dividends from another resident company to deduct from the amount which the former company is
         liable to pay by way of advance corporation tax the amount of that tax paid by the latter company, whereas no such deduction
         is permitted in the case of a resident company receiving dividends from a non-resident company as regards the corresponding
         tax on distributed profits paid by the latter company in the State in which it is resident.
      
 Question By Question 3, the national court essentially asks whether Articles EC and EC and/or Articles 4(1) and of Directive
         90/must be interpreted as meaning that they preclude legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings: 
      
–        which provides that any relief made available to a resident company which has received foreign-sourced dividends in respect
         of tax paid abroad is to reduce the amount of corporation tax against which it may offset the ACT which is due, and
      
–        which does not allow a resident company to surrender the amount of ACT paid which cannot be set off against the corporation
         tax due for the current accounting period or for previous or subsequent accounting periods to non-resident subsidiaries in
         order that they may offset it against the corporation tax for which they are liable.
      
The question sets out a number of difficulties faced by a resident company with non-resident subsidiaries and/or receiving
         foreign-sourced dividends as regards the setting off against the amount of corporation tax for which it is liable of the amount
         of ACT for which that resident company is obliged to account when it pays dividends to its own shareholders.
      
With respect to the second part of the question, it should be observed at the outset that the arguments presented to the Court
         were limited to the inability of a resident company to surrender surplus ACT to non‑resident subsidiaries in order for them
         to set it off against the corporation tax for which they are liable in the United Kingdom in respect of activities carried
         on in that Member State.
      
For the reasons set out in paragraphs to of this judgment, in order to answer the question, it is necessary first to
         consider whether the legislation at issue in the main proceedings contravenes the provisions of the Treaty.
      
It must be held that the national measures which form the subject-matter of Question are capable of falling within the scope
         of both Article EC on freedom of establishment and Article EC on the free movement of capital. As regards the reliefs
         made available to a resident company which has received foreign-sourced dividends in respect of foreign tax paid, consideration
         of the national legislation at issue in the main proceedings in the context of the answer to Question has shown that the
         reliefs available vary according to the extent of the holdings of those companies.
      
As regards the second aspect of the national legislation at issue referred to in Question 3, since it concerns only groups
         of companies, it falls within the scope of Article EC rather than that of Article EC.
      
According to the claimants in the main proceedings, the legislation at issue contravenes Articles EC and EC inasmuch
         as it restricts the ability of a company having foreign income and/or belonging to a group which includes non‑resident companies,
         to obtain relief on surplus ACT in respect of the amount of corporation tax for which it is liable in the United Kingdom.
         That legislation gives rise to manifest differences of treatment in terms of offsetting and surrendering ACT, to the detriment
         of resident companies receiving foreign‑sourced dividends and/or having non-resident subsidiaries. Those differences are neither
         appropriate nor necessary as regards the objective of avoiding the economic double taxation of dividends which have been the
         subject of distribution.
      
It must be held that any relief for corporation tax owed by a resident company receiving foreign-sourced dividends in respect
         of foreign tax – whether that tax is a withholding tax levied on those dividends in advance or corporation tax paid by the
         non-resident company on the underlying profits – necessarily reduces the amount for which the resident company is liable in
         respect of corporation tax against which that resident company may offset the ACT paid on a subsequent distribution by way
         of dividend to its own shareholders.
      
With respect to the ACT which a company receiving dividends from a non-resident company is required to pay on making a distribution
         to its own shareholders, it is clear from the foregoing that, on any basis, Articles EC and EC preclude any discrimination
         as between companies receiving nationally‑sourced dividends and those receiving foreign-sourced dividends at the time when
         ACT is levied (see paragraph of this judgment).
      
It is true that the possibility remains that, even if there were no such discrimination, a company receiving large foreign-sourced
         dividends may have to pay an amount of ACT which exceeds its liability to corporation tax and which may thus give rise to
         surplus ACT. However, such a situation would be the direct result of the application of a national rule which is intended
         to prevent or to mitigate the taxation of profits distributed in the form of dividends.
      
In the case of a mechanism adopted in order to prevent or to mitigate the imposition of a series of charges to tax on distributed
         profits, such a rule cannot be regarded as contrary to the Treaty provisions relating to the freedoms of movement unless it
         treats dividends from foreign companies less favourably than those paid by resident companies, where the situations are objectively
         comparable and a difference in treatment is not justified by overriding reasons in the general interest.
      
The documents before the Court do not show that the mere fact that, for companies receiving foreign-sourced dividends, the
         relief granted in respect of tax paid abroad goes to reduce the amount of corporation tax due in the United Kingdom constitutes
         less favourable treatment of those dividends compared with nationally-sourced dividends. As the United Kingdom Government
         contends, such surplus ACT may also arise in the case of a company receiving nationally-sourced dividends on each occasion
         when the amount of ACT it has paid is greater than its liability to corporation tax, in particular when such a company is
         entitled to exemptions or relief which result in its liability to corporation tax being reduced.
      
The fact that a company receiving foreign‑sourced dividends which is entitled to relief for foreign tax has to suffer a reduction
         as regards the amount of corporation tax against which surplus ACT may be offset will give rise to discrimination as between
         such a company and a company receiving nationally-sourced dividends only where the former company does not, in fact, have
         the same ability as the latter to offset the surplus ACT against the amount of corporation tax for which it is liable.
      
The description by the national court of the legislation at issue in the main proceedings does not show in this regard that
         a resident company receiving foreign-sourced dividends is treated differently from a company receiving nationally-sourced
         dividends.
      
It follows that the provisions of the Treaty relating to freedom of establishment do not preclude a national measure which
         provides that any relief in respect of tax paid abroad given to a resident company which has received foreign‑sourced dividends
         will reduce the amount of corporation tax against which it may offset ACT.
      
Since such a measure does not discriminate against companies receiving foreign-sourced dividends, the conclusion reached in
         the preceding paragraph also applies to the provisions of the Treaty relating to the free movement of capital.
      
As regards the second aspect of the national legislation referred to in Question 3, it must be noted that, as the national
         court points out, if a resident company may surrender the amount of ACT which it has not been able to offset against the amount
         of corporation tax due for the current accounting period or for previous or subsequent accounting periods to its resident
         subsidiaries, which may then offset it against the amount of corporation tax for which they are liable, it is, by contrast,
         not open to such a company to surrender such surplus ACT to non‑resident companies in the same group in order to enable them
         to offset it against the corporation tax for which they are liable in the United Kingdom.
      
According to the United Kingdom Government, a resident company cannot rely on the fact that its non-resident subsidiaries
         may not offset the surplus ACT against corporation tax for which they are liable, since that resident company is not itself
         disadvantaged as a result.
      
It must, however, be held that the provisions relating to freedom of establishment preclude a Member State from hindering
         the establishment in another Member State of one of its nationals or of a company incorporated under its legislation (see,
         inter alia, Case C‑264/ICI [1998] ECR I‑4695, paragraph 21; Marks & Spencer, paragraph 31; and Cadbury Schweppes and Cadbury Schweppes Overseas, paragraph 42).
      
The possibility under the national legislation at issue for a group of companies to surrender a particular amount of tax which
         a group company cannot offset against the corporation tax for which it is liable in the United Kingdom to another group company
         so that the latter may offset that amount against its liability to corporation tax in that Member State, constitutes a tax
         advantage for the companies concerned. The fact that non-resident companies in the group are not entitled to the same advantage
         is liable to hinder the exercise by those resident group companies of their freedom of establishment, by discouraging them
         from creating subsidiaries in other Member States (see, to that effect, as regards group relief for losses suffered by non-resident
         subsidiaries, Marks & Spencer, paragraphs and 33).
      
As the claimants in the main proceedings and the Commission of the European Communities contend, the fact that a resident
         company may not surrender surplus ACT to non‑resident subsidiaries which are liable to corporation tax in the United Kingdom
         thus constitutes a restriction on freedom of establishment. Neither the order for reference nor the observations of the United
         Kingdom Government disclose any legitimate objective which is compatible with the Treaty and which could justify such a restriction.
      
It follows from the above that Article EC precludes a national measure which does not allow a resident company to surrender
         surplus ACT to its non-resident subsidiaries, even though the latter are liable to corporation tax in the Member State concerned.
      
Lastly, the claimants in the main proceedings maintain that, in so far as those provisions of the national legislation lead
         to a resident parent company incurring a liability to pay surplus ACT, they are also contrary to Articles 4(1) and of Directive
         90/435.
      
As was held in paragraphs to of this judgment, the relevant aspects of the national legislation at issue in the main
         proceedings do not fall within the scope of Article of that directive.
      
As regards Article 4(1) of Directive 90/435, it is sufficient to hold that, while that provision obliges a Member State to
         guarantee to a parent company receiving dividends from a subsidiary established in another Member State that the foreign tax
         paid by its subsidiary on distributed profits will be offset in full against the amount of corporation tax for which the parent
         company is liable in the first Member State (see paragraph of this judgment), it does not impose any obligation on that
         State to ensure in such a case that the relief granted to that parent company in respect of the foreign tax will not reduce
         the amount against which it may offset the fraction of the advance corporation tax paid on a distribution by way of dividend
         to its own shareholders, or to allow that parent company to surrender the amount of that advance corporation tax paid which
         it cannot set off against its liability to tax to non-resident subsidiaries liable to corporation tax in that State.
      
The answer to Question must therefore be that Articles EC and EC do not preclude legislation of a Member State which
         provides that any relief for tax paid abroad made available to a resident company which has received foreign‑sourced dividends
         is to reduce the amount of corporation tax against which that company may offset advance corporation tax.
      
Article EC precludes legislation of a Member State which allows a resident company to surrender to resident subsidiaries
         the amount of advance corporation tax paid which cannot be offset against the liability of that company to corporation tax
         for the current accounting period or previous or subsequent accounting periods, so that those subsidiaries may offset it against
         their liability to corporation tax, but does not allow a resident company to surrender such an amount to non-resident subsidiaries
         where the latter are taxable in that Member State on the profits which they made there.
      
 Question By Question 4, the national court essentially asks whether Articles EC and EC, together with Articles 4(1) and of
         Directive 90/435, preclude national legislation, such as the legislation at issue in the main proceedings, which, while allowing
         resident companies receiving foreign-sourced dividends to elect to recover ACT accounted for on a subsequent distribution
         to their own shareholders, first, obliges those companies to pay the ACT and to reclaim it subsequently and, secondly, does
         not provide any tax credit to their shareholders, whereas those shareholders would have received such a tax credit if the
         resident companies had made a distribution based on nationally-sourced dividends.
      
The application of the provisions of Directive 90/to the issue raised by the national court can be excluded at the outset.
         First, as was stated at paragraph of this judgment, Article 4(1) of the directive does not lay down rules as to the way
         in which a liability to pay advance corporation tax may be imposed. In providing rules designed to prevent the imposition
         of a series of charges to tax on profits distributed to a resident parent company by a non-resident subsidiary, that provision
         does not apply where the shareholders concerned are individuals. Secondly, it must be recalled that ACT is not a withholding
         tax for the purposes of Article of the directive (see paragraph of this judgment).
      
As regards the Treaty provisions relating to the freedoms of movement, since the legislation at issue applies to payments
         of dividends to resident companies irrespective of the size of their holding, it is capable of coming within the scope of
         both Article EC on freedom of establishment and Article EC on the free movement of capital.
      
Having regard to the facts in the main proceedings (see paragraph of this judgment), the legislation at issue in those
         proceedings should be considered in the first place from the perspective of Article EC.
      
As the Advocate General stated at point of his Opinion, the national court is, by that question, asking the Court to rule
         on the lawfulness of the FID regime, introduced in the United Kingdom with effect from July 1994. That regime permits resident
         companies receiving foreign‑sourced dividends to obtain a repayment of the amount of surplus ACT, that is to say, the amount
         of ACT which could not be offset against the amount due by way of corporation tax.
      
However, it must be held that the tax treatment of resident companies receiving foreign-sourced dividends and opting for the
         FID regime remains less favourable in two respects than that which applies to resident companies receiving nationally-sourced
         dividends.
      
As regards, in the first place, the ability to recover surplus ACT, the order for reference shows that, while ACT must be
         accounted for within days of the quarter in which the company concerned pays dividends to its shareholders, surplus ACT
         is repayable only when corporation tax becomes due, that is to say, nine months after the end of the accounting period. Depending
         on when the company paid the dividends, it must wait between ½ months and ½ months to obtain repayment of the ACT accounted
         for.
      
Accordingly, as the claimants in the main proceedings contend, resident companies electing to be taxed under such a regime
         by reason of their receipt of foreign-sourced dividends are exposed to a cash-flow disadvantage which does not arise in the
         case of resident companies receiving nationally-sourced dividends. In the latter case, since the resident company making the
         distribution has already accounted for ACT on the profits distributed, a tax credit is granted to the resident company receiving
         the distribution, thereby allowing that company to pay an equivalent amount by way of dividends to its own shareholders without
         having to account for ACT.
      
In the second place, a shareholder receiving a payment of dividends from a resident company which has its origin in foreign-sourced
         dividends treated as FIDs, is not entitled to a tax credit, but is treated as having received income which has been taxed
         at the lower rate for the tax year in question. In the absence of a tax credit, such a shareholder has no right to any repayment
         if he is not liable to income tax or where the income tax due is less than the tax on the dividend at the lower rate.
      
As the claimants in the main proceedings contend, that means that a company which has elected to be taxed under the FID regime
         must increase the amount of its distributions if it wishes to guarantee its shareholders a return equivalent to that which
         would be achieved from a payment of nationally‑sourced dividends.
      
The United Kingdom Government claims that those differences in treatment do not involve any restriction on freedom of establishment.
      
As regards the obligation on a company which has elected to be taxed under the FID regime to account for ACT pending subsequent
         repayment, the United Kingdom Government repeats its argument that the situation of a company receiving foreign-sourced dividends
         is not comparable to that of a company receiving nationally-sourced dividends, in that the obligation on the former company
         to account for ACT on a subsequent payment of dividends is explained by the fact that, unlike the latter, it receives dividends
         on which no ACT has been accounted for. If, in that different context, a company receiving foreign‑sourced dividends which
         elects to be taxed under the FID regime is entitled to reimbursement of the ACT accounted for, such treatment cannot constitute
         discrimination in any way.
      
Nevertheless, as was held in paragraphs to of this judgment, since profits distributed by a company are subject to corporation
         tax in the Member State in which the company is resident, where a system of advance payment of corporation tax which applies
         to the company receiving the dividends determines the amount due by having regard to the tax on distributed profits paid by
         a resident distributing company but not to the tax paid abroad by a non-resident distributing company, such a system treats
         a company receiving foreign-sourced dividends less favourably than a company receiving nationally-sourced dividends, even
         though the situation of the former is comparable to the latter.
      
While it is true that the situation of the former company is improved by the fact that the tax paid in advance which cannot
         be offset against the amount due in respect of corporation tax may be repaid, such a company remains in a less favourable
         situation than that of a company receiving nationally-sourced dividends, in that it suffers a cash-flow disadvantage.
      
Such a difference in treatment, which makes the acquisition of a holding in a non-resident company less attractive than a
         holding in a resident company, constitutes, in the absence of any objective justification, an infringement of freedom of establishment.
      
Contrary to what the United Kingdom Government contends, the cash‑flow disadvantage to which companies which have elected
         to be taxed under the FID regime are exposed cannot be justified by practical constraints linked to the fact that, in assessing
         the tax due on the dividend, the taking into account by a Member State of all the taxes which may have been levied on the
         profits distributed, whether in that State or abroad, requires some time.
      
It is true that a Member State must be allowed some time to take into account, in determining the amount ultimately due by
         way of corporation tax, all of the taxes already levied on the profits distributed. Nevertheless, that cannot justify a situation
         where, in the case of nationally-sourced dividends, a Member State decides to take into account, in determining the amount
         due in respect of ACT by a company paying dividends, the fraction of the ACT paid by a resident company from which the company
         making the distribution has itself received dividends – at a time when the amount for which that other resident company will
         ultimately be liable in respect of corporation tax has not even been able to be determined – when, in the case of foreign‑sourced
         dividends, that State fixes the amount due by way of ACT without a resident company which pays dividends to its own shareholders
         having any opportunity to offset the tax which is levied on the profits which have been distributed to it by a non‑resident
         company against that amount.
      
Were it to be the case that, for practical reasons, the tax paid on the profits distributed could be taken into account under
         a system of advance payment of corporation tax only for nationally-sourced dividends, the Member State concerned would have
         to change part of its system for taxing resident companies in order to eliminate such unequal treatment.
      
As regards the fact that shareholders are not entitled to a tax credit under the FID regime, the United Kingdom Government
         argues that such a tax credit is granted to a shareholder receiving a distribution only where there is economic double taxation
         of the profits distributed which must be prevented or mitigated. That does not apply to the FID regime inasmuch as, first,
         no ACT has been accounted for on foreign-sourced dividends and, secondly, the ACT which the resident company receiving those
         dividends must account for on making a distribution to its shareholders is subsequently repaid.
      
However, that argument is based on the same false premiss that a risk of economic double taxation arises only in the case
         of dividends paid by a resident company subject to an obligation to account for ACT on dividends distributed by it, whereas
         the true position is that such a risk also exists in the case of dividends paid by a non-resident company, the profits of
         which are also subject to corporation tax in the State in which it is resident, at the rates and according to the rules applying
         there.
      
For the same reason, the United Kingdom Government cannot suggest that dividends received from a non-resident company are
         not less favourably treated by arguing that, because such a company is not obliged to account for ACT, it may pay higher dividends
         to its shareholders.
      
It is also necessary to reject the argument that the differences in treatment to which foreign-sourced dividends paid under
         the FID regime are subject do not constitute a restriction on the freedom of establishment because that scheme is merely optional.
      
As the claimants in the main proceedings point out, the fact that a national scheme which restricts the freedoms of movement
         is optional does not mean that it is not incompatible with Community law.
      
As regards, lastly, the argument of the United Kingdom Government that the restrictions at issue are justified by the need
         to preserve the cohesion of the United Kingdom tax system, it must be held that that argument is based on the same reasoning
         that has already been rejected in considering Question (see paragraph of this judgment).
      
It follows that Article EC precludes a regime having the characteristics of the FID regime described by the national court
         in Question 4.
      
In so far as, according to the national court, that question also concerns companies established in non-member countries which,
         accordingly, do not fall within the scope of Article EC on freedom of establishment, and for the reason set out in paragraph
         of this judgment, the question arises whether national measures such as those at issue in the main proceedings also contravene
         Article EC on the free movement of capital.
      
It must be pointed out in that regard that the difference in treatment to which foreign-sourced dividends are subject when
         they are received by a resident company which has elected to be taxed under the FID regime (see paragraphs to of this
         judgment) has the effect of discouraging such a company from investing its capital in a company established in another State
         and also has a restrictive effect on companies established in other States in that it constitutes an obstacle to their raising
         capital in the United Kingdom.
      
In order for such a difference in treatment to be compatible with the provisions of the Treaty on the free movement of capital,
         it must concern situations which are not objectively comparable or be justified by an overriding reason in the general interest.
      
As the United Kingdom Government refers in that respect to the same arguments as those made in relation to the analysis of
         Article EC, it is sufficient to point out that, for the reasons set out in paragraphs to of this judgment, that
         difference in treatment concerns situations which are objectively comparable and constitutes a restriction on the free movement
         of capital for which no justification has been provided.
      
The only argument specifically raised by that Government in relation to the free movement of capital is based on the fact
         that, where companies making distributions are established in non-member countries, it may be more difficult to determine
         the tax paid by those companies in the State in which they are resident than in a purely Community context.
      
It is true that, because of the degree of legal integration that exists between Member States of the Union, in particular
         by reason of the presence of Community legislation which seeks to ensure cooperation between national tax authorities, such
         as Council Directive 77/799/EEC of December concerning mutual assistance by the competent authorities of the Member
         States in the field of direct taxation (OJ L 336, p. 15), the taxation by a Member State of economic activities having
         cross-border aspects which take place within the Community is not always comparable to that of economic activities involving
         relations between Member States and non-member countries.
      
Furthermore, as the Advocate General noted at point of his Opinion, it may be that a Member State will be able to demonstrate
         that a restriction on capital movements to or from non-member countries is justified for a particular reason in circumstances
         where that reason would not constitute a valid justification for a restriction on capital movements between Member States.
      
Nevertheless, the United Kingdom Government has, as regards the national legislation at issue, relied on the difficulties
         arising from the verification of the tax paid abroad only in order to explain the period of time between the time when ACT
         is accounted for and the time when it is repaid. As was held at paragraph of this judgment, that is not a reason justifying
         legislation which refuses completely to allow a resident company receiving a payment of foreign-sourced dividends to offset
         the tax charged on profits distributed abroad against the amount due in respect of advance corporation tax, whereas, for nationally‑sourced
         dividends, that amount is automatically deducted from the tax paid, albeit only in advance, by a resident company making a
         distribution.
      
The answer to Question must therefore be that Articles EC and EC preclude legislation of a Member State which, while
         exempting from advance corporation tax resident companies paying dividends to their shareholders which have their origin in
         nationally‑sourced dividends received by them, allows resident companies distributing dividends to their shareholders which
         have their origin in foreign-sourced dividends received by them to elect to be taxed under a regime which permits them to
         recover the advance corporation tax paid but, first, obliges those companies to pay that advance corporation tax and subsequently
         to claim repayment and, secondly, does not provide a tax credit for their shareholders, whereas those shareholders would have
         received such a tax credit in the case of a distribution made by a resident company which had its origin in nationally-sourced
         dividends.
      
 Question By Question 5, the national court essentially asks whether, having regard to the fact that the national measures referred
         to in Questions and were adopted before December 1993, the measures referred to in Question 4, which were adopted after
         that date but which amend those national measures, to the extent to which they also constitute restrictions on capital movements
         prohibited in principle by Article EC, are authorised as restrictions which existed on December 1993, for the purposes
         of Article 57(1) EC.
      
Article 57(1) EC states that Article EC is to be without prejudice to the application to non-member countries of restrictions
         which existed on December under national or Community law adopted in respect of the movement of capital to or from
         non-member countries involving direct investment, including investment in real estate, establishment, the provision of financial
         services or the admission of securities to capital markets.
      
It is accordingly necessary to determine whether the national measures referred to in Question fall within the scope of
         Article 57(1) EC, as being restrictions on the movement of capital involving direct investment, establishment, the provision
         of financial services or the admission of securities to capital markets.
      
As regards, more particularly, the concept of ‘direct investment’, it must be stated that this is not defined by the Treaty.
      
Nevertheless, that concept has been defined in Community law in the nomenclature of the capital movements set out in Annex
         I to Council Directive 88/361/EEC of June for the implementation of Article of the Treaty [article repealed by
         the Treaty of Amsterdam] (OJ L 178, p. 5), which sets out categories of capital movements.
      
It is settled case-law that, inasmuch as Article EC substantially reproduced the content of Article of Directive 88/361,
         and even if the latter was adopted on the basis of Articles and 70(1) of the EEC Treaty (Articles to of the EEC Treaty
         were replaced by Articles 73b to 73g of the EC Treaty, now Articles EC to EC), that nomenclature retains the same indicative
         value, for the purposes of defining the term ‘movement of capital’, as it did before their entry into force, subject to the
         qualification, contained in the introduction to the nomenclature, that the list set out therein is not exhaustive (see, inter
         alia, Case C-222/Trummer and Mayer [1999] ECR I‑1661, paragraph 21, and Case C-513/Van Hilten-van der Heijden [2006] ECR I-1957, paragraph 39).
      
The same indicative value must be given to that nomenclature in interpreting the concept of direct investment. The first section
         of that nomenclature, entitled ‘Direct investments’ includes the establishment and extension of branches or new undertakings
         belonging solely to the person providing the capital and the acquisition in full of existing undertakings, participation in
         new or existing undertakings with a view to establishing or maintaining lasting economic links, long-term loans with a view
         to establishing or maintaining lasting economic links, and reinvestment of profits with a view to maintaining lasting economic
         links.
      
As that list and the relative explanatory notes show, the concept of direct investments concerns investments of any kind undertaken
         by natural or legal persons and which serve to establish or maintain lasting and direct links between the persons providing
         the capital and the undertakings to which that capital is made available in order to carry out an economic activity.
      
As regards shareholdings in new or existing undertakings, as the explanatory notes confirm, the objective of establishing
         or maintaining lasting economic links presupposes that the shares held by the shareholder enable him, either pursuant to the
         provisions of the national laws relating to companies limited by shares or otherwise, to participate effectively in the management
         of that company or in its control.
      
Contrary to what the claimants in the main proceedings contend, the restrictions on capital movements involving direct investment
         or establishment within the meaning of Article 57(1) EC extend not only to national measures which, in their application to
         capital movements to or from non-member countries, restrict investment or establishment, but also to those measures which
         restrict payments of dividends deriving from them.
      
It is clear from case-law that any less favourable treatment of foreign‑sourced dividends in comparison with nationally-sourced
         dividends must be regarded as a restriction on the free movement of capital in so far as it is liable to make the acquisition
         of holdings in companies established in other Member States less attractive (Verkooijen, paragraph 35, Lenz, paragraph 21, and Manninen, paragraph 23).
      
It follows that a restriction on capital movements, such as a less favourable tax treatment of foreign-sourced dividends,
         comes within the scope of Article 57(1) EC, inasmuch as it relates to holdings acquired with a view to establishing or maintaining
         lasting and direct economic links between the shareholder and the company concerned and which allow the shareholder to participate
         effectively in the management of the company or in its control.
      
Were that not to be the case, a restriction on capital movements prohibited by Article EC could not be applied, even in
         relations with non-member countries.
      
Conversely, it is clear from Article 57(1) EC that a Member State may, in its relations with non-member countries, apply restrictions
         on capital movements which come within the substantive scope of that provision, even though they contravene the principle
         of the free movement of capital laid down under Article EC, provided that those restrictions already existed on December
         1993.
      
The United Kingdom Government argues that, should the Court hold that Article EC precludes national legislation governing
         the taxation of foreign-sourced dividends, such as the legislation at issue in the main proceedings, that would apply not
         only to the measures covered by Questions to 3, which were adopted prior to December 1993, but also to the FID regime,
         which came into effect on July 1994, inasmuch as that regime did not introduce any new restrictions vis-à-vis the existing
         measures but, on the contrary, did no more than abolish a number of the restrictive effects of the existing legislation.
      
It is necessary first of all to clarify the concept of ‘restrictions which exist’ on December within the meaning of
         Article 57(1) EC.
      
As the claimants in the main proceedings, the United Kingdom and the Commission propose, reference should be made to Case
         C-302/Konle [1999] ECR I‑3099, in which the Court had to provide an interpretation of the concept of ‘existing legislation’ contained
         in a derogating provision in the Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Republic of Austria, the Republic of Finland
         and the Kingdom of Sweden and the adjustments to the Treaties on which the European Union is founded (OJ C 241, p. 21,
         and OJ L 1, p. 1), allowing the Republic of Austria to maintain its existing legislation governing secondary residences
         for a limited period.
      
While it is, in principle, for the national court to determine the content of the legislation which existed on a date laid
         down by a Community measure, the Court held in that case that it is for the Court of Justice to provide guidance on interpreting
         the Community concept which constitutes the basis of a derogation from Community rules for national legislation ‘existing’
         on a particular date (see, to that effect, Konle, paragraph 27).
      
As the Court stated in Konle, any national measure adopted after a date laid down in that way is not, by that fact alone, automatically excluded from
         the derogation laid down in the Community measure in question. If the provision is, in substance, identical to the previous
         legislation or is limited to reducing or eliminating an obstacle to the exercise of Community rights and freedoms in the earlier
         legislation, it will be covered by the derogation. By contrast, legislation based on an approach which is different from that
         of the previous law and establishes new procedures cannot be regarded as legislation existing at the date set down by the
         Community measure in question (see Konle, paragraphs and 53).
      
Next, as regards the relationship between the FID regime and the existing national legislation governing the taxation of foreign-sourced
         dividends, as described by the national court, it is apparent that the objective of that regime is to limit the restrictive
         effects arising from the existing legislation for resident companies receiving foreign-sourced dividends, in particular by
         offering those companies the opportunity to obtain a repayment of the surplus ACT which is due when they pay dividends to
         their own shareholders.
      
It is, however, for the national court to determine whether the fact that, as the claimants in the main proceedings point
         out, shareholders receiving a FID are not entitled to a tax credit, must be regarded as a new restriction. While it is true
         that, in the national system of which the FID regime forms part, the grant of such a tax credit to a shareholder receiving
         a distribution is the counterpart of the payment by the company making the distribution of the ACT on that distribution, it
         cannot be inferred from the description of the national tax legislation provided in the order for reference that the fact
         that a company which has elected to be taxed under the FID regime is entitled to be reimbursed surplus ACT justifies, under
         the logic governing the legislation which existed on December 1993, its shareholders not being entitled to any tax credit.
      
In any event, contrary to what the United Kingdom Government contends, the FID regime cannot be categorised as an existing
         restriction merely on the basis that, because it is optional, the companies concerned can always elect to be taxed under the
         system previously in place, with the restrictive effects to which it gave rise. As mentioned in paragraph of this judgment,
         a system which restricts the freedoms of movement still remains incompatible with Community law, even though its application
         may be optional.
      
The answer to Question must therefore be that Article 57(1) EC is to be interpreted as meaning that where, before December
         1993, a Member State has adopted legislation which contains restrictions on capital movements to or from non-member countries
         which are prohibited by Article EC and, after that date, adopts measures which, while also constituting a restriction on
         such movements, are essentially identical to the previous legislation or do no more than restrict or abolish an obstacle to
         the exercise of the Community rights and freedoms arising under that previous legislation, Article EC does not preclude
         the application of those measures to non-member countries when they apply to capital movements involving direct investment,
         including investment in real estate, establishment, the provision of financial services or the admission of securities to
         capital markets. Holdings in a company which are not acquired with a view to the establishment or maintenance of lasting and
         direct economic links between the shareholder and that company and do not allow the shareholder to participate effectively
         in the management of that company or in its control cannot, in this connection, be regarded as direct investments.
      
 Questions to By Questions to 9, which should be considered together, the national court essentially asks whether, in the event that the
         national measures referred to in the preceding questions are incompatible with Community law, claims such as those brought
         by the claimants in the main proceedings in order to remedy that incompatibility should be classified as claims for the repayment
         of sums unduly levied or benefits unduly claimed or, conversely, as claims for compensation for damage suffered. In the latter
         case, it asks whether it is necessary to satisfy the conditions laid down in the Brasserie du Pêcheur and Factortame judgment and, if so, whether account should be taken of the form in which such claims must be brought under national law.
      
As regards the application of the conditions in which a Member State is liable to make reparation for the loss and damage
         caused to claimants as a result of an infringement of Community law, the national court asks the Court to provide guidance
         as to the need for a sufficiently serious breach of Community law and the need for a causal link between the breach of the
         obligation imposed on the Member State and the loss and damage suffered by those affected.
      
The claimants in the main proceedings argue that each of the claims referred to in Question falls to be categorised as a
         claim for repayment, both because those claims seek repayment of the excess tax that was unlawfully levied or of the loss
         arising from the loss of use of money due to premature payment of taxes, and because those claims seek reinstatement of tax
         reliefs or reimbursement of the amount by which the resident companies concerned had to increase the amount of FIDs in order
         to compensate for the lack of any tax credit in the hands of their shareholders. Should Community law provide that only a
         claim for damages was competent under national law, such a claim would, in any event, be a different type of claim from that
         which formed the subject‑matter of Brasserie du Pêcheur and Factortame.
      
Conversely, the United Kingdom Government contends that each of the remedies sought by the claimants in the main proceedings
         constitutes a claim for damages which is subject to the conditions laid down in Brasserie du Pêcheur and Factortame. The way in which those claims were brought under national law has no bearing on how they are to be classified in Community
         law.
      
It must be stated that it is not for the Court to assign a legal classification to the actions brought before the national
         court by the claimants in the main proceedings. In the circumstances, it is for the latter to specify the nature and basis
         of their actions (whether they are actions for repayment or actions for compensation for damage), subject to the supervision
         of the national court (see Metallgesellschaft and Others, paragraph 81).
      
However, the fact remains that, according to established case-law, the right to a refund of charges levied in a Member State
         in breach of rules of Community law is the consequence and complement of the rights conferred on individuals by Community
         provisions as interpreted by the Court (see, inter alia, Case 199/San Giorgio [1983] ECR 3595, paragraph 12, and Metallgesellschaft and Others, paragraph 84). The Member State is therefore required in principle to repay charges levied in breach of Community law (Joined
         Cases C-192/to C‑218/Comateb and Others [1997] ECR I-165, paragraph 20, and Metallgesellschaft and Others, paragraph 84).  
      
In the absence of Community rules on the refund of national charges levied though not due, it is for the domestic legal system
         of each Member State to designate the courts and tribunals having jurisdiction and to lay down the detailed procedural rules
         governing actions for safeguarding rights which individuals derive from Community law, provided, first, that such rules are
         not less favourable than those governing similar domestic actions (principle of equivalence) and, secondly, that they do not
         render virtually impossible or excessively difficult the exercise of rights conferred by Community law (principle of effectiveness)
         (see, inter alia, Case 33/Rewe [1976] ECR 1989, paragraph 5, and Case 45/Comet [1976] ECR 2043, paragraphs and 16; and, more recently, Case C-231/Edis [1998] ECR I-4951, paragraphs and 34; Case C-343/Dilexport [1999] ECR I‑579, paragraph 25; and Metallgesellschaft and Others, paragraph 85).
      
In addition, the Court held in paragraph of its judgment in Metallgesellschaft and Others, that, where a resident company or its parent have suffered a financial loss from which the authorities of a Member State
         have benefited as the result of a payment of advance corporation tax, levied on the resident company in respect of dividends
         paid to its non-resident parent but which would not have been levied on a resident company which had paid dividends to a parent
         company which was also resident in that Member State, the Treaty provisions on freedom of movement require that resident subsidiaries
         and their non‑resident parent companies should have an effective legal remedy in order to obtain reimbursement or reparation
         of the loss which they have sustained.
      
It follows from that case-law that, where a Member State has levied charges in breach of the rules of Community law, individuals
         are entitled to reimbursement not only of the tax unduly levied but also of the amounts paid to that State or retained by
         it which relate directly to that tax. As the Court held in paragraphs and of Metallgesellschaft and Others, that also includes losses constituted by the unavailability of sums of money as a result of a tax being levied prematurely.
      
In so far as the rules of national law governing the availability of tax relief have prevented a tax, such as ACT, levied
         in breach of Community law, from being recovered by a taxpayer who has accounted for it, the latter is entitled to repayment
         of that tax.
      
However, contrary to what the claimants in the main proceedings contend, neither the reliefs waived by a taxpayer in order
         to be able to offset in full a tax levied unlawfully, such as ACT, against an amount due in respect of another tax, nor the
         loss and damage suffered by resident companies which elected to be taxed under the FID regime because they saw themselves
         as having to increase the amount of their dividends so as to compensate for the lack of a tax credit in the hands of their
         shareholders, can form the basis of an action under Community law for the reimbursement of the tax unlawfully levied or of
         sums paid to the Member State concerned or withheld by it directly against that tax. Such waivers of relief or increases in
         the amount of dividends are the result of decisions taken by those companies and do not constitute, on their part, an inevitable
         consequence of the refusal by the United Kingdom to grant those shareholders the same treatment as that afforded to shareholders
         receiving a distribution which has its origin in nationally‑sourced dividends.
      
That being the case, it is for the national court to determine whether the waivers of relief or the increases in the amount
         of dividends constitute, on the part of the companies concerned, financial losses suffered by reason of a breach of Community
         law for which the Member State in question is responsible.
      
While it has not gone so far as to rule out the possibility of a State being liable in less restrictive conditions on the
         basis of national law, the Court has held that there are three conditions under which a Member State will be liable to make
         reparation for loss and damage caused to individuals as a result of breaches of Community law for which it can be held responsible,
         namely that the rule of law infringed must be intended to confer rights on individuals, that the breach must be sufficiently
         serious, and that there must be a direct causal link between the breach of the obligation resting on the State and the loss
         or damage sustained by those affected (Brasserie du Pêcheur and Factortame, paragraphs and 66, and Case C-224/Köbler [2003] ECR I-10239, paragraphs and 57).
      
It is, in principle, for the national courts to apply the criteria for establishing the liability of Member States for damage
         caused to individuals by breaches of Community law (Brasserie du Pêcheur and Factortame, paragraph 58, and Köbler, paragraph 100), in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the Court for the application of those criteria (Brasserie du Pêcheur and Factortame, paragraphs to 57; Case C-392/British Telecommunications [1996] ECR I‑1631, paragraph 41; Denkavit and Others, paragraph 49; and Konle, paragraph 58).
      
In the main proceedings, the first condition is plainly satisfied as regards Articles EC and EC. Those provisions confer
         rights on individuals (see, respectively, Brasserie du Pêcheur and Factortame, paragraphs and 54, and Joined Cases C‑163/94, C‑165/and C‑250/Sanz de Lera and Others [1995] ECR I‑4821, paragraph 43).
      
As regards the second condition, it should be pointed out, first, that a breach of Community law will be sufficiently serious
         where, in the exercise of its legislative power, a Member State has manifestly and gravely disregarded the limits on its discretion
         (see Brasserie du Pêcheur and Factortame, paragraph 55; British Telecommunications, paragraph 42; and Case C-424/Haim [2000] ECR I‑5123, paragraph 38). Secondly, where, at the time when it committed the infringement, the Member State in question
         had only considerably reduced, or even no, discretion, the mere infringement of Community law may be sufficient to establish
         the existence of a sufficiently serious breach (Case C‑5/Hedley Lomas [1996] ECR I-2553, paragraph 28, and Haim, paragraph 38).
      
In order to determine whether a breach of Community law is sufficiently serious, it is necessary to take account of all the
         factors which characterise the situation brought before the national court. Those factors include, in particular, the clarity
         and precision of the rule infringed, whether the infringement and the damage caused were intentional or involuntary, whether
         any error of law was excusable or inexcusable, and the fact that the position taken by a Community institution may have contributed
         towards the adoption or maintenance of national measures or practices contrary to Community law (Brasserie du Pêcheur and Factortame, paragraph 56, and Haim, paragraphs and 43).
      
On any view, a breach of Community law will clearly be sufficiently serious if it has persisted despite a judgment finding
         the infringement in question to be established, or a preliminary ruling or settled case-law of the Court on the matter from
         which it is clear that the conduct in question constituted an infringement (Brasserie du Pêcheur and Factortame, paragraph 57).
      
In the present case, in order to determine whether a breach of Article EC committed by the Member State concerned was sufficiently
         serious, the national court must take into account the fact that, in a field such as direct taxation, the consequences arising
         from the freedoms of movement guaranteed by the Treaty have been only gradually made clear, in particular by the principles
         identified by the Court since delivering judgment in Case 270/Commission v France. Moreover, as regards the taxation of dividends received by resident companies from non-resident companies, it was only in
         Verkooijen, Lenz and Manninen that the Court had the opportunity to clarify the requirements arising from the freedoms of movement, in particular as regards
         the free movement of capital.
      
Apart from cases to which Directive 90/applied, Community law gave no precise definition of the duty of a Member State
         to ensure that, as regards mechanisms for the prevention or mitigation of the imposition of a series of charges to tax or
         economic double taxation, dividends paid to residents by resident companies and those paid by non-resident companies were
         treated in the same way. It follows that, until delivery of the judgments in Verkooijen, Lenz and Manninen, the issue raised by the order for reference in the present case had not yet been addressed as such in the case-law of the
         Court.
      
It is in the light of those considerations that the national court should assess the matters referred to in paragraph of this judgment, in particular the clarity and precision of the rules infringed and whether any errors of law were excusable
         or inexcusable.
      
As regards the third condition, namely the requirement for a causal link between the breach of the obligation resting on the
         State and the loss or damage sustained by those affected, it is for the national court to assess whether the loss and damage
         claimed flows sufficiently directly from the breach of Community law to render the State liable to make it good (see, to that
         effect, as regards the non-contractual liability of the Community, Joined Cases 64/76, 113/76, 167/78, 239/78, 27/79, 28/and 45/Dumortier frères and Others v Council [1979] ECR 3091, paragraph 21).
      
Subject to the right of reparation which flows directly from Community law where the conditions referred to in the previous
         paragraph are satisfied, it is on the basis of the rules of national law on liability that the State must make reparation
         for the consequences of the loss and damage caused, provided that the conditions for reparation of loss and damage laid down
         by national law are not less favourable than those relating to similar domestic claims and are not so framed as to make it,
         in practice, impossible or excessively difficult to obtain reparation (Joined Cases C-6/and C-9/Francovich and Others [1991] ECR I‑5357, paragraphs to 43; Brasserie du Pêcheur and Factortame, paragraph 67; and Köbler, paragraph 58).
      
The answer to Questions to should therefore be that, in the absence of Community legislation, it is for the domestic legal
         system of each Member State to designate the courts and tribunals having jurisdiction and to lay down the detailed procedural
         rules governing actions for safeguarding rights which individuals derive from Community law, including the classification
         of claims brought by injured parties before the national courts and tribunals. Those courts and tribunals are, however, obliged
         to ensure that individuals should have an effective legal remedy enabling them to obtain reimbursement of the tax unlawfully
         levied on them and the amounts paid to that Member State or withheld by it directly against that tax. As regards other loss
         or damage which a person may have sustained by reason of a breach of Community law for which a Member State is liable, the
         latter is obligated to make reparation for the loss or damage caused to individuals in the conditions set out in paragraph
         of the judgment in Brasserie du Pêcheur and Factortame, but that does not preclude the State from being liable under less restrictive conditions, where national law so provides.
      
 The application for a limitation on the temporal effects of the judgment 
At the hearing, the United Kingdom Government requested the Court, if it were to interpret Community law as precluding national
         legislation such as the legislation at issue in the main proceedings, to limit the temporal effects of its judgment, even
         as regards legal proceedings brought before the date on which this judgment is delivered.
      
In support of its request, that Government refers, first, to the fact that, since the adoption of the domestic legislation
         in 1973, its compatibility with Community law has never been challenged and, secondly, to the serious financial implications,
         estimated at GBP million (EUR million), which the applications brought before the national court would have for
         the United Kingdom.
      
The latter amount is contested by the claimants in the main proceedings, who contend that the figure in fact lies somewhere
         between GBP million and GBP million. They also point out that, while it is true that the national legislation had
         never previously been challenged before the national courts on the basis of its compatibility with Articles EC and EC,
         its effect on cross-border activities had none the less been the subject of a number of legal actions.
      
It is sufficient to hold in that regard that the United Kingdom Government has put forward an amount which includes the actions
         brought by the claimants in the main proceedings and which form the subject-matter of each of the questions referred for preliminary
         ruling, thereby proceeding on the, incorrect, assumption that the Court would answer each of the questions in the manner proposed
         by the claimants in the main proceedings.
      
In those circumstances, it is not necessary to limit the temporal effects of this judgment.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Articles EC and EC must be interpreted as meaning that, where a Member State has a system for preventing or mitigating
            the imposition of a series of charges to tax or economic double taxation as regards dividends paid to residents by resident
            companies, it must treat dividends paid to residents by non-resident companies in the same way.
Articles EC and EC do not preclude legislation of a Member State which exempts from corporation tax dividends which
            a resident company receives from another resident company, when that State imposes corporation tax on dividends which a resident
            company receives from a non‑resident company in which the resident company holds at least 10% of the voting rights, while
            at the same time granting a tax credit in the latter case for the tax actually paid by the company making the distribution
            in the Member State in which it is resident, provided that the rate of tax applied to foreign-sourced dividends is no higher
            than the rate of tax applied to nationally-sourced dividends and that the tax credit is at least equal to the amount paid
            in the Member State of the company making the distribution, up to the limit of the amount of the tax charged in the Member
            State of the company receiving the distribution.
Article EC precludes legislation of a Member State which exempts from corporation tax dividends which a resident company
            receives from another resident company, where that State levies corporation tax on dividends which a resident company receives
            from a non-resident company in which it holds less than 10% of the voting rights, without granting the company receiving the
            dividends a tax credit for the tax actually paid by the company making the distribution in the State in which the latter is
            resident.
2.      Articles EC and EC preclude legislation of a Member State which allows a resident company receiving dividends from another
            resident company to deduct from the amount which the former company is liable to pay by way of advance corporation tax the
            amount of that tax paid by the latter company, whereas no such deduction is permitted in the case of a resident company receiving
            dividends from a non‑resident company as regards the corresponding tax on distributed profits paid by the latter company in
            the State in which it is resident.
3.      Articles EC and EC do not preclude legislation of a Member State which provides that any relief for tax paid abroad
            made available to a resident company which has received foreign-sourced dividends is to reduce the amount of corporation tax
            against which that company may offset advance corporation tax.
Article EC precludes legislation of a Member State which allows a resident company to surrender to resident subsidiaries
            the amount of advance corporation tax paid which cannot be offset against the liability of that company to corporation tax
            for the current accounting period or previous or subsequent accounting periods, so that those subsidiaries may offset it against
            their liability to corporation tax, but does not allow a resident company to surrender such an amount to non-resident subsidiaries
            where the latter are taxable in that Member State on the profits which they made there.
4.      Articles EC and EC preclude legislation of a Member State which, while exempting from advance corporation tax resident
            companies paying dividends to their shareholders which have their origin in nationally-sourced dividends received by them,
            allows resident companies distributing dividends to their shareholders which have their origin in foreign-sourced dividends
            received by them to elect to be taxed under a regime which permits them to recover the advance corporation tax paid but, first,
            obliges those companies to pay that advance corporation tax and subsequently to claim repayment and, secondly, does not provide
            a tax credit for their shareholders, whereas those shareholders would have received such a tax credit in the case of a distribution
            made by a resident company which had its origin in nationally-sourced dividends.
5.      Article 57(1) EC is to be interpreted as meaning that where, before December 1993, a Member State has adopted legislation
            which contains restrictions on capital movements to or from non-member countries which are prohibited by Article EC and,
            after that date, adopts measures which, while also constituting a restriction on such movements, are essentially identical
            to the previous legislation or do no more than restrict or abolish an obstacle to the exercise of the Community rights and
            freedoms arising under that previous legislation, Article EC does not preclude the application of those measures to non-member
            countries when they apply to capital movements involving direct investment, including investment in real estate, establishment,
            the provision of financial services or the admission of securities to capital markets. Holdings in a company which are not
            acquired with a view to the establishment or maintenance of lasting and direct economic links between the shareholder and
            that company and do not allow the shareholder to participate effectively in the management of that company or in its control
            cannot, in this connection, be regarded as direct investments. 
6.      In the absence of Community legislation, it is for the domestic legal system of each Member State to designate the courts
            and tribunals having jurisdiction and to lay down the detailed procedural rules governing actions for safeguarding rights
            which individuals derive from Community law, including the classification of claims brought by injured parties before the
            national courts and tribunals. Those courts and tribunals are, however, obliged to ensure that individuals should have an
            effective legal remedy enabling them to obtain reimbursement of the tax unlawfully levied on them and the amounts paid to
            that Member State or withheld by it directly against that tax. As regards other loss or damage which a person may have sustained
            by reason of a breach of Community law for which a Member State is liable, the latter is under a duty to make reparation for
            the loss or damage caused to individuals in the conditions set out in paragraph of the judgment in Joined Cases C-46/and C-48/Brasserie du Pêcheur and Factortame [1996] ECR I-1029, but that does not preclude the State from being liable under less restrictive conditions, where national
            law so provides.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English
      
Top  
 