
Case C-442/Churchill Insurance Company Limited
v
Benjamin Wilkinson
and
Tracy Evans
v
Equity Claims Limited
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Court of Appeal (England and Wales) (Civil Division))
(Compulsory insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles – Directive 84/5/EEC – Article 1(4) and Article 2(1) – Third parties victims of an accident – Express or implied authorisation to drive – Directive 90/232/EEC – First paragraph of Article – Directive 2009/103/EC – Articles 10, 12(1) and 13(1) – Victim of a road traffic accident who was a passenger in a vehicle in respect of which he was insured to drive – Vehicle driven by a person not insured under the insurance policy – Insured victim not deprived of insurance cover)
Summary of the Judgment
Approximation of laws – Insurance against civil liability in respect of motor vehicles – Extent of cover for third parties
            under compulsory insurance – Exclusion clauses – Accident caused by an uninsured driver
(Council Directives 72/166, 84/5, Art. 2(1), and 90/232, Art. 1, first para.)
The first paragraph of Article of Third Directive 90/and Article 2(1) of Second Directive 84/on the approximation
         of the laws of the Member States relating to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles must
         be interpreted as precluding national rules the effect of which is to exclude automatically the requirement for the insurer
         to compensate a passenger who is a victim of a road traffic accident when that accident was caused by a driver who was not
         insured under the insurance policy and when the victim, who was a passenger in the vehicle at the time of the accident, was
         insured to drive the vehicle himself and had given permission to the driver to drive it.
      
That interpretation does not differ depending on whether the insured victim was aware that the person to whom he gave permission
         to drive the vehicle was not insured to do so, whether he believed that the driver was insured or whether or not he had turned
         his mind to that question.
      
The insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles referred to in Article 3(1) of First Directive
         72/on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to insurance against civil liability in respect of the
         use of motor vehicles must cover all the victims other than the driver of the vehicle that caused the damage or injury, unless
         one of the exceptions expressly provided for by the First, Second or Third Directives applies.
      
(see paras 44, 46, 50, operative part 1-2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
December (*)
      
(Compulsory insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles – Directive 84/5/EEC –Article 1(4) and Article 2(1) – Third parties victims of an accident – Express or implied authorisation to drive – Directive 90/232/EEC – First subparagraph of Article – Directive 2009/103/EC – Articles 10, 12(1) and 13(1) – Victim of a road traffic accident who was a passenger in a vehicle in respect of which he was insured to drive – Vehicle driven by a person not insured under the insurance policy – Insured victim not deprived of insurance cover)
In Case C‑442/10,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the Court of Appeal (England and Wales) (Civil Division) (United
         Kingdom), made by decision of August 2010, received at the Court on September 2010, in the proceedings
      
Churchill Insurance Company Limited
v
Benjamin Wilkinson, 
and
Tracy Evans 
v
Equity Claims Limited, 
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of J.-C. Bonichot, President of the Chamber, A. Prechal, L. Bay Larsen, C. Toader and E. Jarašiūnas (Rapporteur),
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: P. Mengozzi,
Registrar: R. Şereş, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on July 2011,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Churchill Insurance Company Limited, by F. Randolph, Barrister, and S. Worthington QC,
–        Mr Wilkinson, by C. Quigley and S. Grime QC, 
–        Mrs Evans, by G. Wood and C. Quigley QC,
–        Equity Claims Limited, by W.R.O. Hunter QC, instructed by J. Herzog, Solicitor,
–        the United Kingdom Government, by L. Seeboruth, acting as Agent,
–        the European Commission, by K.-P. Wojcik and N. Yerrell, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2011,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles 12(1) and 13(1) of Directive 2009/103/EC of
         the European Parliament and of the Council of September relating to insurance against civil liability in respect of
         the use of motor vehicles, and the enforcement of the obligation to insure against such liability (OJ L 263, p. 11).
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between, first, Churchill Insurance Company Limited (‘Churchill’) and Mr Wilkinson,
         and, second, Mrs Evans and Equity Claims Limited (‘Equity’) concerning compensation for damage or injury suffered in respect
         of road traffic accidents.
      
 Legal context
 European Union (‘EU’) Law
Pursuant to Article 3(1) of Council Directive 72/166/EEC of April on the approximation of the laws of the Member States
         relating to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles, and to the enforcement of the obligation
         to insure against such liability (OJ, English Special Edition (II), p. 360) (‘the First Directive’):
      
‘Each Member State shall … take all appropriate measures to ensure that civil liability in respect of the use of vehicles
         normally based in its territory is covered by insurance. The extent of the liability covered and the terms and conditions
         of the cover shall be determined on the basis of these measures.’
      
Recitals to in the preamble to Second Council Directive 84/5/EEC of December on the approximation of the laws
         of the Member States relating to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles (OJ L 8, p. 17)
         (‘the Second Directive’), state:
      
‘… it is necessary to make provision for a body to guarantee that the victim will not remain without compensation where the
         vehicle which caused the accident is uninsured or unidentified; whereas it is important, without amending the provisions applied
         by the Member States with regard to the subsidiary or non‑subsidiary nature of the compensation paid by that body and to the
         rules applicable with regard to subrogation, to provide that the victim of such an accident should be able to apply directly
         to that body as a first point of contact; whereas, however, Member States should be given the possibility of applying certain
         limited exclusions as regards the payment of compensation by that body and of providing that compensation for damage to property
         caused by an unidentified vehicle may be limited or excluded in view of the danger of fraud;
      
… it is in the interest of victims that the effects of certain exclusion clauses be limited to the relationship between the
         insurer and the person responsible for the accident; whereas, however, in the case of vehicles stolen or obtained by violence,
         Member States may specify that compensation will be payable by the abovementioned body;
      
… in order to alleviate the financial burden on that body, Member States may make provision for the application of certain
         excesses where the body provides compensation for damage to property caused by uninsured vehicles or, where appropriate, vehicles
         stolen or obtained by violence’.
      
Article 1(4) of the Second Directive provides that each Member State is to set up or authorise a body with the object of providing
         compensation, at least up to the limits of the insurance obligation, for damage to property or personal injuries caused by
         an unidentified or uninsured vehicle (‘the national body’). The third subparagraph of Article 1(4) states:
      
‘… Member States may exclude the payment of compensation by that body in respect of persons who voluntarily entered the vehicle
         which caused the damage or injury when the body can prove that they knew it was uninsured.’
      
In accordance with the fourth subparagraph of Article 1(4), Member States may limit or exclude the payment of compensation
         by that body in the event of damage to property by an unidentified vehicle and, in accordance with the fifth subparagraph
         of that provision, they may also authorise, in the case of damage to property caused by an uninsured vehicle an excess of
         not more than EUR for which the victim may be responsible.
      
The rules applicable to those national bodies were subsequently clarified and supplemented by, in particular, Directive 2005/14/EC
         of the European Parliament and of the Council of May amending Council Directives 72/166/EEC, 84/5/EEC, 88/357/EEC
         and 90/232/EEC and Directive 2000/26/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council relating to insurance against civil
         liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles (OJ L 149, p. 14). The third subparagraph of Article 1(4) of the Second
         Directive therefore became, in essence, the second subparagraph of Article 1(5) of the Second Directive, as amended by Directive
         2005/14.
      
Article 2(1) of the Second Directive provides:
      
‘Each Member State shall take the necessary measures to ensure that any statutory provision or any contractual clause contained
         in an insurance policy issued in accordance with Article 3(1) of [the first Directive], which excludes from insurance the
         use or driving of vehicles by:
      
–        persons who do not have express or implied authorisation thereto, or
–        persons who do not hold a licence permitting them to drive the vehicle concerned, or
–        persons who are in breach of the statutory technical requirements concerning the condition and safety of the vehicle concerned,
         
      
shall, for the purposes of Article 3(1) of [the First Directive], be deemed to be void in respect of claims by third parties
         who have been victims of an accident. 
      
However the provision or clause referred to in the first indent may be invoked against persons who voluntarily entered the
         vehicle which caused the damage or injury, when the insurer can prove that they knew the vehicle was stolen. 
      
…’
According to recitals and in the preamble to Third Council Directive 90/232/EEC of May on the approximation of
         the laws of the Member States relating to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles (OJ L 129, p. 33) (‘the Third Directive’):
      
‘… motor vehicle accident victims should be guaranteed comparable treatment irrespective of where in the Community accidents
         occur;
      
… there are, in particular, gaps in the compulsory insurance cover of motor vehicle passengers in certain Member States; whereas,
         to protect this particularly vulnerable category of potential victims, such gaps should be filled’.
      
Article 1, first paragraph, of the Third Directive provides:
      
‘Without prejudice to the second subparagraph of Article 2(1) of [the Second Directive], the insurance referred to in Article
         3(1) of the [First Directive] shall cover liability for personal injuries to all passengers, other than the driver, arising
         out of the use of a vehicle.’
      
Directive 2009/codified the earlier directives relating to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of
         motor vehicles (‘civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles’) and therefore repealed those earlier directives
         with effect from October 2009. Pursuant to the correlation table in Annex II to that directive, Article 3(1) of the First
         Directive corresponds to the first and second subparagraphs of Article of Directive 2009/103; Article 1(4), third subparagraph,
         and Article 2(1) of the Second Directive correspond to Article 10(2), second subparagraph, and Article 13(1) of Directive
         2009/respectively; and Article 1, first subparagraph, of the Third Directive corresponds to Article 12(1) of Directive
         2009/103.
      
 National law
Section of the Road Traffic Act (‘the Act’), concerning the duty of insurers to satisfy a judgment which relates
         to civil liability of the type covered by a compulsory insurance policy, provides:
      
‘(1)      This section applies where, after a certificate of insurance … has been delivered … to the person by whom a policy has been
         effected …, a judgment to which this subsection applies is obtained.
      
…
(5)      Notwithstanding that the insurer may be entitled to avoid or cancel, or may have avoided or cancelled, the policy…, he must,
         subject to the provisions of this section, pay to the persons entitled to the benefit of the judgment – 
      
(a)      as regards liability in respect of death or bodily injury, any sum payable under the judgment in respect of [that] liability
         …,
      
…
…
(8)      Where an insurer becomes liable under this section to pay an amount in respect of a liability of a person who is not insured
         by a policy…, he is entitled to recover the amount from that person or from any person who – 
      
(a)      is insured by the policy…, by the terms of which the liability would be covered if the policy insured all persons …, and
(b)      caused or permitted the use of the vehicle which gave rise to the liability.
…’
 The actions in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Mr Wilkinson was a named driver on an insurance policy with Churchill covering the use of a motor vehicle. On November
         2005, he allowed one of his friends to drive the car with himself as a passenger. It is accepted that Mr Wilkinson knew that
         that person was not insured to drive the car under that insurance policy. The driver lost control of the vehicle, which collided
         with a vehicle travelling in the opposite direction. Mr Wilkinson suffered severe injuries. Churchill accepted that it was
         liable to compensate Mr Wilkinson, but claimed, pursuant to section 151(8) of the Act, an indemnity from him as the insured
         in the same amount as the compensation payable to him. Mr Wilkinson contested this claim. At first instance the court held
         in favour of Mr Wilkinson, and Churchill brought an appeal against that judgment before the Court of Appeal.
      
Mrs Evans, who owned a motorcycle insured with Equity, was insured to drive it, but no one else at all was. On August 2004,
         she permitted a friend to drive her motorcycle with herself as a pillion passenger. Through negligence, the driver drove into
         the back of a lorry. Mrs Evans was seriously injured. At first instance, the court found that, in permitting him to drive,
         she had given no thought to the question whether the driver was insured to drive her motorcycle. It also held that Equity
         was entitled to an indemnity under section 151(8) of the Act in respect of the sum that Equity would have had to pay
         to Mrs Evans, because she had allowed someone to drive the motorcycle without being insured. Mrs Evans lodged an appeal against
         that judgment before the Court of Appeal. 
      
Churchill and Equity argued before the Court of Appeal that section 151(8) of the Act is not a provision which ‘excludes
         from insurance’, within the meaning of Article 13(1) of Directive 2009/103, and that the drivers in both cases had the requisite
         authorisation to use or drive the vehicles in question. On the other hand, Mr Wilkinson and Mrs Evans argued, first, that
         that provision, when applied to an insured who is a victim so that he is precluded from receiving payment from the insurer,
         excludes that victim from insurance within the meaning of Article 13(1) and, second, that the authorisation referred to in
         that provision is that of the insurer, not the insured.
      
The Court of Appeal found that, under the law of England and Wales, the effect of section 151(8) of the Act is to exclude
         automatically from the benefit of insurance an insured who, taking a place as a passenger in the vehicle that he is insured
         to drive, has given an uninsured driver permission to drive that vehicle. The Court of Appeal is uncertain whether European
         Union law precludes such an exclusion and, if so, whether section 151(8) of the Act may be interpreted in a manner consistent
         with European Union law. 
      
The referring court considers that, according to the case-law, Article 12(1) of Directive 2009/must be given a broad interpretation.
         It notes, however, that in circumstances such as those of the cases before it, such an interpretation would lead to a difference
         in treatment in relation to the situation governed by Article 10(2) of Directive 2009/103. The Court of Appeal also points
         out that the situation of an insured passenger permitting an uninsured driver to drive can vary, depending on whether that
         passenger is aware that the driver is uninsured, or whether or not the passenger has turned his or her mind to that question.
      
In those circumstances, the Court of Appeal (England and Wales) (Civil Division) decided to stay proceedings and to refer
         the following questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1. Are Articles 12(1) and 13(1) of [Directive 2009/103] to be interpreted as precluding national provisions the effect of
         which, as a matter of the relevant national law, is to exclude from the benefit of insurance a victim of a road traffic accident,
         in circumstances where:
      
–        that accident was caused by an uninsured driver; and
–        that uninsured driver had been given permission to drive the vehicle by the victim; and
–        that victim was a passenger in the vehicle at the time of the accident; and
–        that victim was insured to drive the vehicle in question?
In particular:
–        is such a national provision one which “excludes from insurance” within the meaning of Article 13(1) of [Directive 2009/103]?
–        in circumstances such as arising in the present case, is permission given by the [insured] to the non-insured “express or
         implied authorisation” within the meaning of Article 13(l)(a) of [Directive 2009/103]?
      
–        is the answer to this question affected by the fact that, pursuant to Article of [Directive 2009/103], national bodies
         charged with providing compensation in the case of damage caused by unidentified or uninsured vehicles may exclude the payment
         of compensation in respect of persons who voluntarily enter the vehicle which caused the damage or injury when the body can
         prove that those persons know that the vehicle was uninsured?
      
2.      Does the answer to question depend on whether the permission in question (a) was based on actual knowledge that the driver
         in question was uninsured or (b) was based on a belief that the driver was insured or (c) where the permission in question
         was granted by the insured person who had not turned his/her mind to the issue?’
      
 Consideration of the questions referred
 The first question
It should be noted as a preliminary observation that Directive 2009/was not in force at the time of the facts in the main
         proceedings. The question referred must, therefore, be construed as referring, not to the provisions of Directive 2009/103,
         but to those corresponding provisions in the Second and Third Directives that are applicable ratione temporis to the facts in the main proceedings and that were subsequently incorporated into Directive 2009/103.
      
By its first question, the referring court therefore asks, in essence, whether Article 1, first subparagraph, of the Third
         Directive and Article 2(1) of the Second Directive must be interpreted as precluding national rules whose effect is to exclude
         from the benefit of insurance a victim of a road traffic accident when that accident was caused by an uninsured driver and
         when the victim, a passenger in the vehicle at the time of the accident, was insured to drive the vehicle himself and had
         given permission to the driver to drive it.
      
In that regard, Churchill and Equity claim, first, that the provisions of Directive 2009/corresponding to Article 2(1)
         of the Second Directive are not applicable in the present case. Section 151(8) of the Act would not constitute an exclusion
         from compulsory insurance cover. The effect of that provision, according to Churchill and Equity, is merely to entitle an
         insurer, when it is required to pay compensation in respect of the liability of a driver not insured under the insurance policy,
         to bring an action against the insured, when the insured has caused or permitted to the driver to drive the vehicle, for recovery
         of that amount.
      
However, according to settled case-law, in the procedure laid down by Article TFEU, the functions of the Court of Justice
         and those of the referring court are clearly separate, and it falls exclusively to the latter to interpret national legislation
         and assess its effects (see Case 52/Benedetti [1977] ECR 163, paragraph 25; Case C‑397/Kordel and Others [1999] ECR I‑5959, paragraph 25; and Case C‑500/Corporación Dermoestética [2008] ECR I‑5785, paragraph 21).
      
It is apparent from the order for reference that the Court of Appeal interprets Section 151(8) of the Act, in situations
         such as those described in the first question referred for a preliminary ruling, not as providing for the payment of compensation
         by the insurer to the insured victim, followed by reimbursement of that amount by the insured to the insurer, but as having
         the effect of excluding automatically from the benefit of insurance a passenger, the victim of a road traffic accident, who
         is insured to drive the vehicle himself and who has given permission to an uninsured driver to drive. 
      
It follows that the questions referred to the Court in the present case do not concern the compatibility with EU law of a
         rule governing civil liability, but concern rather the compatibility with EU law of a provision which, according to the interpretation
         given by the referring court, by excluding automatically the benefit of compensation possibly due to an insured, limits the
         extent of civil liability insurance cover. The questions referred therefore do indeed concern the scope of the relevant EU
         rules.
      
Churchill, Equity and the United Kingdom Government further submit that the first question should be answered in the negative.
         Persons in a situation such as that of Mr Wilkinson and Mrs Evans cannot be considered to be third parties who have been victims
         of an accident within the meaning of Article 2(1) of the Second Directive.
      
By contrast, Mr Wilkinson, Mrs Evans and the European Commission take the view that EU rules relating to civil liability in
         respect of the use of motor vehicles preclude a national provision such as that described in the first question. In particular,
         the Commission considers that a victim of a road traffic accident cannot be excluded from the category of passenger merely
         on the basis that he is insured. Consequently, according to the Commission, an insured who is a victim must be considered
         to be a third party who has been a victim of an accident within the meaning of Article 2(1) of the Second Directive.
      
In that regard, it must be borne in mind that EU rules relating to civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles
         are designed to ensure the free movement of vehicles normally based on EU territory and of persons travelling in those vehicles
         and to guarantee that the victims of accidents caused by those vehicles receive comparable treatment irrespective of where
         in the EU the accident has occurred (see, inter alia, Case C‑129/Ruiz Bernáldez [1996] ECR I‑1829, paragraph 13, and Case C‑537/Candolin and Others [2005] ECR I‑5745, paragraph 17). They also seek, as set out in the fifth recital in the preamble to the Third Directive,
         to protect that particularly vulnerable category of potential victims who are motor vehicle passengers by filling the gaps
         in the compulsory insurance cover of those passengers in certain Member States (Case C‑356/Farrell [2007] ECR I‑3067, paragraph 24). 
      
To those ends, Article 3(1) of the First Directive, as amplified and supplemented by the Second and Third Directives, requires
         the Member States to ensure that civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles normally based in their territory
         is covered by insurance, and specifies, inter alia, the types of damage and the third parties who have been victims of an
         accident to be covered by that insurance (see, to that effect, Case C‑348/Mendes Ferreira and Delgado Correia Ferreira [2000] ECR I‑6711, paragraphs to 27, and Case C‑484/Carvalho Ferreira Santos [2011] ECR I‑0000, paragraphs to 27).
      
In that last regard, the Court has already held that the aim of Article 3(1) of the First Directive, Article 2(1) of the Second
         Directive and Article of the Third Directive is to ensure that compulsory motor vehicle insurance against civil liability
         in respect of the use of motor vehicles allows all passengers who are victims of an accident caused by a motor vehicle to
         be compensated for the injury or loss they have suffered (see, to that effect, Candolin and Others, paragraph 27). It also considered that, by providing that insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor
         vehicles covers liability for personal injuries to all passengers other than the driver, Article of the Third Directive
         only lays down a distinction between the driver and the other passengers and unquestionably grants insurance cover to all
         passengers (Candolin and Others, paragraph 32, and Farrell, paragraph 23). 
      
In view of this, the Court held that the aim of protecting victims pursued by the First, Second and Third Directives, as has
         been pointed out in paragraph of this judgment, requires the legal position of the owner of the vehicle, present in the
         vehicle at the time of the accident as a passenger, to be the same as that of any other passenger who is a victim of the accident
         (Candolin and Others, paragraph 33). Likewise, it held that that aim also precludes national rules from restricting unduly the concept of passenger
         covered by insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles, by excluding from that concept persons
         who were on board a part of a vehicle which is not designed for their carriage and equipped for that purpose (see, to that
         effect, Farrell, paragraphs to 30).
      
The only distinction permitted by EU rules relating to civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles thus being,
         as pointed out in paragraph of this judgment and as the Advocate General has noted in point of his Opinion, that between
         the driver and passenger, the same aim of protecting victims also requires the legal position of the person who, at the time
         of the accident, was a passenger in the vehicle in respect of which he was insured to drive, to be the same as that of any
         other passenger who is a victim of the accident. 
      
It follows that the fact that a person was insured to drive the vehicle which caused the accident does not mean that that
         person should be excluded from the concept of third parties who have been victims of an accident within the meaning of Article
         2(1) of the Second Directive, in so far as he was a passenger in that vehicle and not the driver.
      
With regard to the rights granted to those third parties who have been victims of an accident, it must be borne in mind that
         the Court has held that Article 3(1) of the First Directive precludes an insurer from relying on statutory provisions or contractual
         clauses in order to refuse to compensate third parties who have been victims of an accident caused by the insured vehicle
         (see, to that effect, Ruiz Bernáldez, paragraph 20, Candolin and Others, paragraph 18, and Carvalho Ferreira Santos, paragraph 29). 
      
The Court has also held that the first subparagraph of Article 2(1) of the Second Directive simply repeats that obligation,
         with respect to provisions or clauses in an insurance policy referred to in that article excluding from the cover provided
         by insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles, damage or injury suffered by third parties who
         have been victims of an accident caused by the use or driving of an insured vehicle by persons not authorised to drive the
         vehicle, persons not holding a driving licence, or persons in breach of the statutory technical requirements concerning the
         condition and safety of the vehicle (Ruiz Bernáldez, paragraph 21; Candolin and Others, paragraph 19; and Carvalho Ferreira Santos, paragraph 30).
      
It is true that by way of derogation from that obligation, the second subparagraph of Article 2(1) provides that certain persons
         may be excluded from compensation by the insurer, having regard to the situation they have themselves brought about, that
         is to say, persons who voluntarily entered the vehicle which caused the damage or injury, when the insurer can prove that
         they knew the vehicle was stolen (Ruiz Bernáldez, paragraph 21, Candolin and Others, paragraph 20). However, and as the Court has already held, derogations from the first subparagraph of Article 2(1) of the
         Second Directive may only be made in that single, specific case (see, to that effect, Candolin and Others, paragraph 23). 
      
It follows from the foregoing that Article 1, first subparagraph, of the Third Directive and Article 2(1) of the Second Directive
         must be interpreted as precluding national rules the effect of which is to omit automatically the requirement that the insurer
         should compensate a passenger, the victim of a road traffic accident, on the ground that that passenger was insured to drive
         the vehicle which caused the accident but that the driver was not.
      
In that context, the referring court also asks the Court whether permission to drive given by the insured to a non-insured
         driver constitutes, in circumstances such as those in the main proceedings, ‘express or implied authorisation’ within the
         meaning of the first indent of Article 2(1) of the Second Directive. As the Advocate General has stressed in point of his
         Opinion, the referring court asks this question in order to establish whether the statutory provisions and contractual clauses
         excluding insurance cover when the driver was a person who had not received express or implied authorisation from the insurer
         may be invoked against the victim.
      
However, that argument cannot be accepted. Even if the terms ‘express or implied authorisation’ did refer only to permission
         given by the insured, it cannot, in any event, mean that a clause excluding insurance cover when the driver was a person who
         had not received authorisation from the insurer would be valid and enforceable against a third party who has been a victim
         of an accident. The only situation in which a third party who has been a victim of an accident may be excluded from insurance
         cover is that specified in the second subparagraph of Article 2(1) of the Second Directive. It is not disputed that, in the
         present case, that situation is not in issue.
      
Nevertheless, the referring court also asks whether the fact that, in accordance with the third subparagraph of Article 1(4)
         of the Second Directive, Member States may exclude the payment of compensation by a national body in respect of persons who
         voluntarily entered the vehicle which caused the damage or injury, when the body can prove that they knew it was uninsured,
         can have a bearing on the answer to question 1.
      
In that regard, it is first necessary to point out that the situation in which the vehicle that caused the damage was driven
         by a person not insured to do so, while a driver was, moreover, insured to drive that vehicle, and the situation specified
         in the third subparagraph of Article 1(4) of the Second Directive in which the vehicle which caused the accident was not covered
         by any insurance policy, are situations neither similar nor comparable. The fact that a vehicle is driven by a person not
         named in the relevant insurance policy cannot, having regard, in particular, to the aim of protecting victims of road traffic
         accidents pursued by the First, Second and Third Directives, support the view that that vehicle was not insured for the purpose
         of that provision. 
      
Second, as noted by the Commission, the payment of compensation by a national body is considered to be a measure of last resort,
         provided for only in cases in which the vehicle that caused the injury or damage is uninsured or unidentified or has not satisfied
         the insurance requirements referred to in Article 3(1) of the First Directive.
      
This explains why, despite the general aim of protecting victims of EU rules relating to civil liability in respect of the
         use of motor vehicles, the EU legislature allows Member States to exclude the payment of compensation by that national body
         in certain limited cases, and, in particular, in respect of persons who voluntarily entered the vehicle which caused the damage
         or injury when the body can prove that they knew that neither the driver nor the vehicle was insured.
      
Consequently, the fact that, in accordance with the third subparagraph of Article 1(4) of the Second Directive, Member States
         may exclude the payment of compensation by a national body in respect of persons who voluntarily entered the vehicle which
         caused the damage or injury when the body can prove that they knew that neither the driver nor the vehicle was insured, has,
         in the present case, no bearing on the interpretation of Article 1, first subparagraph, of the Third Directive and Article
         2(1) of the Second Directive.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the first question is that Article 1, first subparagraph, of the Third Directive
         and Article 2(1) of the Second Directive must be interpreted as precluding national rules whose effect is to omit automatically
         the requirement that the insurer should compensate a passenger who is a victim of a road traffic accident when that accident
         was caused by a driver not insured under the insurance policy and when the victim, who was a passenger in the vehicle at the
         time of the accident, was insured to drive the vehicle himself and who had given permission to the driver to drive it. 
      
 The second question
By its second question, the referring court asks, in essence, whether the answer to the first question would be different,
         depending on whether the insured victim was aware that the person to whom he gave permission to drive the vehicle was not
         insured to do so, whether he believed that the driver was insured or whether or not he had turned his mind to that question.
      
In that regard, it must be borne in mind, as the Advocate General has noted in point of his Opinion, that the insurance
         against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles referred to in Article 3(1) of the First Directive must cover
         all of the victims other than the driver of the vehicle which caused the damage or injury, unless one of the exceptions expressly
         provided for by the First, Second or Third Directives applies.
      
The fact that the insured victim was aware that the person to whom he gave permission to drive the vehicle was not insured
         to do so, or that he believed that the driver was insured or whether or not he had turned his mind to that question therefore
         has no bearing on the answer to question 1.
      
That does not, however, mean that the Member States may not take account of every factor within the ambit of their rules relating
         to civil liability provided, none the less, that they exercise their powers in that field in compliance with EU law and, in
         particular, with Article 3(1) of the First Directive, Article 2(1) of the Second Directive and Article of the Third Directive
         and that those national rules do not deprive those directives of their effectiveness (Ruiz Bernáldez, paragraph 19; Candolin and Others, paragraphs and 28; Farrell, paragraph 34; Carvalho Ferreira Santos, paragraphs and 36; and Case C‑409/Ambrósio Lavrador and Olival Ferreira Bonifácio [2011] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 28). 
      
Accordingly, national rules, formulated in terms of general and abstract criteria, may not refuse or restrict to a disproportionate
         extent the compensation to be made available to a passenger by compulsory insurance against civil liability in respect of
         the use of motor vehicles solely on the basis of his contribution to the occurrence of the loss which arises. It is only in
         exceptional circumstances that the amount of compensation may be limited on the basis of an assessment of that particular
         case (Candolin and Others, paragraphs 29, and 35; Farrell, paragraph 35; Carvalho Ferreira Santos, paragraph 38; and Ambrósio Lavrador and Olival Ferreira Bonifácio, paragraph 29).
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the second question is that the answer to the first question is not different
         depending on whether the insured victim was aware that the person to whom he gave permission to drive the vehicle was not
         insured to do so, whether he believed that the driver was insured or whether or not he had turned his mind to that question.
         
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article 1, first subparagraph, of the Third Council Directive 90/232/EEC of May on the approximation of the laws of
            the Member States relating to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles, and Article 2(1)
            of the Second Council Directive 84/5/EEC of December on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating
            to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles, must be interpreted as precluding national rules
            the effect of which is to omit automatically the requirement that the insurer compensate a passenger who is a victim of a
            road traffic accident when that accident was caused by a driver who was not insured under the insurance policy and when the
            victim, who was a passenger in the vehicle at the time of the accident, was insured to drive the vehicle himself but who had
            given permission to the driver to drive it.
2.      The answer to the first question is not different depending on whether the insured victim was aware that the person to whom
            he gave permission to drive the vehicle was not insured to do so, whether he believed that the driver was insured or whether
            or not he had turned his mind to that question.
[Signatures]
*  Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 