
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-229/ProceedingsagainstSusanne Müller(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Unabhängiger Verwaltungssenat im Land Niederösterreich)
         
«(Directive 2000/13/EC – Labelling and presentation of foodstuffs – Date of minimum durability – Article 18)»
Opinion of Advocate General Tizzano delivered on October I - Judgment of the Court (Fifth Chamber), March I - Summary of the Judgment
Approximation of laws – Labelling and presentation of foodstuffs – Directive 2000/– Non-harmonised national rule laying down an obligation to indicate in a clear and generally intelligible manner the fact that
                     the period of minimum durability has expired – Rule justified on grounds of prevention of fraud on consumers
                  (Directive of the European Parliament and the Council 2000/13, Art. 18(2))Directive 2000/on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the labelling, presentation and advertising
         of foodstuffs does not preclude a national rule which provides that, where the period of minimum durability of a foodstuff
         has expired, that fact must be indicated separately, clearly and in a generally intelligible manner. Such a labelling rule
         is a non-harmonised national provision justified on the ground of prevention of fraud on consumers as provided for in Article
         18(2) of the directive. The aim of such a rule is to inform the consumer of the characteristics of a foodstuff and, in particular,
         of the fact that because the period of minimum durability has expired, the product has lost its initial freshness. That information
         is capable of preventing fraud on the consumer, who can, as a result, be sure that the product offered for sale retains all
         its original characteristics if the date of minimum durability has not passed. Such measures, which do not necessarily require
         an additional label to be affixed to every item offered for sale after the period of minimum durability has expired, do not
         go beyond what is necessary to prevent fraud.see paras 33, 35, 38, operative part
      
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)March (1)
((Directive 2000/13/EC – Labelling and presentation of foodstuffs – Date of minimum durability – Article 18))
In Case C-229/01, 
            REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Unabhängiger Verwaltungssenat im Land Niederösterreich (Austria) for a
            preliminary ruling in the proceedings before that court against
            
 Susanne Müller,
on the interpretation of Council Directive 79/112/EEC of December on the approximation of the laws of the Member States
            relating to the labelling, presentation and advertising of foodstuffs for sale to the ultimate consumer (OJ L 33, p.
            1) and Directive 2000/13/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of March on the approximation of the laws
            of the Member States relating to the labelling, presentation and advertising of foodstuffs (OJ L 109, p. 29),
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),,
composed of: M. Wathelet, President of the Chamber, D.A.O. Edward, P. Jann, S. von Bahr (Rapporteur) and A. Rosas, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: A. Tizzano, Registrar: R. Grass, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
Ms Müller, by P. Zöchbauer and C. Butter, Rechtsanwälte, 
               
─
the Austrian Government, by H. Dossi, acting as Agent, 
               
─
the Commission of the European Communities, by M. Shotter and H. Kreppel, acting as Agents, 
               
having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on October 2002,
gives the following
Judgment
            
By decision of June 2001, received at the Court on June 2001, the Unabhängiger Verwaltungssenat im Land Niederösterreich
         (Independent Administrative Board of the  
          Land  of Niederösterreich), referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC a question on the interpretation
         of Council Directive 79/112/EEC of December on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the
         labelling, presentation and advertising of foodstuffs for sale to the ultimate consumer (OJ L 33, p. 1) and Directive
         2000/13/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of March on the approximation of the laws of the Member States
         relating to the labelling, presentation and advertising of foodstuffs (OJ L 109, p. 29). 
         
            
That question was raised in penal administrative proceedings brought against Ms Müller, who was found guilty, at first instance,
         of marketing a foodstuff after the date of expiry of the period of minimum durability of that foodstuff without indicating
         in a clear and generally intelligible manner that the period had expired, in breach of the applicable national rules. 
         
Legal background
Community law
         Directive 79/After numerous amendments, Directive 79/was consolidated in Directive 2000/and repealed by Article 26(1) thereof. Directive
         2000/came into force on May 2000. Articles 3(1) and of Directive 79/112, to which the national court refers, correspond
         to Articles 3(1) and of Directive 2000/respectively. 
         Directive 2000/The second and third recitals in the preamble to Directive 2000/state: 
         
(2)
 Differences between the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States on the labelling of foodstuffs
         may impede the free circulation of these products and can lead to unequal conditions of competition. 
         
(3)
 Therefore, approximation of these laws would contribute to the smooth functioning of the internal market
         . 
         
            
The 10th recital in the directive states: ... the horizontal nature of this directive does not allow, at the initial stage, the inclusion in the compulsory indications
         of all the indications which must be added to the list applying in principle to the whole range of foodstuffs. During a later
         stage, Community provisions should be adopted, aimed at supplementing the existing rules.
         
            
Article 1(3)(a) provides: labelling shall mean any words, particulars, trade marks, brand name, pictorial matter or symbol relating to a foodstuff and placed
         on any packaging, document, notice, label, ring or collar accompanying or referring to such foodstuff.
         
            
Article 3(1) states: In accordance with Articles to and subject to the exceptions contained therein, indication of the following particulars
         alone shall be compulsory on the labelling of foodstuffs:
         
(1)
the name under which the product is sold; 
         
(2)
the list of ingredients; 
         
(3)
 the quantity of certain ingredients or categories of ingredients as provided for in Article 7; 
         
(4)
 in the case of prepackaged foodstuffs, the net quantity; 
         
(5)
 the date of minimum durability or, in the case of foodstuffs which, from the microbiological point of view, are highly perishable,
         the  
         use by date; 
         
(6)
 any special storage conditions or conditions of use; 
         
(7)
 the name or business name and address of the manufacturer or packager, or of a seller established within the Community. ... 
         
(8)
 particulars of the place of origin or provenance where failure to give such particulars might mislead the consumer to a material
         degree as to the true origin or provenance of the foodstuff; 
         
(9)
 instructions for use when it would be impossible to make appropriate use of the foodstuff in the absence of such instructions;
         
         
(10)
 with respect to beverages containing more than 1.2% by volume of alcohol, the actual alcoholic strength by volume.
         
            
Article provides: 
         
1.
  Member States may not forbid trade in foodstuffs which comply with the rules laid down in this directive by the application
         of non-harmonised national provisions governing the labelling and presentation of certain foodstuffs or of foodstuffs in general.
         
2.
  Paragraph shall not apply to non-harmonised national provisions justified on grounds of:
         
─
protection of public health, 
         
─
prevention of fraud, unless such provisions are liable to impede the application of the definitions and rules laid down by
            this directive, 
         
─
protection of industrial and commercial property rights, indications of provenance, registered designations of origin and
            prevention of unfair competition.
         
Austrian law
         
            
Under Paragraph 10(2) of the Lebensmittelkennzeichnungsverordnung (Regulation on the labelling of foodstuffs, BGBl.
         1993/72) as last amended by a regulation published in (BGBl. II 1999/462,  
         the LMKV), the following obligation must be observed in respect of packaged foodstuffs: If the period of minimum durability has expired, that fact must be indicated clearly and in a generally intelligible manner.
         
            
Pursuant to point of Paragraph 74(4) of the Lebensmittelgesetz (Law on foodstuffs, BGBl. 1975/86, amended in 1999,
         BGBl. I 1999/157,  
         the LMG), failure to fulfil that obligation constitutes a misdemeanour punishable by an administrative fine. 
         
            
The national court explains that the Verwaltungsgerichtshof (Administrative Court) considers that a mere indication of the
         minimum period of durability of a food stuff does not suffice to meet the requirements of Paragraph 10(2) of the LMKV, and
         that it is necessary to add an indication that the period of minimum durability of that foodstuff has expired where that is
         so. 
         The main proceedings and the question referred
            
Ms Müller, in her capacity as the representative of Spar Österreichische Warenhandels AG, was found guilty of offering for
         sale and thus putting into circulation Zwettler Kuenringer Festbock beer, a packaged foodstuff, on August without
         indicating that its period of minimum durability had expired on August 2000. 
         
            
Ms Müller was ordered to pay a fine of ATS by an administrative decision imposing a penalty, taken on February by the Bezirkshauptmannschaft Zwettl (first-instance administrative authority of Zwettl) in application of the LMG. 
         
            
Ms Müller brought an appeal against that decision before the national court which has referred this question, in which she
         claimed that Directives 79/and 2000/preclude an obligation such as that laid down in Paragraph 10(2) of the LMKV. In
         those circumstances, the Unabhängiger Verwaltungssenat im Land Niederösterreich considered it necessary to stay proceedings
         and to refer the following question to the Court for a preliminary ruling: Do Council Directive 79/112/EEC of December on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the
         labelling, presentation and advertising of foodstuffs for sale to the ultimate consumer, in the version prior to the entry
         into force of Directive 2000/13/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of March on the approximation of
         the laws of the Member States relating to the labelling, presentation and advertising of foodstuffs ... , in particular Article
         thereof, and Directive 2000/13/EC ... , in particular Article thereof, preclude a national rule which provides that,
         where foodstuffs are offered for sale after the period of their minimum durability has expired, that fact must be indicated
         clearly and in a generally intelligible manner in addition to the expiry date itself?
         The question referred
            
By its question, which may be examined solely in the light of Directive 2000/13, the national court is asking essentially
         whether that directive, and in particular Article thereof, must be interpreted as precluding a national rule which provides
         that where the period of minimum durability of a foodstuff has expired, that fact must be indicated separately, clearly and
         in a generally intelligible manner. 
         
            
Ms Müller submits that the national requirement to indicate separately the fact that the period of minimum durability has
         expired constitutes a restriction on the free movement of goods inasmuch as it requires an additional operation which increases
         distribution costs. That restriction is not covered by the exceptions provided for in Directive 2000/13. In particular, since
         the minimum durability of a foodstuff must itself be indicated clearly in a generally intelligible way, the additional obligation
         regarding the fact that the period of durability has expired is not essential to protect consumers against fraud. 
         
            
By contrast, the Austrian Government and the Commission submit that the additional information required under the national
         rules is not contrary to Directive 2000/13. 
         
            
According to the Austrian Government, a rule such as the one at issue in the main proceedings is a non-harmonised national
         provision within the meaning of Directive 2000/13, which is justified on the grounds of prevention of fraud and protection
         of public health set out in Article 18(2) of that directive. 
         
            
The Commission recalls that the task of harmonising the rules on labelling undertaken in Directive 2000/has not yet been
         completed, and maintains that rules such as the one at issue in the main proceedings are not, at present, covered by that
         directive. Such a rule must therefore be examined in the light of Article EC. It submits that the rule in question is compatible
         with that provision because it applies without discrimination, and because even if it constitutes a restriction on the free
         movement of goods that restriction is justified on the public interest grounds of prevention of fraud and unfair competition.
         
         
            
Under Article 18(2) of Directive 2000/the same public interest grounds may also be relied on if it is found that, in contrast
         to the interpretation advocated by the Commission, a rule such as the one at issue in the main proceedings comes within the
         scope of the directive. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
The Court must first examine whether a national rule such as the one laid down in Paragraph 10(2) of the LMKV comes within
         the scope of Directive 2000/13. For that purpose, it is necessary to ascertain whether the rule is a rule on labelling within
         the meaning of Article 1(3)(a) of that directive and whether the situation envisaged by it is governed by the provisions of
         that directive. 
         
            
Article 1(3)(a) of Directive 2000/provides that, for the purposes of the directive,  
         labelling covers words and particulars relating to a foodstuff and placed on any packaging, document, notice, label, ring or collar
         accompanying or referring to such foodstuff. 
         
            
The national provision at issue in the main proceedings lays down the obligation, where the period of minimum durability of
         a foodstuff has expired, to clearly indicate that fact in a generally intelligible manner. The national court has stated that
         this requires a separate reference to that fact, but that no particular form is prescribed. 
         
            
The information required under Paragraph 10(2) of the LMKV relates to a foodstuff and must appear on a medium, the nature
         of which is not specified, but which could, in particular, be a notice or label accompanying or referring to that foodstuff.
         It follows that a provision such as Paragraph 10(2) is a rule on labelling within the meaning of Article 1(3)(a) of Directive
         2000/13. 
         
            
It is also necessary to ascertain whether the provisions of Directive 2000/govern the situation envisaged by such a rule
         on labelling. 
         
            
As is clear from the second and third recitals in its preamble, Directive 2000/is intended to harmonise the Member States'
         laws on the labelling of foodstuffs so that they cease to impede, by reason of their diversity, the free circulation of those
         products. 
         
            
In the 10th recital in Directive 2000/13, the Community legislature acknowledges that it has not yet succeeded in harmonising
         all the rules on labelling by providing an exhaustive list of all the permissible compulsory indications, and that it intends
         to supplement the existing rules at a later stage. 
         
            
It is nevertheless clear from Directive 2000/13, read in the light of those recitals, that it governs all rules on labelling,
         as defined in Article 1(3)(a) thereof, by, first, providing for the harmonisation of certain national provisions and, second,
         establishing rules governing non-harmonised national provisions. As regards the non-harmonised provisions, Article of the
         directive provides that the Member States may not prohibit trade in foodstuffs which comply with the rules laid down in the
         directive by application of non-harmonised national provisions unless they are justified on one of the grounds referred to
         in paragraph of that article. 
         
            
The rule on labelling that requires separate mention of the expiry of the period of minimum durability of foodstuffs is not
         included in the compulsory indications referred to in Article of Directive 2000/13, which merely requires that the date
         of minimum durability be indicated in accordance with the detailed rules set out in Article of the directive. Moreover,
         no other provision of that directive specifically addresses the situation envisaged by Paragraph of the LMKV. 
         
            
A rule on labelling such as the one at issue in the main proceedings is therefore a non-harmonised national provision which
         comes within the scope of Directive 2000/13. 
         
            
Secondly, the Court must ascertain whether such a rule is justified on one of the grounds set out in Article 18(2) of Directive
         2000/13. 
         
            
According to the Austrian Government, a national provision such as the one at issue in the main proceedings is justified on
         the grounds of prevention of fraud on consumers and protection of public health. 
         
            
As regards the prevention of fraud, the aim of such a provision is to inform the consumer of the characteristics of a foodstuff
         and, in particular, of the fact that because the period of minimum durability has expired, the product has lost its initial
         freshness. That information is capable of preventing fraud on the consumer, who, as the Austrian Government and the Commission
         point out, can, as a result, be sure that the product offered for sale retains all its original characteristics if the date
         of minimum durability has not passed. 
         
            
It is necessary, however, to consider whether a national provision such as the one at issue in the main proceedings complies
         with the principle of proportionality set out in the second indent of Article 18(2) of Directive 2000/13, which provides that
         national provisions justified on the grounds of prevention of fraud must not be  
         liable to impede the application of the definitions and rules laid down in the directive. 
         
            
As Advocate General Tizzano correctly observes in point of his Opinion, the obligation to indicate clearly and in a generally
         intelligible manner the fact that the period of minimum durability has expired, limits trade in goods a great deal less than
         an outright marketing prohibition. Moreover, the national provision does not necessarily require an additional label to be
         affixed to every item offered for sale after the period of minimum durability has expired, but may be fulfilled by other means.
         It is clear that such a measure does not go beyond what is necessary to prevent fraud. 
         
            
It follows that an obligation, such as the one laid down in the national provision at issue in the main proceedings, to indicate
         clearly and in a generally intelligible manner the fact that the period of minimum durability has expired is justified by
         the aim of prevention of fraud, which is one of the justifications set out in Article 18(2) of Directive 2000/13. 
         
            
In the light of the foregoing, it is not necessary to examine the second justification relied on by the Austrian Government,
         concerning the need to protect public health. 
         
            
In those circumstances, the answer to the question referred must be that Directive 2000/does not preclude a national rule
         which provides that, where the period of minimum durability of a foodstuff has expired, that fact must be indicated separately,
         clearly and in a generally intelligible manner. Such a rule is a non-harmonised national provision justified on the ground
         of prevention of fraud as provided for in Article 18(2) of the directive. 
         
Costs
            
The costs incurred by the Austrian Government and by the Commission, which have submitted observations to the Court, are not
         recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the proceedings pending before
         the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
in answer to the question referred to it by the Unabhängiger Verwaltungssenat im Land Niederösterreich by decision of June
         2001, hereby rules: 
          Directive 2000/13/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of March on the approximation of the laws of the
               Member States relating to the labelling, presentation and advertising of foodstuffs does not preclude a national rule which
               provides that, where the period of minimum durability of a foodstuff expired, that fact must be indicated separately, clearly
               and in a generally intelligible manner. Such a rule is a non-harmonised national provision justified on the ground of prevention
               of fraud as provided for in Article 18(2) of the directive. 
Wathelet
Edward 
Jann 
von Bahr
Rosas
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on March 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
M. Wathelet  
Registrar
President of the Fifth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: German.
Top  
 