
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Tenth Chamber)
June (*)
      
(Appeals — Regulation (EC) No 1049/— Access to the documents of the European institutions — Documents relating to the trade negotiations between the European Union and the Republic of India — Full access — Refusal)
In Case C‑399/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, brought on July 2013,
Stichting Corporate Europe Observatory, established in Amsterdam (Netherlands), represented by S. Crosby, Solicitor,
      
appellant,
the other parties to the proceedings being:
European Commission, represented by F. Clotuche-Duvieusart and I. Zervas, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant at first instance,
Federal Republic of Germany, represented by T. Henze and J. Möller, acting as Agents,
      
intervener at first instance,
THE COURT (Tenth Chamber),
composed of C. Vajda, President of the Chamber, E. Juhász (Rapporteur) and D. Šváby, Judges,
Advocate General: E. Sharpston,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having regard to the written procedure,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By its appeal, Stichting Corporate Europe Observatory asks the Court to set aside the judgment of the General Court of the
         European Union in Stichting Corporate Europe Observatory v Commission (T‑93/11, EU:T:2013:308, ‘the judgment under appeal’), by which the General Court dismissed its application for annulment
         of the Commission’s decision of December refusing the appellant full access to several documents relating to the negotiations
         between the European Union and the Republic of India aimed at concluding a free trade agreement, pursuant to the third indent
         of Article 4(1)(a) of Regulation (EC) No 1049/of the European Parliament and of the Council of May regarding
         public access to European Parliament, Council and Commission documents (OJ L 145, p. 43) (‘the decision at issue’).
      
 Legal context
Regulation No 1049/is intended to ensure greater transparency in the work of the EU institutions, to give the fullest
         possible effect to the right of public access to documents and to lay down the general principles and limits on such access
         in accordance with Article 15(2) TFEU.
      
Under the third indent of Article 4(1)(a) of Regulation No 1049/2001, ‘[t]he institutions shall refuse access to a document
         where disclosure would undermine the protection of the public interest as regards … international relations’.
      
Article 9(1) of that regulation provides:
      
‘Sensitive documents are documents originating from the institutions or the agencies established by them, from Member States,
         third countries or International Organisations, classified as “TRÈS SECRET/TOP SECRET”, “SECRET” or “CONFIDENTIEL” in accordance
         with the rules of the institution concerned, which protect essential interests of the European Union or of one or more of
         its Member States in the areas covered by Article 4(1)(a), notably public security, defence and military matters.’
      
Article 9(2) provides that applications for access to sensitive documents are to be handled only by those persons who have
         a right to acquaint themselves with those documents.
      
 The judgment under appeal
In the judgment under appeal, the General Court made the following findings:
      
‘In 2007, negotiations were started between the European Union and the Republic of India with a view to concluding a free trade
         agreement.
      
In the context of the travaux préparatoires for the establishment of that agreement, and pursuant to Council Decision 98/552/EC of September on the implementation
         by the Commission of activities relating to the Community market access strategy (OJ L 265, p. 31), an advisory committee
         was created to assist the Commission in its task and, more specifically, to assist it in the identification of barriers to
         market access in the third State concerned and of measures capable of eliminating those barriers. In accordance with Article of Decision 98/552, that committee is composed of representatives of the Member States and chaired by the representative of
         the Commission.
      
Representatives of trade associations or companies are involved in this process and participate, as experts, in the work of
         the advisory committee and of working groups established on the basis of sector-specific expertise.
      
The applicant, Stichting Corporate Europe Observatory, is a foundation governed by Netherlands law. According to its Articles
         of Association, the applicant is non-profit making (Article 4.of the Articles of Association) and its objectives are “to
         increase general knowledge about the political and economic influence of transnational companies and financial institutions”
         and to “formulate alternatives and policy proposals to limit these influences in order to contribute to a more democratic
         and socially and economically just society” (Article 4.of the Articles of Association).
      
On June 2009, acting on the basis of Regulation (EC) No 1049/…, the applicant submitted to the Commission an application
         for access to [various documents concerning the travaux préparatoires for the aforementioned free trade agreement].’
      
The General Court then indicated that the European Commission, by its letter of April 2010, granted the appellant full
         access to over documents and partial access to more than others. Access to some documents was refused on the basis
         of a number of exceptions provided for under Regulation No 1049/2001.
      
In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the General Court noted that, ‘[b]y letter of May 2010, the applicant submitted
         to the Commission a … confirmatory application regarding documents to which full access had been refused [“the documents
         at issue”], pointing out that those same documents had been disclosed, in full and without any indication that they were in
         any way confidential, to a large number of persons, the number of potential recipients itself being very large. The applicant
         took the view that, in those circumstances, the documents at issue did not contain any confidential information or had, in
         any event, entered the public domain. The applicant explained that, while it had no objection to access being refused on grounds
         of the protection of the commercial interests of a natural or legal person, it was contesting non-disclosure the justification
         for which was based on the protection of relations between the European Union and the Republic of India, or any other related
         interest’.
      
The General Court observed that, by the decision at issue, the Commission replied to the confirmatory application of May
         2010. That decision concerned documents, identified as follows:
      
–        document is a letter dated March from the member of the Commission responsible for trade to the Secretary-General
         of BusinessEurope. That letter contained a handwritten note suggesting to the addressee that he make some comments to his
         counterparts in the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) in view of the matters set out in that letter;
      
–        documents to are the minutes of the meetings of the working groups on market access;
–        documents to are the minutes of the meetings of the Market Access Advisory Committee;
–        document is an attachment to an email sent by the Commission’s directorate-general for trade (DG Trade) to the European
         Tyre and Rubber Manufacturers’ Association (ETRMA), dated July 2008, and
      
–        documents to are other emails from DG Trade to ETRMA, sent on July 2008, March and July 2009.
The General Court noted, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal:
      
‘In the [decision at issue] … the Commission granted further partial access to documents and 12. By contrast, it confirmed
         its refusal to grant access to the passages in documents to and to that had been deleted, and also to document
         in its entirety, on the basis of the third indent of Article 4(1)(a) of Regulation No 1049/...’
      
In support of its action before the General Court, the appellant invoked two pleas in law, only the first of which is relevant
         for the purposes of the present appeal. In that first plea in law, the appellant claimed that the Commission had refused to
         grant it access to the documents at issue in breach of rules derived from the third indent of Article 4(1)(a) of Regulation
         No 1049/2011.
      
In the judgment under appeal, the General Court dismissed the action.
      
As regards the first plea in law, the General Court first pointed out that the documents at issue had been disclosed ‘within
         the framework of a consultation process made mandatory’, to ‘a specific group of persons defined according to a predetermined
         criterion, in this case membership of a trade association whose expertise is required in connection with the provision of
         assistance to the Commission for the purpose of deciding upon a strategy for access to the markets of a third State’. The
         General Court inferred that those documents were not intended to be made ‘known to the public, that is to say, to an indeterminate
         group of persons, considered in general and in the abstract’.
      
The General Court also emphasised that the Commission had never made the documents at issue directly or easily accessible
         and that the appellant had not produced evidence that those documents had been communicated to legal or natural persons other
         than their initial recipients.
      
It then held that the absence of one of the designations referred to in Article 9(1) of Regulation No 1049/concerning
         the secret or confidential nature of the documents at issue did not constitute a conclusive factor for considering that the
         Commission had, by implication, relinquished all control over the dissemination of the documents at issue.
      
It held, lastly, that the provisions of the document entitled ‘Vademecum on access to documents’ (‘the vade-mecum’) and marked
         ‘DG Trade’, produced by the appellant at the hearing before the General Court and used by the directorate concerned when dealing
         with requests for access to documents, could not be relied on against the Commission, since that vade-mecum had not been the
         subject of any form of publication and therefore had to be regarded as a mere internal service memorandum, which did not create
         any rights for the benefit of third parties.
      
 The appeal
By its appeal, the appellant asks the Court to set aside the judgment under appeal and the decision at issue. It requests,
         moreover, that the Commission be ordered to pay the costs of the appeal and those incurred at first instance.
      
The appellant relies on a single ground of appeal, alleging the infringement of the third indent of Article 4(1)(a) of Regulation
         No 1049/2001.
      
That ground of appeal is composed of three parts, alleging, respectively, (i) that the provisions of the vade-mecum may be
         relied on against the Commission, (ii) that the General Court failed to acknowledge that there was a presumption that the
         documents at issue had been disseminated to a large number of people and (iii) that the General Court failed to acknowledge
         that the Commission waived all confidentiality by refraining from marking the documents at issue with the designations referred
         to in Article 9(1) of Regulation No 1049/2001, concerning the secret or confidential nature of the documents at issue.
      
 The first part of the single ground of appeal, alleging that the provisions of the vade-mecum may be relied on against the
            Commission
By the first part of the single ground of appeal, the appellant criticises the General Court for holding that the rules contained
         in the vade-mecum could not be relied on against the Commission. In particular, the General Court did not take account of
         the fact that the vade-mecum invoked by the appellant was disclosed to it by the Commission on its own initiative. The appellant
         therefore argues that the vade-mecum has entered the public domain and, as a result, may be relied on against the Commission.
      
The Commission considers that argument to be inadmissible.
      
It must be pointed out that the appellant’s argument that the rules contained in the vade-mecum may be relied on against the
         Commission is based on the premiss that, by refusing to grant the appellant access to the documents at issue, the Commission
         departed from the wording of the vade-mecum according to which, if the information contained in a document has already been
         disseminated to a large number of persons, a refusal to disclose the document is not justified.
      
In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the General Court made a finding of fact that the documents at issue were sent
         to a restricted and specific group of persons only, established on the basis of a predetermined criterion consisting of participation
         in a process of assistance to the Commission.
      
Moreover, it must be noted that the General Court dealt with the argument put forward in the first part of the single ground
         of appeal and held, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the appellant ‘neither alleged nor, still less, established
         that the document in question had been the subject of any form of publication intended for third parties’.
      
By its claim that the vade-mecum entered the public domain, the appellant is in reality contesting a factual assessment made
         by the General Court.
      
According to the case-law, an appeal lies on points of law only. The General Court has exclusive jurisdiction to find and
         appraise the relevant facts and to assess the evidence. The appraisal of those facts and the assessment of that evidence thus
         do not, save where the facts or evidence are distorted, constitute points of law open, as such, to review by the Court of
         Justice on appeal (see judgment in Viega v Commission, C‑276/P, EU:C:2013:163, paragraphs and 29).
      
Accordingly, and in the absence of any distortion of the facts committed by the General Court, the first part of the single
         ground of appeal must be rejected as inadmissible.
      
 The second part of the single ground of appeal, alleging a presumption that the documents at issue were disseminated to a
            large number of people
By the second part of the single ground of appeal, the appellant claims that, since the documents at issue were sent to collective
         entities — trade associations, in this instance — there is a presumption that those documents were actually intended for a
         large number of persons. The appellant therefore argues that the General Court, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal,
         erred in law by considering that the appellant had not proved that any of those documents in fact ended up in the possession
         of, or were made directly accessible to, legal or natural persons other than their initial recipients.
      
The Commission rightly submits that the appellant’s argument amounts to contesting a finding of fact made by the General Court,
         according to which the documents in question had not been communicated to anyone other than their initial recipients.
      
The alleged presumption invoked by the appellant has no basis in EU law. In that respect, the appellant fails to refer to
         any provision of EU law establishing such a presumption or cite any case-law of the Court from which such a presumption could
         be inferred. In seeking to invoke such a presumption, the appellant is in reality contesting findings of fact made by the
         General Court.
      
Accordingly, and in the absence of any distortion of the facts committed by the General Court, the second part of the single
         ground of appeal must be rejected as inadmissible.
      
 The third part of the single ground of appeal, alleging that the Commission implicitly waived confidentiality
By the third part of the single ground of appeal, the appellant claims that, by failing to mark the documents at issue with
         one of the specific designations referred to in Article 9(1) of Regulation No 1049/2001, concerning the confidential nature
         of the documents at issue, the Commission implicitly waived the confidentiality of those documents. The appellant therefore
         concludes that the General Court committed an error of law by considering, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that
         an implicit waiver of any restrictions on the dissemination of the documents at issue covered by the request for access cannot
         be inferred from the mere fact that the Commission did not mark those documents as being confidential.
      
The Commission submits, inter alia, that the third part of the single ground of appeal is inadmissible.
      
As a preliminary point, it must be observed that the appellant criticises the conclusion in paragraph of the judgment under
         appeal that an implicit waiver of any restrictions on the dissemination of the documents covered by the request for access
         cannot be inferred from the mere fact that the Commission did not mark those documents as being confidential, a conclusion
         which was a decisive factor for the rejection of the line of argument put forward by the appellant regarding Article 9(1)
         of Regulation No 1049/2001. The appellant therefore identifies the elements of the judgment under appeal which are being challenged
         with sufficient precision to enable the Court to carry out its review of the lawfulness thereof (see, to that effect, judgment
         in Nuova Agricast and Cofra v Commission, C‑67/P, EU:C:2010:607, paragraphs and 49).
      
The third part of the single ground of appeal is therefore admissible.
      
As to the substance, it does not follow from either Article or Article of Regulation No 1049/that the fact that a
         document has not previously been classified pursuant to Article 9(1) prevents an institution from refusing access to that
         document on the basis of Article 4. Accordingly, the mere fact that a document is not marked with one of the designations
         referred to in Article of Regulation No 1049/cannot prevent the exceptions provided for in Article 4(1)(a) thereof
         from applying, unless the latter provision is to be deprived of all practical effect (see, to that effect, judgment in Jurašinović v Council, C‑576/P, EU:C:2013:777, paragraphs 41, and 47).
      
In that regard, the General Court rightly held, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, that the absence of a
         designation expressly indicating the internal or confidential nature of the documents at issue did not constitute a conclusive
         factor in the assessment of whether or not those documents must be protected. The General Court also rightly held, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, that, since Regulation No 1049/contains no express provision to that effect, the
         fact that the Commission did not mark those documents with one of the aforementioned designations cannot be interpreted as
         constituting an implicit waiver by the Commission of any restrictions on the dissemination of the documents at issue.
      
Consequently, the third part of the single ground of appeal must be rejected as unfounded.
      
As none of the three parts of the ground relied on by the appellant in support of its appeal have been accepted, that appeal
         must be dismissed in its entirety.
      
 Costs
In accordance with Article 184(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, where the appeal is unfounded, the Court
         is to make a decision as to the costs.
      
Under Article 138(1) of those rules, which apply to the procedure on appeal by virtue of Article 184(1) thereof, the unsuccessful
         party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission
         has requested that the appellant be ordered to pay the costs and the appellant has been unsuccessful, it must be ordered to
         pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Tenth Chamber) hereby:
1.      Dismisses the appeal;
2.      Orders Stichting Corporate Europe Observatory to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 