
Case C-450/Ulrich Schröder
v
Finanzamt Hameln
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Niedersächsisches Finanzgericht)
(Free movement of capital – Direct taxation – Taxation of income from the letting of immovable property – Deductibility of annuities paid to a relative in the context of an anticipated succession inter vivos – Condition of being subject to unlimited tax liability in the Member State at issue)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Preliminary rulings – Admissibility – Need to provide the Court with sufficient information on the factual and legislative
            context – Scope and limits
(Art. TFEU; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 23)
2.        Free movement of capital – Restrictions – Tax legislation – Income tax – Rental income
(Art. TFEU)
1.        In view of the division of responsibilities between the national courts and the Court of Justice on which the procedure referred
         to in Article TFEU is based, the referring court cannot be required to make all the findings of fact and of law required
         by its judicial function before it may bring the matter before the Court. It is sufficient that both the subject-matter of
         the dispute in the main proceedings and the main issues raised for the European Union legal order may be understood from the
         reference for a preliminary ruling, in order to enable the Member States to submit their observations in accordance with Article
         of the Statute of the Court of Justice and to participate effectively in the proceedings before the Court.
      
(see para. 19)
2.        Article TFEU must be interpreted as precluding legislation of a Member State which, while allowing a resident taxpayer
         to deduct the annuities paid to a relative who transferred to him immovable property situated in the territory of that State
         from the rental income derived from that property, does not grant such a deduction to a non-resident taxpayer, in so far as
         the undertaking to pay those annuities results from the transfer of that property.
      
To the extent that a non-resident taxpayer’s undertaking to pay the annuity to his relative results from the transfer to him
         of immovable property situated in the Member State concerned – that being a matter for the referring court to establish –
         that annuity constitutes an expense directly linked to the use of that property, with the result that that individual is in
         that regard in a situation comparable to that of a resident taxpayer.
      
In those circumstances, national provisions which, in matters of income tax, deny non-residents the right to deduct such an
         expense, while that right is, by contrast, granted to residents, is, in the absence of valid justification, contrary to Article
         TFEU.
      
(see paras 46-47, 49, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
March (*)
      
(Free movement of capital – Direct taxation – Taxation of income from the letting of immovable property – Deductibility of annuities paid to a relative in the context of an anticipated succession inter vivos – Condition of being subject to unlimited tax liability in the Member State at issue)
In Case C‑450/09,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Niedersächsisches Finanzgericht (Germany), made by decision
         of October 2009, received at the Court on November 2009, in the proceedings
      
Ulrich Schröder
v
Finanzamt Hameln,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, President of the Chamber, A. Arabadjiev, U. Lõhmus (Rapporteur), A. Ó Caoimh and P. Lindh,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: Y. Bot,
Registrar: B. Fülöp, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on November 2010,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Mr Schröder, by R. Geck, Rechtsanwalt, 
–        the Finanzamt Hameln, by P. Klose, acting as Agent,
–        the German Government, by C. Blaschke, acting as Agent,
–        the French Government, by G. de Bergues and J.‑S. Pilczer, acting as Agents,
–        the European Commission, by R. Lyal and W. Mölls, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on December 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles TFEU and TFEU.
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between Mr Schröder and the Finanzamt Hameln (Tax Office Hameln, Germany) concerning
         the refusal by the Finanzamt Hameln to authorise the deduction of the annuity paid by Mr Schröder to his mother from the income
         derived from the letting of immovable property situated in Germany and acquired by him, inter alia, in the context of an anticipated
         succession inter vivos.
      
 Legal context
 European Union law
Article 1(1) of Council Directive 88/361/EEC of June for the implementation of Article of the Treaty [article repealed
         by the Treaty of Amsterdam] (OJ L 178, p. 5) provides:
      
‘Without prejudice to the following provisions, Member States shall abolish restrictions on movements of capital taking place
         between persons resident in Member States. To facilitate application of this Directive, capital movements shall be classified
         in accordance with the Nomenclature in Annex I.’
      
The capital movements listed in Annex I to Directive 88/include, in section XI of that annex, personal capital movements,
         which in turn include gifts and inheritances.
      
 National law
Paragraph of the Law on Income Tax (Einkommensteuergesetz), in the version applicable at the time of the facts in the main
         proceedings (BGBl. I, p. 4210; ‘the EStG’), provides, inter alia, that natural persons who have their domicile or habitual
         residence in Germany are subject to unlimited income tax liability, whereas those who are not domiciled or habitually resident
         in Germany are subject to limited income tax liability in the case where they receive income of German origin within the meaning
         of Paragraph of the EStG. Income coming under Paragraph includes that derived from the letting of immovable property
         situated in Germany.
      
Paragraph of the EStG is entitled ‘Special expenditure’. Subparagraph of that paragraph states as follows:
      
‘The following expenses shall constitute special expenditure where they are not business or occupational expenses:
…
1a.      annuities and permanent burdens based on specific obligations, which have no economic link to income which is not taken into
         consideration in the assessment of tax; …’
      
Paragraph of the EStG contains specific provisions concerning persons with limited tax liability. Under subparagraph 1:
      
‘Persons with limited tax liability may deduct business expenses (Paragraph 4(4) to (8)) or occupational expenses (Paragraph
         9) only to the extent that those expenses are economically linked to income of German origin. ... Paragraphs ... ... do
         not apply. ... ’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
Mr Schröder is a German national who is resident and employed in Belgium.
      
By a document of April certified by a notary, he acquired from his parents immovable property situated in Germany,
         which was subject to a right of usufruct in their favour. By a document of December certified by a notary, other immovable
         property situated in Germany was transferred by their mother to Mr Schröder and his brother by means of anticipated succession
         inter vivos. The rights of usufruct which their mother had hitherto enjoyed over several properties were transformed into an annuity
         under the terms of which, from December 2002, Mr Schröder and his brother each had to pay their mother a monthly sum of
         EUR 000.
      
For the year 2002, Mr Schröder received, in Germany, income of EUR from the letting of the property acquired in and EUR 749.from the property held jointly by him and his brother.
      
The Finanzamt Hameln based the tax notice addressed to Mr Schröder in respect of the year on the sum of those two amounts
         and refused to take into account the annuity of EUR paid by him in December 2002.
      
Mr Schröder brought an action against that refusal before the Niedersächsisches Finanzgericht (Finance Court of Lower Saxony).
         That court states that the possibility for a person such as Mr Schröder’s brother, who resides in Germany and is, as a result,
         subject to unlimited income tax liability, to deduct from the taxable amount such an annuity as a category of special expenditure
         coming under Paragraph 10(1)(1a) of the EStG is well established in the case-law of the Bundesfinanzhof (Federal Finance Court).
         The Bundesfinanzhof, according to the Niedersächsisches Finanzgericht, takes the view that, in relation to immovable property
         transferred by means of anticipated succession inter vivos, the payments agreed, such as annuities, do not constitute consideration, or partial consideration, and it excludes those
         payments in full from the calculation of income.
      
However, according to the referring court, a person such as Mr Schröder, who, as a non-resident, is subject only to limited
         income tax liability in Germany, is not entitled to deduct such an annuity from his taxable income because Paragraph 50(1)
         of the EStG excludes the application of Paragraph of the EStG to him.
      
The referring court has doubts as to whether this difference in the tax treatment of resident and non-resident taxpayers is
         compatible with European Union law and, in particular, with Article TFEU.
      
In those circumstances, the Niedersächsisches Finanzgericht decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following question
         to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Is a situation where a relative with limited tax liability in the Federal Republic of Germany, unlike a person with unlimited
         tax liability, may not deduct from his total income, as special expenditure, annuities paid in connection with income from
         letting or leasing contrary to Articles [TFEU] and [TFEU]?’
      
 Consideration of the question referred
 Admissibility
The German Government takes the view that the reference for a preliminary ruling is inadmissible on the ground that the referring
         court fails to provide information concerning the factual circumstances and the legal context sufficient to enable the Member
         States, in particular, to comment on the present proceedings in full knowledge of the facts. First, there is no detailed information
         concerning the manner in which the immovable property was transferred to Mr Schröder, the termination of the existing rights
         of usufruct and the payment of the monthly annuity. Second, there is insufficient information concerning the content and interpretation
         of the national legislation regarding special expenditure, within the meaning of Paragraph of the EStG, and the differences
         between that expenditure and other categories of expenditure, such as business expenses and occupational expenses. In the
         absence of such detailed information, it is not possible to analyse the link between certain expenses of a non-resident taxpayer
         and his taxable income in order to determine whether such a taxpayer has been subject to unlawful discrimination.
      
In that regard, it should be recalled that the Court may reject a reference for a preliminary ruling submitted by a national
         court only where it is quite obvious that the interpretation of European Union law that is sought is unrelated to the actual
         facts of the main action or its purpose, where the problem is hypothetical, or where the Court does not have before it the
         factual or legal material necessary to give a useful answer to the questions submitted to it (see, inter alia, Case C‑415/Bosman [1995] ECR I‑4921, paragraph 61, and Case C‑97/Schmelz [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 29).
      
With regard, more particularly, to the information that must be provided to the Court in an order for reference, that information
         does not serve only to enable the Court to provide answers which will be of use to the referring court; it must also enable
         the governments of the Member States, and other interested parties, to submit observations in accordance with Article of
         the Statute of the Court of Justice. For those purposes, it is necessary that the national court should define the factual
         and legislative context of the questions which it is asking or, at the very least, explain the factual circumstances on which
         those questions are based (see, to that effect, Case C‑345/Heinrich [2009] ECR I‑1659, paragraphs and 31, and Case C‑42/Liga Portuguesa de Futebol Profissional and Bwin International [2009] ECR I‑7633, paragraph 40).
      
However, in view of the division of responsibilities between the national courts and the Court of Justice on which the procedure
         referred to in Article TFEU is based, the referring court cannot be required to make all the findings of fact and of law
         required by its judicial function before it may bring the matter before the Court. It is sufficient that both the subject-matter
         of the dispute in the main proceedings and the main issues raised for the European Union legal order may be understood from
         the reference for a preliminary ruling, in order to enable the Member States to submit their observations in accordance with
         Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice and to participate effectively in the proceedings before the Court (Liga Portuguesa de Futebol Profissional and Bwin International, paragraph 41, and Case C‑439/VEBIC [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 47).
      
In the present case, as is apparent from paragraphs to of the present judgment, the order for reference explains clearly,
         first, how the immovable property owned by Mr Schröder in Germany was acquired and the origin of the annuity which he is required
         to pay to his mother and, second, the effect of the national legislation at issue in the main proceedings with regard to the
         non-deductibility of that annuity from his taxable income. In addition, the referring court states that the resolution of
         the dispute which has been brought before it depends on its establishing whether the difference in treatment between a resident
         taxpayer and a non-resident taxpayer is compatible with European Union law.
      
Those elements are sufficient to explain the subject-matter of the dispute in the main proceedings and the main issues raised
         by it for the European Union legal order and to enable the Court to provide an answer which will be of use to the referring
         court. It should also be pointed out that the French Government and the European Commission have been able to submit to the
         Court detailed written observations on the question referred.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the reference for a preliminary ruling must be regarded as admissible.
      
 Substance
By its question, the referring court asks, in essence, whether Articles TFEU and TFEU must be interpreted as precluding
         legislation of a Member State which, while allowing a resident taxpayer to deduct annuities paid to a relative who transferred
         to him immovable property situated in the territory of that State from the rental income generated by that property, does
         not allow such a deduction to be made by a non-resident taxpayer.
      
First, it is necessary to identify the provision of the FEU Treaty which is applicable to a situation such as that in the
         main proceedings.
      
With regard to Article TFEU, it is settled case-law that, in the absence of a definition in the Treaty of ‘movement of
         capital’ within the meaning of Article 63(1) TFEU, the nomenclature which constitutes Annex I to Directive 88/retains
         an indicative value, even though that directive was adopted on the basis of Articles and 70(1) of the EEC Treaty (Articles
         to of the EEC Treaty were replaced by Articles 73b to 73g of the EC Treaty, which themselves became Articles EC to
         EC), it being understood that, according to the third paragraph of the introduction to that annex, the nomenclature which
         it contains is not exhaustive as regards the notion of movements of capital (see, inter alia, Case C‑318/Persche [2009] ECR I‑359, paragraph and the case-law cited; Case C‑182/Glaxo Wellcome [2009] ECR I‑8591, paragraph 39; Case C‑35/Busley and Cibrian Fernandez [2009] ECR I‑9807, paragraph 17; and Case C‑25/Missionswerk Werner Heukelbach [2011] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 15).
      
In that regard, the Court has already held that inheritances and gifts, which fall under section XI of Annex I to Directive
         88/361, entitled ‘Personal Capital Movements’, constitute movements of capital within the meaning of Article TFEU, except
         in cases where their constituent elements are confined within a single Member State (see, to that effect, Persche, paragraph 27; Busley and Cibrian Fernandez, paragraph 18; and Missionswerk Werner Heukelbach, paragraph 16).
      
Consequently, it must be held that the transfer of immovable property situated in Germany, as a gift or by means of anticipated
         succession inter vivos, to a natural person resident in Belgium comes within the scope of Article TFEU.
      
As regards Article TFEU, which lays down a general prohibition of all discrimination on grounds of nationality, it should
         be noted that that provision applies independently only to situations governed by European Union law for which the Treaty
         does not lay down any specific rules of non-discrimination (see, inter alia, Case C‑443/Hollmann [2007] ECR I‑8491, paragraph and the case-law cited; Case C‑311/SGI [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 31; and Missionswerk Werner Heukelbach, paragraph 18).
      
Since the Treaty provisions on the free movement of capital are applicable and provide specific rules on non-discrimination,
         Article TFEU is not applicable to the main proceedings (see Hollmann, paragraph 29, and Missionswerk Werner Heukelbach, paragraph 19).
      
Second, it should be noted that the measures prohibited by Article 63(1) TFEU, as restrictions on the movement of capital,
         include those which are liable to discourage non-residents from making investments in a Member State or from maintaining such
         investments (see, to that effect, Case C‑377/STEKO Industriemontage [2009] ECR I‑299, paragraphs and and the case-law cited).
      
With regard to the legislation at issue in the main proceedings, a natural person who is not domiciled or habitually resident
         in Germany is, according to Paragraph of the EStG, liable to income tax in that Member State in respect of income derived
         from the letting of immovable property situated in Germany. In contrast to resident taxpayers, a non-resident taxpayer may
         not, under Paragraph of the EStG, deduct from that income an annuity, such as that paid by Mr Schröder to his mother in
         the context of the anticipated succession inter vivos, as special expenditure within the meaning of Paragraph 10(1)(1a) of the EStG.
      
Less favourable tax treatment reserved for non-residents alone might deter them from acquiring or retaining immovable property
         situated in Germany (see, by analogy, Case C‑512/Blanckaert [2005] ECR I‑7685, paragraph 39). It might also deter German residents from naming, as beneficiaries of an anticipated succession
         inter vivos, persons resident in a Member State other than the Federal Republic of Germany (see, by analogy, Missionswerk Werner Heukelbach, paragraph 25).
      
Such legislation constitutes, therefore, a restriction on the free movement of capital which is prohibited, in principle,
         by Article TFEU. 
      
It is true that, according to Article 65(1)(a) TFEU, Article TFEU is without prejudice to the right of Member States to
         distinguish, in their tax law, between taxpayers who are not in the same situation with regard to their place of residence.
      
However, it is important to distinguish unequal treatment permitted under Article 65(1)(a) TFEU from arbitrary discrimination
         or disguised restrictions prohibited under Article 65(3) TFEU. In order for national tax legislation such as that at issue
         in the main proceedings, which distinguishes between resident and non-resident taxpayers, to be regarded as compatible with
         the Treaty provisions on the free movement of capital, the difference in treatment must relate to situations which are not
         objectively comparable or must be justified by an overriding reason in the public interest. Moreover, in order to be justified,
         the difference in treatment must not go beyond what is necessary in order to attain the objective of the legislation in question
         (see Persche, paragraph 41, and Case C‑510/Mattner [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 34).
      
It is thus necessary to examine whether, in the circumstances of the dispute in the main proceedings, the situation of non-residents
         is comparable to that of residents.
      
In that regard, it is settled case-law that, in relation to direct taxes, the situations of residents and non-residents within
         a State are not, as a rule, comparable, since the income received in the territory of a Member State by a non-resident is
         in most cases only a part of his total income, which is concentrated at his place of residence, and because a non-resident’s
         personal ability to pay tax, determined by reference to his aggregate income and his personal and family circumstances, is
         easier to assess at the place where his personal and financial interests are centred, which in general is the place where
         he is habitually resident (Case C‑279/Schumacker [1995] ECR I‑225, paragraphs and 32; Case C‑234/Gerritse [2003] ECR I‑5933, paragraph 43; and Case C‑562/Commission v Spain [2009] ECR I‑9553, paragraph 46).
      
Furthermore, the fact that a Member State does not grant to a non-resident certain tax benefits which it grants to a resident
         is not, as a rule, discriminatory, having regard to the objective differences between the situation of residents and that
         of non-residents, from the point of view both of the source of their income and of their personal ability to pay tax or their
         personal and family circumstances (Schumacker, paragraph 34; Gerritse, paragraph 44; and Commission v Spain, paragraph 47).
      
In the present case, it is not in dispute that the rental income generated in the course of by the immovable property
         owned by Mr Schröder in Germany constituted only a small part of the overall income received by him during that year.
      
However, the Court has held, in relation to expenses, such as business expenses which are directly linked to an activity which
         has generated taxable income in a Member State, that residents and non-residents of that State are in a comparable situation,
         with the result that legislation of that State which denies non-residents, in matters of taxation, the right to deduct such
         expenses, while, on the other hand, allowing residents to do so, risks operating mainly to the detriment of nationals of other
         Member States and therefore constitutes indirect discrimination on grounds of nationality (see Gerritse, paragraphs and 28; Case C‑346/Conijn [2006] ECR I‑6137, paragraph 20; Case C‑290/FKP Scorpio Konzertproduktionen [2006] ECR I‑9461, paragraph 49; Case C‑345/Centro Equestre da Lezíria Grande [2007] ECR I‑1425, paragraph 23; Case C‑11/Eckelkamp and Others [2008] ECR I‑6845, paragraph 50; and Case C‑43/Arens-Sikken [2008] ECR I‑6887, paragraph 44).
      
It follows that legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings would in principle be contrary to Article TFEU
         if the annuity paid by Mr Schröder to his mother were to be regarded as expenditure directly linked to the activity of Mr
         Schröder in letting the immovable property situated in Germany which was transferred to him by his parents.
      
The German Government takes the view that there is no direct link in the present case. According to it, such an annuity, classified
         as special expenditure coming under Paragraph 10(1)(1a) of the EStG, differs from business expenses and occupational expenses
         which, under Paragraph 50(1) of the EStG, can be deducted by a taxpayer with limited tax liability in so far as they represent
         the consideration for the acquisition of a source of income. The payment of such an annuity, it argues, is not the normal
         or legal consequence of the receipt of rental income but forms part of a family support arrangement, with the amount being
         fixed not by reference to the value of the assets transferred but according to the personal needs of the recipient and the
         debtor’s general economic ability to pay, matters which can be adequately assessed only by the Member State in which the debtor
         is resident. Also in that context, the French Government observes that the amount of the annuity is affected neither by the
         lack of rental income nor, conversely, by the receipt of very substantial income.
      
Those arguments cannot be accepted. Even assuming that the amount of an annuity, such as that paid by Mr Schröder, is determined
         on the basis of the ability of the debtor to pay and the recipient’s personal needs, the fact remains that the existence of
         a direct link within the meaning of the case-law cited in paragraph of the present judgment results, not from a correlation,
         of whatever kind, between the amount of the expenditure in question and that of the taxable income, but from the fact that
         that expenditure is inextricably linked to the activity which gives rise to that income (see, in that regard, Centro Equestre da Lezíria Grande, paragraph 25).
      
Thus, the Court has taken the view that expenses occasioned by the activity in question are directly linked to that activity
         (see, to that effect, Gerritse, paragraphs and 27, and Centro Equestre da Lezíria Grande, paragraph 25) and are, thus, necessary in order to carry out that activity. Likewise, such a direct link was accepted with
         regard to costs incurred in obtaining tax advice required in order to prepare a tax return, the duty to file such a return
         resulting from the receipt of income in the Member State concerned (see Conijn, paragraph 22).
      
According to the order for reference, the immovable property transferred to Mr Schröder was, at least in part, subject to
         rights of usufruct which were converted into a monthly annuity which he is required to pay to his mother. It therefore appears
         that the undertaking to pay that annuity results from the transfer of that property, that undertaking having been necessary
         to enable Mr Schröder to assume ownership of the property and, consequently, generate the rental income at issue in the main
         proceedings which is subject to tax in Germany.
      
The view must therefore be taken that, to the extent that Mr Schröder’s undertaking to pay the annuity to his mother results
         from the transfer to him of immovable property situated in Germany – that being a matter for the referring court to establish
         – that annuity constitutes an expense directly linked to the use of that property, with the result that Mr Schröder is in
         that regard in a situation comparable to that of a resident taxpayer.
      
In those circumstances, national provisions which, in matters of income tax, deny non-residents the right to deduct such an
         expense, while that right is, by contrast, granted to residents, is, in the absence of valid justification, contrary to Article
         TFEU.
      
No overriding reason in the public interest has been invoked by the German Government or contemplated by the referring court.
      
In view of the foregoing, the answer to the question referred is that Article TFEU must be interpreted as precluding legislation
         of a Member State which, while allowing a resident taxpayer to deduct the annuities paid to a relative who transferred to
         him immovable property situated in the territory of that State from the rental income derived from that property, does not
         grant such a deduction to a non-resident taxpayer, in so far as the undertaking to pay those annuities results from the transfer
         of that property.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
Article TFEU must be interpreted as precluding legislation of a Member State which, while allowing a resident taxpayer
            to deduct the annuities paid to a relative who transferred to him immovable property situated in the territory of that State
            from the rental income derived from that property, does not grant such a deduction to a non-resident taxpayer, in so far as
            the undertaking to pay those annuities results from the transfer of that property.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 