
Case C-26/Commission of the European Communities
v
Kingdom of Spain
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 76/160/EEC – Quality of bathing waters – Designation as bathing areas – Directive 79/923/EEC – Quality of shellfish waters – Establishment of a pollution reduction programme)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Approximation of laws – Quality of bathing water – Directive 76/– Obligation for Member States to designate bathing areas
            officially – No such obligation
(Council Directive 76/160, Arts 1(2)(a) and 4(1))
2.        Approximation of laws – Quality of shellfish waters – Directive 79/– Definition of shellfish waters – Waters harbouring
            shellfish intended for direct human consumption or for consumption after treatment – Included 
(Council Directive 79/923, Art. 1)
1.        Article 4(1) of Directive 76/concerning the quality of bathing water does not impose on Member States the obligation to
         designate bathing areas officially. Article 1(2)(a) of that directive, which defines bathing waters, shows that it is permissible
         for Member States to allow bathing in certain waters without necessarily designating them as bathing areas.
      
(see paras 15-16, 18)
2.        It is apparent from the wording of Article of Directive 79/on the quality required of shellfish waters, and from the
         3rd, 7th and 10th recitals in the preamble thereto, that that directive applies to all shellfish waters, whether the shellfish
         living in them are intended for direct human consumption or for consumption after treatment.
      
(see paras 22, 24)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
December (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 76/160/EEC – Quality of bathing waters – Designation as bathing areas – Directive 79/923/EEC – Quality of shellfish waters – Establishment of a pollution reduction programme)
In Case C-26/04,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on January 2004,
Commission of the European Communities,  represented by G. Valero Jordana, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Kingdom of Spain,  represented by E. Braquehais Conesa, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of P. Jann, President of the Chamber, K. Schiemann,  N. Colneric, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur) and E. Levits,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: F.G. Jacobs,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure, 
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on July 2005,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application the Commission of the European Communities requests the Court to declare that, by failing to officially
         designate the beaches of ‘Vilela/A Videira’, ‘Niño do Corvo’ and ‘Canabal’, located in the municipality of Moaña, in the province
         of Pontevedra, Comunidad Autónoma de Galicia, as bathing areas and, by failing to adopt a pollution reduction programme for
         the Ría de Vigo, the Kingdom of Spain has failed to fulfil its obligations under, respectively, Article 4(1) of Council Directive
         76/160/EEC of December concerning the quality of bathing water (OJ L 31, p. 1) and Article of Council Directive
         79/923/EEC of October on the quality required of shellfish waters (OJ L 281, p. 47).
      
 Law
Article 1(2)(a) of Directive 76/defines bathing water as:
      
‘all running or still fresh waters or parts thereof and sea water, in which:
–        bathing is explicitly authorised by the competent authorities of each member State, or  
–        bathing is not prohibited and is traditionally practised by a large number of bathers’.
Under Article 3(1) of that directive, Member States are to set, for all bathing areas or for each individual bathing area,
         the values applicable to bathing water for the parameters given in the Annex to that directive.
      
Article 4(1) of that directive provides:
      
‘Member States shall take all necessary measures to ensure that, within years following the notification of this Directive,
         the quality of bathing water conforms to the limit values set in accordance with Article 3.’
      
Article of Directive 79/states:
      
‘This Directive concerns the quality of shellfish waters and applies to those coastal and brackish waters designated by the
         Member States as needing protection or improvement in order to support shellfish (bivalve and gasteropod molluscs) life and
         growth and thus to contribute to the high quality of shellfish products directly edible by man.’ 
      
Under Article 4(1) of that directive:
      
‘Member States shall, initially within a two-year period following the notification of this directive, designate shellfish
         waters.’
      
Article of that directive provides:
      
‘Member States shall establish programmes in order to reduce pollution and to ensure that designated waters conform, within
         six years following designation in accordance with Article 4, to both the values set by the Member States in accordance with
         Article and the comments contained in columns G and I of the Annex.’
      
Parameter of the Annex to Directive 79/923, entitled ‘Faecal coliforms/ml’, indicates a reference value of ‘≤ in
         the shellfish flesh and intervalvular liquid’. That value appears in column ‘G’ of that annex, which makes it, in principle,
         a guide rather than a mandatory value for Member States, in accordance with Article 3(2) of that directive.
      
Nevertheless, footnote relating to parameter provides: ‘However, pending the adoption of a Directive on the protection
         of consumers of shellfish products, it is essential that this value be observed in waters in which live shellfish directly
         edible by man.’
      
Since Article of the Act concerning the conditions of Accession of the Kingdom of Spain and the Portuguese Republic and
         the adjustments to the Treaties (OJ L 302, p. 23) does not provide for any derogation from Directives 76/and 79/in favour of the Kingdom of Spain, the quality of Spanish bathing water should have conformed to the mandatory limit values
         set by Directive 76/as from January and the programmes referred to in Article of Directive 79/should have
         been implemented by October at the latest.
      
 The pre-litigation procedure
Taking the view that the Kingdom of Spain had failed to fulfil its obligations under Directives 76/and 79/923, the Commission
         initiated the procedure for failure to fulfil obligations laid down by Article EC by letter of formal notice of January
         2001.
      
Having rejected the arguments put forward by the Spanish Government in response to that letter of formal notice, the Commission
         called on the Kingdom of Spain, in a reasoned opinion of July 2002, to take all the measures necessary to comply with that
         opinion within two months of its receipt. 
      
Since the Spanish Government did not reply to that reasoned opinion, the Commission brought the present action.
      
 The action
 The first claim, concerning infringement of Directive 76/As the Commission states in its reply, the infringement alleged against the Kingdom of Spain in the first claim is the failure
         to designate three beaches on the Galician coast as bathing areas rather than the failure to comply with the mandatory limit
         values set by Directive 76/160.
      
Article 4(1) of Directive 76/does not expressly impose the obligation on Member States to officially designate beaches
         or other places as bathing areas.  
      
On the contrary, Article 1(2)(a) of that directive defines bathing waters as being those in which bathing is either explicitly
         authorised by the competent authorities of each Member State or is not prohibited and is traditionally practised by a large
         number of bathers. It follows from the second part of that definition that it is permissible for Member States to allow bathing
         in certain waters without necessarily designating them as bathing areas.
      
As pointed out by the Advocate General at point of his Opinion, the absence in Directive 76/of an obligation to officially
         designate the relevant waters is emphasised by the fact that other directives relating to the protection of the environment
         and public health do contain an express provision requiring Member States to officially designate or identify certain areas
         or waters by a certain date. 
      
It follows that Article 4(1) of Directive 76/does not impose on Member States the obligation to officially designate bathing
         areas as the Commission claims. 
      
Consequently, the first claim is unfounded and must therefore be dismissed.
      
 The second claim, concerning infringement of Article of Directive 79/It is common ground between the parties that the waters of the Ría de Vigo have been designated by the Kingdom of Spain as
         shellfish waters in accordance with Article of Directive 79/923.  
      
In its defence, the Kingdom of Spain maintains, principally, that the scope of that directive, defined in Article 1, is limited
         to waters where shellfish which are ‘directly edible by man’ live. The directive has a single objective: to improve of the
         quality of waters used for the cultivation of shellfish directly edible by man. According to the Kingdom of Spain, no area
         of the Ría de Vigo is an area producing shellfish intended for direct human consumption. The Ría de Vigo produces only shellfish
         which undergo purification treatment, or re-laying in beds, prior to consumption. Consequently, the failure to comply with
         the reference value provided for in Directive 79/does not constitute an infringement of Article of that directive. 
      
That argument cannot be accepted. Article of Directive 79/provides that it applies to those coastal and brackish waters
         designated by the Member States as needing protection or improvement in order to support shellfish life and growth ‘and thus
         to contribute to the high quality of shellfish products directly edible by man’. As stated by the Advocate General at point
         of his Opinion, the phrase ‘and thus to contribute to the high quality of shellfish products directly edible by man’ does
         not limit the scope of the directive to that aim, but rather indicates that it simultaneously pursues a further objective
         which may be achieved by the same means, the use of the adverb ‘thus’ being significant in this respect. It follows from that
         wording that the directive applies to all shellfish waters, whether the shellfish living in them are intended for direct human
         consumption or for consumption after treatment. 
      
That interpretation is confirmed by the wording of footnote concerning parameter in the Annex to Directive 79/923. That
         footnote specified that the guide value for coliforms must, for a certain period, be regarded as mandatory ‘in waters in which
         live shellfish directly edible by man’. It follows that the value set remains the guide value for waters in which shellfish
         which are not directly edible by man live, which indicates that the directive does apply to such waters. 
      
Such an interpretation is also in accordance with the objective of Directive 79/923, as shown by the preamble to that directive.
         It follows, in particular, from the 3rd, 7th and 10th recitals in that preamble that its aim is the protection of shellfish
         water quality in general, whether or not the shellfish that live in those waters are intended for direct human consumption.
         
      
It follows that, by reason of Article 1, Directive 79/applies to the waters of the Ría de Vigo.
      
The Kingdom of Spain maintains, in the alternative, that it has adopted an overall programme to reduce pollution in the Ría
         de Vigo and that a programme of gradual pollution reduction measures has been drawn up. Consequently, the Spanish authorities
         have acted in accordance with Article of Directive 79/923.
      
The Commission does not dispute the existence of those programmes but considers that they are general sewage treatment programmes
         which do not fulfil the criteria for a pollution reduction programme specific to shellfish waters, within the meaning of Article
         of Directive 79/923.
      
It follows from Case C-298/Commission v Germany [1996] ECR I-6747, paragraph 24, that Article of Directive 79/imposes on Member States the obligation to establish
         specific programmes in order to reduce pollution of shellfish waters. 
      
Since the pollution reduction programmes referred to by the Kingdom of Spain in its defence are not specific programmes in
         order to reduce the pollution of shellfish waters, the alleged failure is established. 
      
Accordingly, the Commission’s second claim must be regarded as well founded. 
      
Consequently, it must be held that, by failing to adopt a pollution reduction programme for the shellfish waters of the Ría
         de Vigo, the Kingdom of Spain failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of Directive 79/923. 
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         asked for in the successful party’s pleadings. However, under the first subparagraph of Article 69(3), where each party succeeds
         on some and fails on other heads, the Court may order that the parties bear their own costs. Since the Commission and the
         Kingdom of Spain have each been unsuccessful in part in their pleas, they must be ordered to bear their own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, by failing to adopt a pollution reduction programme for the shellfish waters of the Ría de Vigo, the Kingdom
            of Spain has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of Council Directive 79/923/EEC of October on the quality
            required of shellfish waters;
2.      Dismisses the remainder of the action;
3.      Orders the Commission of the European Communities and the Kingdom of Spain to bear their own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Spanish.
      
Top  
 