
Avis juridique important
|
61997JJudgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber) of July 1998.  -  Commission of the European Communities v Portuguese Republic.  -  Failure of a Member State to fulfil its obligations - Failure to transpose Directive 94/51/EC within the prescribed period.  -  Case C-285/97.  
European Court reports Page I-Parties
Grounds
Decision on costs
Operative part
Keywords
Member States - Obligations - Implementation of directives - Failure to fulfil obligations not contested(EC Treaty, Art. 169)  
Parties
In Case C-285/97,Commission of the European Communities, represented by Francisco de Sousa Fialho, of its Legal Service, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of Carlos Gómez de la Cruz, of its Legal Service, Wagner Centre, Kirchberg, applicant, v Portuguese Republic, represented by Luís Fernandes, Director of the Legal Service of the European Communities Directorate-General in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and Pedro Portugal, of the Legal Office of the Directorate-General for Environment, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the Portuguese Embassy, Allée Scheffer, defendant, APPLICATION for a declaration that, by failing to adopt within the prescribed period the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Commission Directive 94/51/EC of November adapting to technical progress Council Directive 90/219/EEC on the contained use of genetically modified micro-organisms (OJ L 297, p. 29), the Portuguese Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under the third paragraph of Article of the EC Treaty and Article of Directive 94/51/EC, THE COURT (Sixth Chamber), composed of: H. Ragnemalm (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, G.F. Mancini, J.L. Murray, G. Hirsch and K.M. Ioannou, Judges, Advocate General: A. La Pergola, Registrar: R. Grass, having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur, after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on April 1998, gives the following Judgment  
Grounds
By application lodged at the Court Registry on August 1997, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action under Article of the EC Treaty for a declaration that, by failing to adopt within the prescribed period the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Commission Directive 94/51/EC of November adapting to technical progress Council Directive 90/219/EEC on the contained use of genetically modified micro-organisms (OJ L 297, p. 29), the Portuguese Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under the third paragraph of Article of the EC Treaty and Article of Directive 94/51/EC.Under Article of Directive 94/the Member States were to bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directive by April and inform the Commission thereof forthwith. Since it had not received any notification concerning the transposition of Directive 94/into Portuguese law and had no other information enabling it to conclude that the Portuguese Republic had complied with that obligation, the Commission initiated the procedure provided for in Article of the Treaty on August by sending the Portuguese Government a letter of formal notice whereby it called upon it to submit its observations within two months. By letter of August the Portuguese Republic replied that Directive 94/had been transposed into Portuguese national law by Portaria (Implementing Order) No 602/of July which had been notified previously to the Commission. The Commission proceeded to analyse that order and concluded that it could not be considered to have transposed Directive 94/into domestic law.  On December 1996, it accordingly sent the Portuguese Republic a reasoned opinion, calling upon it to adopt the measures necessary to comply with its obligations under Directive 94/within two months with effect from its notification. Since no reply was forthcoming and it had no other information to justify a finding that the Portuguese Republic had adopted the requisite measures, the Commission brought the present action. The Portuguese Government does not deny that it failed to fulfil its obligations.  However, it points out that a draft Portaria intended to transpose Directive 94/is currently awaiting publication in the Diário da República. Since the transposition of Directive 94/has not been achieved within the prescribed period, the action brought by the Commission must be held to be well founded. It must therefore be held that, by failing to adopt within the prescribed period the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Directive 94/51, the Portuguese Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of that directive.  
Decision on costs
CostsUnder Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs. Since the Portuguese Republic has been unsuccessful, it must be ordered to pay the costs.  
Operative part
On those grounds,THE COURT (Sixth Chamber) hereby: 1. Declares that, by failing to adopt within the prescribed period the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Commission Directive 94/51/EC of November adapting to technical progress Council Directive 90/219/EEC on the contained use of genetically modified micro-organisms, the Portuguese Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of that directive; 2. Orders the Portuguese Republic to pay the costs.  
Top  
 