
Avis juridique important
|
62001OOrder of the President of the Fifth Chamber of the Court of September 2002.  -  Commission of the European Communities v Ireland.  -  Removal from the register.  -  Case C-120/01.  
European Court reports Page I-Parties
Grounds
Operative part
Keywords
Procedure - Discontinuance by the applicant - Removal from the Register(Rules of Procedure of the Court, Art. 78) 
Parties
In Case C-120/01,Commission of the European Communities, represented by R.B. Wainwright, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,applicant,vIreland, represented by D.J. O'Hagan and C. O'Rourke, acting as Agents, assisted by N. Nyland, BL, with an address for service in Luxembourg,defendant,APPLICATION for a declaration that, by failing by September to prepare and communicate to the Commission the plans, outlines and summaries required pursuant to Articles and 4(1) of Council Directive 96/59/EC of September on the disposal of polychlorinated biphenyls and polychlorinated terphenyls (PCB/PCT), Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive,THE PRESIDENT OF THE FIFTH CHAMBER OF THE COURTafter hearing Advocate General Mischomakes the followingOrder 
Grounds
By application lodged at the Court Registry on March 2001, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action pursuant to Article EC for a declaration that, by failing by September to prepare and communicate to the Commission the plans, outlines and summaries required pursuant to Articles and 4(1) of Council Directive 96/59/EC of September on the disposal of polychlorinated biphenyls and polychlorinated terphenyls (PCB/PCT), Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive.By letter of July received at the Court Registry on July 2002, the Commission informed the Court, in accordance with Article of the Rules of Procedure, that it wished to discontinue the proceedings.Ireland did not submit any observations relating to that discontinuance within the time allowed to it for that purpose.Pursuant to the third indent of Article 69(5) of the Rules of Procedure, the parties should be ordered to bear their own costs. 
Operative part
On those grounds,THE PRESIDENT OF THE FIFTH CHAMBER OF THE COURThereby orders:1. Case C-120/is removed from the register.2. The Commission of the European Communities and Ireland shall bear their own costs. 
Top  
 