
Case C-94/Danfoss A/S
and
Sauer-Danfoss ApS
v
Skatteministeriet
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Vestre Landsret)
(Indirect taxes – Excise duties on mineral oils – Incompatibility with European Union law – Non-repayment of excise duty to purchasers of goods to whom the excise duty has been passed on)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        European Union law – Direct effect – National duties incompatible with European Union law – Repayment – Refusal – Condition
2.        European Union law – Direct effect – National duties incompatible with European Union law – Repayment – Claim for reimbursement
            brought by a final purchaser which has not itself paid the duty to the tax authorities
3.        European Union law – Direct effect – National duties incompatible with European Union law – Claim for damages
1.        The right to a refund of charges levied in a Member State in breach of the rules of Union law is the consequence and complement
         of the rights conferred on individuals by the provisions of Union law prohibiting such charges. The Member State is therefore
         required in principle to repay charges levied in breach of Union law. The repayment of duties wrongly levied can be refused
         only where repayment would entail unjust enrichment of the persons concerned, that is to say, where it is established that
         the person required to pay such charges has actually passed them on to the purchaser directly.
      
(see paras 20-21)
2.        The rules of Union law must be construed as meaning that a Member State may oppose a claim for reimbursement of a duty unduly
         paid, brought by the purchaser to whom that duty has been passed on, on the ground that it is not the purchaser who has paid
         the duty to the tax authorities, provided that the purchaser is able, on the basis of national law, to bring a civil action
         against the taxable person for recovery of the sum unduly paid and provided that the reimbursement, by that taxable person,
         of the duty unduly paid is not in practical terms impossible or excessively difficult.
      
However, if reimbursement by the taxable person were to prove impossible or excessively difficult, in particular, in the case
         of the latter’s insolvency, the principle of effectiveness requires the purchaser to be able to bring his claim for reimbursement
         against the tax authorities directly and, to that end, the Member State to provide the necessary instruments and detailed
         procedural rules.
      
(see paras 28-29, operative part 1)
3.        The rules of Union law must be construed as meaning that a Member State may reject a claim for damages brought by a purchaser
         to whom a duty unduly paid has been passed on by the taxable person, on the ground that there is no direct causal link between
         the levying of that duty and the damage suffered, provided that the purchaser is able, on the basis of national law, to bring
         that claim against the taxable person and provided that the compensation, by that taxable person, of the damage suffered by
         the purchaser is not in practical terms impossible or excessively difficult.
      
However, if it were to prove impossible or excessively difficult for the taxable person to compensate the purchaser who bore
         the financial burden of the duty unduly paid and passed on to him for the damage suffered, in particular, in the case of the
         latter’s insolvency, the principle of effectiveness requires the purchaser to be able to bring his claim for reimbursement
         against the State directly, without that State’s being able legitimately to rely on the lack of a direct causal link between
         the levying of the duty that was not due and the damage suffered by the purchaser.
      
(see paras 38-39, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Indirect taxes – Excise duties on mineral oils – Incompatibility with European Union law – Non-repayment of excise duty to purchasers of goods to whom the excise duty has been passed on)
In Case C‑94/10,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the Vestre Landsret (Denmark), made by decision of February
         2010, received at the Court on February 2010, in the proceedings
      
Danfoss A/S,
Sauer-Danfoss ApS
v
Skatteministeriet,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of A. Tizzano, President of the Chamber, M. Safjan (Rapporteur), A. Borg Barthet, E. Levits and J.-J. Kasel, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: C. Strömholm, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on February 2011,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Danfoss A/S, by T.K. Kristjánsson and H.S. Hansen, advokaterne,
–        Sauer-Danfoss ApS, by A. Møllin and E. Vistisen, advokaterne,
–        the Danish Government, by V. Pasternak Jørgensen, K. Lundgaard Hansen and B. Weis Fogh, acting as Agents,
–        the Spanish Government, by M. Muñoz Pérez, acting as Agent,
–        the Italian Government, by G. Palmieri, acting as Agent, assisted by G. Albenzio, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Polish Government, by K. Rokicka, acting as Agent,
–        the Swedish Government, by A. Falk, acting as Agent,
–        the United Kingdom Government, by S. Hathaway, acting as Agent, assisted by P. Mantle, Barrister,
–        the European Commission, by N. Fenger and W. Mölls, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2011,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of European Union (‘EU’) law on recovery of sums unduly
         paid and on the liability incurred by Member States as a consequence of levying a duty which is incompatible with that law.
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between Danfoss A/S (‘Danfoss’) and Sauer-Danfoss ApS (‘Sauer-Danfoss’), on the
         one hand, and the Skatteministeriet (Danish Ministry of Taxation), on the other, concerning the Skatteministeriet’s refusal
         to grant those undertakings reimbursement of a duty on mineral oils levied in breach of EU law or compensation for the damage
         suffered as a consequence of the levying of that unlawful duty.
      
 Legal context
 EU law
Article of Council Directive 92/12/EEC of February on the general arrangements for products subject to excise duty
         and on the holding, movement and monitoring of such products (OJ L 76, p. 1) provides:
      
‘1.      This Directive lays down the arrangements for products subject to excise duties and other indirect taxes which are levied
         directly or indirectly on the consumption of such products, except for value added tax and taxes established by the Community.
      
2.      The particular provisions relating to the structures and rates of duty on products subject to excise duty shall be set out
         in specific Directives.’
      
Under Article 3(1) and (2) of that directive:
      
‘1.      This Directive shall apply at Community level to the following products as defined in the relevant Directives:
–        mineral oils,
–        alcohol and alcoholic beverages,
–        manufactured tobacco.
2.      The products listed in paragraph may be subject to other indirect taxes for specific purposes, provided that those taxes
         comply with the tax rules applicable for excise duty and VAT purposes as far as determination of the tax base, calculation
         of the tax, chargeability and monitoring of the tax are concerned.’
      
Article of Council Directive 92/81/EEC of October on the harmonisation of the structures of excise duties on mineral
         oils (OJ L 316, p. 12) provides:
      
‘1.      Member States shall impose a harmonised excise duty on mineral oils in accordance with this Directive.
2.      Member States shall fix their rates in accordance with Directive 92/82/EEC on the approximation of the rates of excise duty
         on mineral oils.’
      
Under Article 8(1) of Directive 92/81: 
      
‘1.      In addition to the general provisions set out in Directive 92/12/EEC on exempt uses of excisable products, and without prejudice
         to other Community provisions, Member States shall exempt the following from the harmonised excise duty under conditions which
         they shall lay down for the purpose of ensuring the correct and straightforward application of such exemptions and of preventing
         any evasion, avoidance or abuse:
      
(a)      mineral oils used for purposes other than as motor fuels or as heating fuels;
(b)      mineral oils supplied for use as fuels for the purpose of air navigations other than private pleasure flying.
…’
The Commission Communication of November on the proposal for a Council Directive on the harmonisation of the structures
         of excise duties on mineral oils (COM(90) final) expressly stated that lubricants and hydraulic oils could benefit from
         the exemption under Directive 92/81.
      
 National law
For the purposes of transposing Directives 92/and 92/into national law, the Danish legislature adopted Law No of
         December on energy duties on mineral oil products (‘the DMO Law’). The first paragraph of Article of that Law provided:
      
‘Oil products shall be subject to an excise duty in national territory. The rates shall be fixed as follows:
… 
(12)      Lubricants, hydraulic oils and other similar goods: DKK 1.per litre.’
The excise duty on lubricant and hydraulic oils was payable by the oil companies, but the explanatory memorandum to the DMO
         Law forecast that that duty would be passed on to the purchasers of the taxed oils.
      
Following the delivery of the judgment in Case C‑346/Braathens [1999] ECR I‑3419, confirmed by Case C‑437/Commission v Italy [2003] ECR I‑9861, from which it follows that the introduction of an indirect tax on products exempted from harmonised excise
         duty would render Article 8(1)(b) of Directive 92/entirely ineffective and could not therefore be based on Article 3(2)
         of Directive 92/12, the Danish tax authorities decided to suspend, at executive level, the levying of the duty on lubricant
         and hydraulic oils with effect from December 2001. Law No of June abolished the duty, also with effect from December 2001.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Between January and November 2001, Danfoss purchased lubricant oils from various Danish oil companies which, after
         paying the duty on mineral oils to the Danish exchequer, passed on the total amount of that duty – DKK – to Danfoss.
      
Between January and November 2001, Danfoss sold some of those oils to Sauer-Danfoss, including in the sale price
         a duty on mineral oils totalling DKK 096.
      
Following the abolition of the duty on mineral oils, Danfoss and Sauer‑Danfoss claimed reimbursement of the part of the total
         price for the lubricant oils purchased by them which corresponded to that unlawful duty – DKK and DKK 096,
         respectively – from the Danish tax authorities, but stating that, if Danfoss were to recover the total amount claimed from
         the tax authorities, it would repay Sauer‑Danfoss the sum of DKK representing the duty on mineral oils included
         in Danfoss’ sale price, in which case Sauer-Danfoss would withdraw its claim. Sauer-Danfoss’ claim is thus subsidiary to that
         of Danfoss.
      
Moreover, it emerges from the order for reference that the oil companies have not claimed any reimbursement of the excise
         duties levied on the lubricant oils sold to Danfoss.
      
In support of their claims, Danfoss and Sauer-Danfoss submitted that, as they had had to bear the financial consequences of
         the unlawful duty, the principle of effectiveness of EU law required that they alone, and not the oil companies, should be
         entitled to demand reimbursement of that duty. They also claimed compensation from the Danish State for the damage suffered
         as a consequence of the duty being levied.
      
The claims of Danfoss and Sauer-Danfoss were rejected. According to the Danish authorities, the right under EU law to the
         recovery of sums unduly paid accrues only to the person who is directly taxable and not to the subsequent links in the marketing
         chain, which were not required to pay that duty themselves and did not pay out any amount to the exchequer which they could
         claim back.
      
As regards the right to compensation, the Danish authorities ruled out any compensation because, they maintained, with regard
         to the period preceding Braathens, the duty provided for under the DMO Law was not so obviously incompatible with EU law that its being levied would be likely
         to give rise to State liability and, with regard to the period following that judgment, it was impossible to determine at
         what stage in the distribution chain damage had been suffered and, in consequence, there was no direct causal link. In a situation
         where a duty unduly paid is passed on, the question whether – and, if so, to what extent – particular undertakings or consumers
         further down the distribution chain will actually bear the burden of that duty depends on various factors, including the pricing
         policy applied, in the case of the products concerned, by the taxable person and by each of the downstream economic agents,
         the practical use of those products and the competitive situation in the affected market.
      
Danfoss and Sauer-Danfoss therefore appealed against the decisions rejecting their claims before the Vestre Landsret (Western
         Regional Court), which decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary
         ruling:
      
‘1.      Does Community law preclude a Member State from rejecting a claim for reimbursement brought by an undertaking to which excise
         duty imposed contrary to a directive has been passed on, where such rejection – in circumstances such as those of the present
         case – is on the ground that it is not the undertaking that paid the duty to the State?
      
2.      Does Community law preclude a Member State from rejecting a claim for damages brought by an undertaking to which excise duty
         imposed contrary to a directive has been passed on, where such rejection – in circumstances such as those of the present case
         – is on the grounds put forward by the Member State (specifically, that the undertaking is not the directly injured party
         and that there is no direct causal link between any loss and the conduct giving rise to liability)?’
      
 Consideration of the questions referred
 Question By its first question, the national court asks the Court of Justice, in essence, whether a Member State may oppose a claim
         for reimbursement brought by an operator to whom the amount of the duty unduly paid has been passed on, on the ground that
         he is not the person liable for payment of that duty and has therefore not paid out the corresponding amount to the tax authorities.
      
In order to answer that question, it should first be borne in mind that the right to a refund of charges levied in a Member
         State in breach of the rules of EU law is the consequence and complement of the rights conferred on individuals by the provisions
         of EU law prohibiting such charges. The Member State is therefore required in principle to repay charges levied in breach
         of EU law (see Case 199/San Giorgio [1983] ECR 3595, paragraph 12; Case C‑264/Direct Parcel Distribution Belgium [2010] ECR I‑731, paragraph 45; and Case C‑398/Lady & Kid and Others, [2011] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 17).
      
However, by way of exception to the principle of the reimbursement of charges incompatible with EU law, the repayment of duties
         wrongly levied can be refused only where repayment would entail unjust enrichment of the persons concerned, that is to say,
         where it is established that the person required to pay such charges has actually passed them on to the purchaser directly
         (see, to that effect, Lady & Kid and Others, paragraphs and 20).
      
In such circumstances, the burden of the charge levied but not due has been borne not by the taxable person, but by the purchaser
         to whom the cost has been passed on. Accordingly, to repay the taxable person the amount of the charge already collected from
         the purchaser would be tantamount to paying him twice over, which may be described as unjust enrichment, whilst in no way
         remedying the consequences for the purchaser of the illegality of the charge (Joined Cases C‑192/to C‑218/Comateb and Others [1997] ECR I‑165, paragraph 22, and Lady & Kid and Others, paragraph 19).
      
It appears from this that the right to the recovery of sums unduly paid helps to offset the consequences of the duty’s incompatibility
         with EU law by neutralising the economic burden which that duty has unduly imposed on the operator who, in the final analysis,
         has actually borne it.
      
That said, it should also be noted that, in accordance with settled case-law, in the absence of EU rules governing claims
         for the repayment of taxes, it is for the domestic legal system of each Member State to lay down the conditions under which
         those claims may be made; subject, nevertheless, to observance of the principles of equivalence and effectiveness (see Case
         C‑291/MyTravel [2005] ECR I‑8477, paragraph 17, and Case C‑35/Reemtsma Cigarettenfabriken [2007] ECR I‑2425, paragraph 37).
      
In that regard, given the purpose of the right to the recovery of sums unduly paid, as recalled in paragraph above, observance
         of the principle of effectiveness requires that the conditions under which an action may be brought for recovery of sums unduly
         paid be fixed by the Member States, pursuant to the principle of procedural autonomy, in such a way that the economic burden
         of the duty unduly paid can be neutralised.
      
From that perspective, it has been held that, if the final consumer is able, on the basis of national law, to obtain reimbursement
         through the taxable person of the amount of the charge passed on to him, that taxable person must in turn be able to obtain
         reimbursement from the national authorities (see Comateb and Others, paragraph 24). In the same way, a national legal system which allows the supplier who has paid VAT to the tax authorities
         in error to seek reimbursement, and which allows the recipient of the services to bring a civil law action against that supplier
         for recovery of the sums paid but not due observes the principle of effectiveness, as that system enables the recipient who
         bore the tax invoiced in error to obtain reimbursement of the sums unduly paid (see Reemtsma Cigarettenfabriken, paragraph 39).
      
It follows that a Member State may, in principle, oppose a claim for the reimbursement of a duty unduly paid made by the final
         consumer to whom that duty has been passed on, on the ground that it is not that consumer who has paid the duty to the tax
         authorities, provided that the consumer – who, in the final analysis, bears the burden of that duty – is able, on the basis
         of national law, to bring a civil action against the taxable person for recovery of the sums unduly paid.
      
However, if reimbursement by the taxable person were to prove impossible or excessively difficult – in particular, in the
         case of the insolvency of that person – the principle of effectiveness requires that the purchaser be able to bring his claim
         for reimbursement against the tax authorities directly and that, to that end, the Member State must provide the necessary
         instruments and detailed procedural rules (see Reemtsma Cigarettenfabriken, paragraph 41).
      
Accordingly, the answer to Question is that a Member State may oppose a claim for reimbursement of a duty unduly paid, brought
         by the purchaser to whom that duty has been passed on, on the ground that it is not the purchaser who has paid the duty to
         the tax authorities, provided that the purchaser is able, on the basis of national law, to bring a civil action against the
         taxable person for recovery of the sum unduly paid and provided that the reimbursement, by that taxable person, of the duty
         unduly paid is not virtually impossible or excessively difficult.
      
 Question By its second question, the national court asks the Court of Justice whether a Member State may reject a claim for damages
         brought by an undertaking to which a duty unduly paid has been passed on by the taxable person, on the ground that a direct
         causal link between the levying of that duty by the State and the damage suffered by that undertaking is automatically ruled
         out.
      
In doing so, the national court asks the Court of Justice to state whether the decision freely made by the taxable person
         to pass on the duty unduly paid down the marketing chain can be regarded as breaking the direct causal link between the action
         of the Member State and the damage suffered by the purchaser.
      
First of all, it should be borne in mind that it is not for the Court to assign a legal classification to the actions brought
         by the plaintiffs before the national court claiming reimbursement of a duty unduly paid or claiming compensation for damage
         suffered (see Joined Cases C‑397/and C‑410/Metallgesellschaft and Others [2001] ECR I‑1727, paragraph 81, and Case C‑446/Test Claimants in the FII Group Litigation [2006] ECR I‑11753, paragraph 201), and that an action for damages may coexist with an action for the recovery of sums unduly
         paid (see, to that effect, Comateb and Others, paragraph 34).
      
It should also be noted that recognition of the right of individuals harmed to compensation for damage suffered as a consequence
         of a breach of EU law by a Member State is subject to three conditions: the rule of EU law infringed must be intended to confer
         rights on those individuals; the breach of that rule must be sufficiently serious; and there must be a direct causal link
         between the breach and the loss or damage sustained by the individuals (see Case C‑118/Transportes Urbanos y Servicios Generales [2010] ECR I‑635, paragraph 30, and Case C‑568/Combinatie Spijker Infrabouw-De Jonge Konstruktie and Others, [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 87).
      
Concerning the direct causal link requirement, it appears from settled case-law that it is, in principle, for the national
         court to ascertain whether the loss and damage claimed flows sufficiently directly from the breach of EU law by the Member
         State (see Joined Cases C‑46/and C‑48/Brasserie du pêcheur and Factortame [1996] ECR I‑1029, paragraph 65; Case C‑524/Test Claimants in the Thin Cap Group Litigation [2007] ECR I‑2107, paragraph 122; and Case C‑470/AGM-COS.MET [2007] ECR I‑2749, paragraph 83).
      
Nevertheless, the Court of Justice may, in order to give the national court a useful answer, provide it with all the guidance
         that it deems necessary (see, to that effect, Case C‑150/Stockholm Lindöpark [2001] ECR I‑493, paragraph 38, and Case C‑566/Stadeco [2009] ECR I‑5295, paragraph 43).
      
To that end, it should be observed that a national legal system, such as that concerned in the main proceedings, under which
         a direct causal link can be established only as between the levying by the State of a duty which is not due, on the one hand,
         and the damage suffered by the taxable person, on the other, may not interpret that requirement in such a way as to make it
         virtually impossible or excessively difficult to obtain compensation for the damage suffered.
      
It follows that such a national legal system is, in principle, consistent with the principle of effectiveness, provided that
         the purchaser to whom the burden of that duty has been passed on by the taxable person is able, on the basis of national law,
         to bring his action seeking compensation for the consequential damage against that taxable person.
      
However, by analogy with the observation made in paragraph above, if it were to prove impossible or excessively difficult
         for the taxable person to compensate the purchaser who bore the financial burden of the duty unduly paid and passed on to
         him for the damage suffered – in particular, in the case of the insolvency of the taxable person – the principle of effectiveness
         requires that the purchaser be able to bring his claim for reimbursement against the State directly, without that State being
         legitimately able to rely on the lack of a direct causal link between the levying of the duty which was not due and the damage
         suffered by the purchaser.
      
Accordingly, the answer to Question is that a Member State may reject a claim for damages brought by a purchaser to whom
         a duty unduly paid has been passed on by the taxable person, on the ground that there is no direct causal link between the
         levying of that duty and the damage suffered, provided that the purchaser is able, on the basis of national law, to bring
         that claim against the taxable person and provided that the compensation, by that taxable person, of the damage suffered by
         the purchaser is not virtually impossible or excessively difficult.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
The rules of European Union law must be construed as meaning that:
1.      a Member State may oppose a claim for reimbursement of a duty unduly paid, brought by the purchaser to whom that duty has
            been passed on, on the ground that it is not the purchaser who has paid the duty to the tax authorities, provided that the
            purchaser is able, on the basis of national law, to bring a civil action against the taxable person for recovery of the sum
            unduly paid and provided that the reimbursement, by that taxable person, of the duty unduly paid is not virtually impossible
            or excessively difficult;
2.      a Member State may reject a claim for damages brought by a purchaser to whom a duty unduly paid has been passed on by the
            taxable person, on the ground that there is no direct causal link between the levying of that duty and the damage suffered,
            provided that the purchaser is able, on the basis of national law, to bring that claim against the taxable person and provided
            that the compensation, by that taxable person, of the damage suffered by the purchaser is not virtually impossible or excessively
            difficult.
[Signatures]
** Language of the case: Danish.
      
Top  
 