
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-417/Commission of the European Communities
v
Hellenic Republic
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 85/384/EEC – Recognition of architects’ diplomas – Registration procedure with the Greek Technical Board (Technico Epimelitirio Elladas) – Obligation to provide a document stating that the evidence of formal qualifications concerned is covered by the system of
         mutual recognition)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Subject-matter of the proceedings – Specification in the pre-litigation procedure
            – Purely formal amendment of the grounds for complaint after the issue of the reasoned opinion because of an amendment to
            national legislation – Permissible
(Art. EC)
2.        Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Freedom to provide services – Architects – Recognition of diplomas
            and other evidence of formal qualifications – Obligation to provide a document attesting to compliance with the national provisions
            in question – Delayed processing by the national technical board of applications for registration of Community nationals not
            holding a national diploma – Not permissible
(Council Directive 85/384)
1.        In an action for failure to fulfil obligations under Article EC, the Commission’s reasoned opinion and its action must
         be based on identical grounds for complaint. That requirement cannot, however, go so far as to make it necessary that in every
         event the national provisions mentioned in the reasoned opinion and in the application should be completely identical. Where
         a change in the legislation occurred between those two phases in the procedure, it is sufficient that the system established
         by the legislation contested in the pre-litigation procedure has as a whole been maintained by the new measures which were
         adopted by the Member State after the issue of the reasoned opinion and have been challenged in the application.
      
(see para. 17)
2.        A Member State which adopts and retains in force provisions which, among the conditions for obtaining authorisation to pursue
         the profession of architect, lay down the obligation to submit a certificate issued by the competent authorities of the person’s
         Member State of origin or of the State from which he comes, attesting that the diplomas or other evidence of formal qualifications
         submitted correspond to those provided for by the national provisions at issue, and accepts that the national technical board,
         with which a person must be registered in order to pursue the profession of architect, carries out with significant delays
         the processing of the files and the registration of Community nationals holding foreign diplomas which ought to be recognised
         under Directive 85/on the mutual recognition of diplomas, certificates and other evidence of formal qualifications in
         architecture, including measures to facilitate the effective exercise of the right of establishment and freedom to provide
         services, has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive.
      
(see para. 18, operative part)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)September 2004(1)
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations  –  Directive 85/384/EEC  –  Recognition of architects’ diplomas  –  Registration procedure with the Greek Technical Board (Technico Epimelitirio Elladas)  –  Obligation to provide a document stating that the evidence of formal qualifications concerned is covered by the system of
                  mutual recognition)
               
 In Case C-417/02,ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations,brought on November 2002,
            
Commission of the European Communities, represented by M. Patakia, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant,
v
Hellenic Republic, represented by E. Skandalou, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
defendant,
THE COURT (First Chamber),,
 composed of: P. Jann, President of the Chamber,  A. Rosas, S. von Bahr, K. Lenaerts and K. Schiemann (Rapporteur), Judges,
            
 Advocate General:  J. Kokott, Registrar:  L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
             having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on March 2004,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By its application, the Commission of the European Communities has brought an action for a declaration that, by adopting and
         retaining in force the provisions of Article 3(1)(c) and (2) of Presidential Decree No 107/(‘Decree No 107/1993’) of
         March 1993, and by accepting that the Technico Epimelitirio Elladas (Greek Technical Board; ‘Technical Board’) with which
         a person must be registered in order to be able to pursue the profession of architect in Greece, systematically refuses to
         register Community nationals holding diplomas which have not been awarded in Greece and which ought to be recognised under
         Council Directive 85/384/EEC of June on the mutual recognition of diplomas, certificates and other evidence of formal
         qualifications in architecture, including measures to facilitate the effective exercise of the right of establishment and
         freedom to provide services (OJ L 223, p. 15), the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under that
         directive.
         
Relevant provisions and pre-litigation procedure
            
 Articles to of Directive 85/lay down general rules regarding the taking up of activities in the field of architecture.
         For the purposes of facilitating the functioning of the system of mutual recognition, Article 7(1) of Directive 85/provides
         that each Member State is to communicate as soon as possible, simultaneously to the other Member States and to the Commission,
         the list of diplomas, certificates and other evidence of formal qualifications which are awarded within its territory and
         which meet the criteria laid down in Articles and 4, together with the establishments and authorities awarding them. Under
         Article 7(2), those lists are to be published for information purposes by the Commission in the Official Journal of the European Communities (‘the Official Journal’) after expiry of a three-month period following their communication. 
         
            
 Article of Directive 85/relates to the recognition of academic titles enabling the holder to take up activities in
         the field of architecture by virtue of established rights. Under that article, each Member State is to recognise the diplomas,
         certificates and other evidence of formal qualifications set out in Article of that directive, awarded by other Member
         States to nationals of the Member States, where such nationals already possess these qualifications at the time of notification
         of the directive or their studies leading to such diplomas, certificates and other evidence of formal qualifications commence
         during the third academic year at the latest following such notification, even if those qualifications do not fulfil the minimum
         requirements laid down in Chapter II of the directive, by giving them, as regards the taking up and pursuit of activities
         in the field of architecture, the same effect within its territory as the diplomas, certificates and other evidence of formal
         qualifications which it awards in architecture.
         
            
 Article 20(1) of Directive 85/provides that the procedure for authorising the holder to take up one of the activities
         in the field of architecture is to be completed as soon as possible and not later than three months after presentation of
         all the documents relating to that person, without prejudice to delays resulting from any appeal that may be made upon termination
         of that procedure.
         
            
 In Greece, Decree No 107/was adopted in order to implement, among others, Directive 85/384.
         
            
 Article 3(1)(c) of Decree No 107/laid down, among the conditions for obtaining authorisation from the Technical Board
         to pursue the profession of architect, the obligation to produce the certificate issued by the competent authorities of the
         person’s Member State of origin or of the State from which he comes, attesting that the diplomas or other evidence of formal
         qualifications submitted corresponded to those provided for by that decree. Presidential Decree No 107/was amended by
         Decree No 272/of October (‘amended Decree No 107/1993’). Article 3(1)(c) of amended Decree No 107/requires
         that the same certificate as before be issued by the competent authorities of the person’s Member State of origin or of the
         State from which he comes in cases where the qualifications or the schools issuing them are not expressly referred to in the
         annexes to Article of amended Decree No 107/1993. Those annexes include all the diplomas, certificates and other evidence
         of formal qualifications on the list published by the Commission in the Official Journal in accordance with Article 7(2) of
         Directive 85/384.
         
            
 Article 3(2) of Decree No 107/required persons applying for registration with the Technical Board to supply an official
         Greek translation of the documentary evidence provided for in Article 3(1)(c) of Decree No 107/1993. Article 3(2) in amended
         Decree No 107/adds that the documentary evidence must be translated either officially into Greek or by the competent
         authorities of the person’s Member State of origin or of the State from which he comes.
         
            
 Following examination of the provisions notified and various complaints that the Technical Board had, since 1996, systematically
         refused the registration of Community nationals holding diplomas recognised under Directive 85/384, the Commission complained
         that the Greek Government had incorrectly implemented and applied Directive 85/384. Having given the Hellenic Republic notice
         to submit its observations, the Commission, on February 2000, sent a reasoned opinion to that Member State in accordance
         with the first paragraph of Article EC, calling on it to take the measures necessary to comply with its obligations under
         Directive 85/within a period of two months of notification of that opinion.
         
            
 Having considered the replies of the Hellenic Republic, the Commission took the view that the infringement stated in the reasoned
         opinion was continuing, and decided to bring this action.
         
The action
            
 In support of its action, the Commission raised three complaints. In its reply, the Commission decided however to withdraw
         its complaint relating to Article 3(2) of amended Decree No 107/1993.
         
The first complaint: Article 3(1)(c) of amended Decree No 107/Arguments of the parties
         
            
 By its first complaint, the Commission submits that the obligation imposed by the Greek Government in Article 3(1)(c) of amended
         Decree No 107/does not comply with the provisions of Directive 85/384. Article of Directive 85/provides that such
         a certificate can be required only in exceptional circumstances, where legitimate doubt exists. This is however not the case
         in regard to the obligation in question, which is principally intended to overcome significant delays found in the updating
         of the annexes to amended Decree No 107/1993. Accordingly, with a delay of more than months, the last update related only
         to the Commission’s communication of December 1999.
         
            
 In its defence, the Greek Government maintained that Article 3(1)(c) of amended Decree No 107/was intended, in the interest
         of applicants, to facilitate the application of the registration procedure by the competent authority where there is a discrepancy
         between the updated annex to that directive and the annex to the decree. That discrepancy stemmed from the periods usually
         necessary for the updating of the annexes to Article of amended Decree No 107/1993.
         
            
 The Greek Government also relies on the 15th recital in the preamble to Directive 85/384, according to which Member States
         may prescribe that, in addition to evidence of qualifications, holders are to provide a certificate from the competent authorities
         of their Member State of origin or of the country from which they come stating that these qualifications are in fact those
         referred to by the Directive.
         
            
 On the other hand, in its rejoinder, the Greek Government stated that, in order to respond to the Commission’s complaint,
         Article 3(1)(c) of amended Decree No 107/would be amended. Therefore the obligation to provide the certificate in question
         would be removed and, although the corresponding Greek ministerial order had not yet been published, the holder could merely
         give the reference of the Official Journal in which his qualifications had been published. Subsequently, the Greek Government
         informed the Court of the publication on February of the presidential decree repealing amended Decree No 107/which contains the amendment described above.
         
 Findings of the Court
         
            
 As appears from the Commission’s legal arguments, the first complaint relates to Article 3(1)(c) of amended Decree No 107/1993.
         However, the reasoned opinion issued by the Commission concerns the version of that provision before it was amended. Therefore
         the Court must of its own motion deal with the question of the admissibility of the first complaint, a question which was
         not raised by the Greek Government.
         
            
 In accordance with its case-law, the Court may of its own motion examine the question whether the conditions laid down in
         Article EC for the bringing of an action for failure to fulfil obligations are satisfied (Case C-362/Commission  v Italy [1992] ECR I-2353, paragraph 8).
         
            
 It is also apparent from the case-law of the Court that the Commission’s reasoned opinion and its action must be based on
         identical grounds for complaint. That requirement cannot, however, go so far as to make it necessary that in every event the
         national provisions mentioned in the reasoned opinion and in the application should be completely identical. Where a change
         in the legislation occurred between those two phases in the procedure, it is sufficient that the system established by the
         legislation contested in the pre-litigation procedure has as a whole been maintained by the new measures which were adopted
         by the Member State after the issue of the reasoned opinion and have been challenged in the application (Case C-105/Commission v Greece [1992] ECR I-5871, paragraph 13).
         
            
 In this case, the fundamental obligation in Article 3(1)(c) of Decree No 107/1993, namely the obligation to provide a certificate
         attesting that the evidence of formal qualifications submitted correspond to those provided for by that decree, was also contained
         in Article 3(1)(c) of amended Decree No 107/1993. It follows that in this action it is the original text of Decree No 107/which is to be considered on the merits. It also follows that the complaint is admissible.
         
            
 As regards the merits, the obligation laid down in Article 3(1)(c) of Decree No 107/required the persons concerned to
         adduce additional proof not provided for in Directive 85/384. That obligation had a deterrent effect which went against the
         facilitation of the effective exercise of the right of establishment, which Directive 85/and Article EC seek to achieve
         and to maintain.
         
            
 The periods usually required for the updating of the annexes to Decree No 107/to which the Greek Government refers cannot
         justify the barriers hindering the taking up of the profession of architect in Greece. According to the case-law of the Court,
         internal difficulties relating to the circumstances in which laws and regulations are drawn up cannot exempt Member States
         from their Community obligations (see, inter alia, Case C-374/Commission v France [2000] ECR I-10799, paragraph 13).
         
            
 As regards the argument of the Greek Government based on the 15th recital to Directive 85/384, the wording of that recital
         cannot in itself be used as the legal basis for requiring a person to provide a certificate from the competent authorities
         of his Member State of origin or of the State from which he comes.
         
            
 Regarding the Greek Government’s adoption of legislation removing the obligation on holders to submit the certificate from
         the competent authorities of his Member State of origin or of the State from which he comes, it is settled case-law that the
         question whether there has been a failure to fulfil obligations must be determined by reference to the situation prevailing
         in that Member State at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion, and subsequent changes cannot be taken into
         account by the Court (see, inter alia, Case C-384/Commission v Greece [2000] ECR I-3823, paragraph 35). 
         
            
 In this case, the reasoned opinion calling on the Hellenic Republic to take the measures necessary to comply with it within
         a period of two months was sent on February 2000. However, it was not until February that the Greek Government published
         a presidential decree removing that obligation to provide the certificate in question.
         
            
 The first complaint pleaded by the Commission is therefore well founded.
         
The second complaint: the practices of the Technical Board Arguments of the parties
         
            
 By its second complaint, the Commission claims that the non-compliance of the Technical Board with Directive 85/is shown
         by its failure to examine applications for registration within the time-limits laid down in Directive 85/or even to notify
         applicants of the reasons for refusal of their registration. The Commission states that it asked for information, by letter
         of November 2001, about action taken in relation to the application for registration with the Technical Board of certain
         architects who had submitted their applications to months beforehand without receiving a reply. As at April 2002, those
         applicants had still received no reply.
         
            
 The Greek Government does not deny that there may be administrative problems within the Technical Board which could result
         in delays in processing applications from candidates for recognition as architects, but contends that, given the frequency
         of earthquakes in Greece, the Technical Board has to carry out a careful examination of the files in order to determine the
         skills of the persons concerned regarding the prevention of risks associated with earthquakes.
         
            
 The Court requested the Greek Government to provide specific information in writing on the processing of applications for
         registration submitted to the Technical Board and to state, for each application, the date of the application, the date of
         registration, and, where appropriate, the date on which the Board demanded further documentary evidence from the applicant.
         
            
 In its reply of January 2004, the Greek Government stated that applications for registration had been lodged as at that
         date. An examination of these shows that:
         
–
architects had been registered;
–
architects had withdrawn their registration;
–
architects, having submitted an application between and and completed their files, had been registered by decision
               of  January 2004;
            
–
files relating to applications made between and 2002, were still incomplete;
–
applications not supported by documentary evidence had been made in 2003.
 Findings of the Court
         
            
 In view of the information provided by the Greek Government in its reply of January 2004, the Court finds that, at the
         end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion, the registration procedure of of the abovementioned architects,
         which had been completed on January 2004, had taken more than three months, since the corresponding applications were made
         in 1989, 1995, 1996, and 1998.
         
            
 As regards the other files mentioned above, the official letter calling on the persons concerned to complete their file
         was not sent until December 2002, even though six of them had lodged their application in 1992, 1995, 1997, 1998, and respectively. Therefore the conclusion must be drawn that, at the relevant date for the purposes of   determining
         whether there has been a failure to fulfil obligations, namely two months after notification of the reasoned opinion of February 2000, those six persons, some of whom had lodged their application several years before, had not received any official
         communication from the Technical Board inviting them to complete their file and stating which documents were missing.
         
            
 In that regard, Article of Directive 85/requires that the procedure for authorising the person concerned to take up
         one of the activities in the field of architecture is to be completed as soon as possible and not later than three months
         after presentation of all the documents relating to that person. The only exceptions to that requirement are where an appeal
         is made or, under Articles 17(4) and 18(2) of Directive 85/384, where it is necessary to carry out a re-examination of the
         file if the host Member State has detailed knowledge of a serious matter which has occurred prior to the establishment of
         the person concerned in that State, or if it knows that the declaration referred to in Article 17(3) of the directive contains
         incorrect information. In that case, the Member State of origin or the Member State from which the foreign national comes
         may be notified thereof and verifies the accuracy of those facts. The Member State consulted must submit its response within
         a period of three months.
         
            
 None of the above derogations have been pleaded by the Greek Government.
         
            
 So far as concerns the need to determine the skills of applicants regarding the prevention of risks associated with earthquakes
         pleaded by the Greek Government to justify its delays in processing the files, that consideration cannot justify either the
         registration of architects over such lengthy periods or the delay noted in sending the persons concerned requests for the
         submission of missing documents.
         
            
 A quick and effective registration procedure is one of the objectives envisaged by Directive 85/384. Accordingly, the need
         to register the persons concerned as soon as possible applies to the whole of the procedure for processing of applications,
         and also requires the persons concerned to be called upon to complete their application by submitting any missing documentary
         evidence as soon as possible. That obligation is also among those flowing from Article EC, which seeks to eliminate restrictions
         on the freedom of establishment.
         
            
 The Greek Government has not pleaded any ground capable of justifying the delays of its competent authorities in processing
         the files and has not adduced any evidence to show that those delays were attributable to the fault of the persons concerned.
         
            
 The second complaint pleaded by the Commission is therefore well founded.
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs. Since the Commission
         has applied for costs and the Hellenic Republic has been largely unsuccessful, it must be ordered to pay the costs.
         
On those grounds,
THE COURT (First Chamber) 
 hereby:
         
 
1.
Declares that, by adopting and retaining in force the provisions of Article 3(1)(c) of Presidential Decree No 107/of
                     March 1993, and by accepting that the Technico Epimelitirio Elladas (Greek Technical Board), with which a person must be
                     registered in order to pursue the profession of architect in Greece, carries out, with significant delays, the processing
                     of the files and the registration of Community nationals holding foreign diplomas which ought to be recognised under Council
                     Directive 85/384/EEC of June on the mutual recognition of diplomas, certificates and other evidence of formal qualifications
                     in architecture, including measures to facilitate the effective exercise of the right of establishment and freedom to provide
                     services, the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive;
                  
 
2.
Orders the Hellenic Republic to pay the costs.
 Signatures.
      
 –
            
Language of the case: Greek.
Top  
 