
Avis juridique important
|
61987JJudgment of the Court of September 1988.  -  Commission of the European Communities v Council of the European Communities.  -  International Convention on the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System - Action for annulment - Legal basis.  -  Case 165/87.  
European Court reports Page Swedish special edition Page Finnish special edition Page Summary
Parties
Grounds
Decision on costs
Operative part
Keywords
++++. Common Customs Tariff - Establishment of a tariff and statistical nomenclature for goods - Power of Council to conclude an international convention - Legal basis - Articles and of the Treaty  ( EEC Treaty, Arts and 113; Council Decision 87/)  . EEC Treaty - Article - Scope  . Measures adopted by the institutions - Preparation - Consultation of Parliament - Consultation in the absence of a requirement - Lawfulness  
Summary
. Articles and of the Treaty are the legal bases for the Council' s power to adopt the decision concluding the international convention on the harmonized commodity description and coding system to be used by the contracting parties for their tariff and statistical nomenclature .  The Council has a general power in relation to tariff matters which is based both on Article and on Article of the Treaty, inasmuch as it has that power irrespective of whether the Common Customs Tariff duties are amended autonomously ( Article ) or under tariff agreements or other measures of common commercial policy ( Article ). It is thus Articles and of the Treaty which together constitute the appropriate legal basis for the establishment of a tariff nomenclature, which is indispensable for the application of customs duties .  The Council' s power to establish a statistical nomenclature for the Community' s external trade is given by Article of the Treaty, for statistics of external trade, along with the corresponding nomenclature, constitute an indispensable instrument of commercial policy .  . The fact that a measure which an institution intends to adopt may affect another measure which is based on Article does not necessarily imply recourse to that provision as a legal basis . Such recourse may be contemplated only if the institution in question cannot base its power on any other provision of the Treaty .  . Since the Council is always entitled to consult the Parliament, the fact that although it was not mandatory such consultation occurred and may have affected the substance of the measure adopted cannot, unlike disregard of the obligation to consult, be regarded as giving rise to unlawfulness .  
Parties
In Case 165/Commission of the European Communities, represented by its Legal Adviser Peter Gilsdorf, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of Georgios Kremlis, a member of its Legal Department, Jean Monnet Building, Kirchberg,  applicant,  v  Council of the European Communities, represented by Bernhard Schloh, an adviser in the Council' s Legal Department, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of Joerg Kaeser, Manager of the Legal Department of the European Investment Bank, boulevard Konrad-Adenauer,  defendant,  APPLICATION for the annulment of Council Decision 87/of April concerning the conclusion of the International Convention on the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System and of the Protocol of Amendment thereto ( Official Journal 1987, L 198, p . ),  THE COURT  composed of : Lord Mackenzie Stuart, President, G . Bosco, O . Due, J . C . Moitinho de Almeida and G . C . Rodríguez Iglesias ( Presidents of Chambers ), T . Koopmans, U . Everling, K . Bahlmann, Y . Galmot, R . Joliet and T . F . O' Higgins, Judges,  Advocate General : C . O . Lenz  Registrar : H . A . Ruehl, Principal Administrator  having regard to the Report for the Hearing and further to the hearing on May 1988,  after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General delivered at the sitting on June 1988,  gives the following  Judgment  
Grounds
By an application lodged at the Court Registry on June 1987, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action under the first paragraph of Article of the EEC Treaty for the annulment of Council Decision 87/of April concerning the conclusion of the International Convention on the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System and of the Protocol of Amendment thereto ( Official Journal 1987, L 198, p . ).  That convention, which has been in force since January 1988, was adopted on June under the auspices of the Cutoms Cooperation Council to replace the Convention of December on Nomenclature for the Classification of Goods ( United Nations Treaty Series, Vol . 347, p . ) on which the Community' s Common Customs Tariff was based .  The Commission challenges the legal basis of the contested decision, which it considers is solely a matter of commercial policy and ought therefore to have been based, as the Commission had proposed, only on Article and not on Articles 28, and of the Treaty .  Reference is made to the Report for the Hearing for a more detailed account of the facts, the course of the proceedings and the submissions and arguments of the parties, which are mentioned or discussed hereinafter only in so far as is necessary for the reasoning of the Court .  It should be observed at the outset that the main object of the convention which is the subject of the contested decision is the establishment of a harmonized commodity description and coding system to be used by the contracting parties for their tariff and statistical nomenclature .  In order to rule on the merits of the Commission' s action it is necessary to consider the Council' s power to adopt the contested decision, taking into account the two aspects covered by the Convention, namely tariff nomenclature on the one hand and statistical nomenclature on the other .  With regard to the first of those aspects, it appears from the terms of Article of the Treaty, which is the legal basis for "any autonomous alteration or suspension of duties in the Common Customs Tariff", and Article of the Treaty, which provides for a common commercial policy based on uniform principles, particularly in regard to changes in tariff rates and the conclusion of tariff and trade agreements, that neither of those two provisions expressly gives the Council power to establish a tariff nomenclature .  However, the establishment of a tariff nomenclature is indispensable to the application of customs duties . Without a system of classification of goods it would be impossible to ascribe them to particular tariff headings . It follows that the power given to the Council to make changes in rates necessarily implies, in the absence of express provision in the Treaty, power to establish and amend the nomenclature relating to the application of the Common Customs Tariff .  It follows from that observation that the Council has a general power in relation to tariff matters, which is based both on Article and on Article of the Treaty, inasmuch as it has that power irrespective of whether Common Customs Tariff duties are amended autonomously ( Article ) or under tariff agreements or other measures of common commercial policy ( Article ).  The Commission' s argument that the scope of Article is covered by that of Article of the Treaty must therefore be rejected .  It may be added that where an institution' s power is based on two provisions of the Treaty, it is bound to adopt the relevant measures on the basis of the two relevant provisions .  Such recourse to a dual legal basis is, moreover, consistent with an established practice of the Community institutions in tariff matters which has been endorsed by the fact that the Single European Act has aligned the procedural requirements of Article with those of Article of the Treaty .  Articles and of the Treaty thus together constitute the appropriate legal basis for the establishment of a tariff nomenclature and consequently for the conclusion of an international convention on that subject .  With regard to statistical nomenclature, the statistical nomenclatures covered by the convention to which the contested decision relates are "goods nomenclatures established by a contracting party for the collection of data for import and export trade statistics" ( Article ( c ) of the Convention ), that is to say, as regards the Community, its external trade statistics and not statistics of intra-Community trade .  Power to establish such a statistical nomenclature is given by Article of the Treaty . Statistics of external trade, along with the corresponding nomenclature, constitute an indispensable instrument of commercial policy . The list of commercial policy measures set out in Article is not exhaustive but is included only by way of example .  The Council nevertheless contends that recourse to Article was justified by the fact that the convention affected a measure which was itself based on Article 235, namely Regulation No 1445/of the Council of April concerning the nomenclature of goods for the external trade statistics of the Community and the statistics of trade between Member States ( Nimexe ) ( Official Journal, English Special Edition 1965-72, p . ).  The Council' s argument must be rejected . The fact that the contested decision may affect another measure which is based on Article does not necessarily imply recourse to that provision as a legal basis . Such recourse may be contemplated only if the institution in question cannot base its power on any other provision of the Treaty ( see the judgment of March in Case 45/Commission v Council (( )) ECR ).  It follows from the foregoing that since the Council had power to take the contested decision under Articles and of the Treaty, it was not entitled to base it on Article .  However, when the contested decision was adopted before the entry into force of the Single European Act, Article of the Treaty, like Article 235, required unanimity in the Council; the illegality found to exist is therefore only a purely formal defect which cannot make the measure void .  It is true that in contrast to Article 28, Article requires the European Parliament to be consulted, and such consultation, which took place in the present case, is likely to affect the substance of the measure adopted . Nevertheless, although disregard of the obligation to consult makes the measure concerned void ( judgment of October in Case 138/Roquette Frères v Council (( )) ECR ), consultation of Parliament, which the Council is always entitled to do, cannot be regarded as unlawful even if it is not mandatory .  It follows from the foregoing that the application must be rejected .  
Decision on costs
Costs  Under Article ( ) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs . However, Article ( ) provides that where the circumstances are exceptional the Court may order the parties to bear their own costs .  Although in the circumstances of this case the Commission' s application must be dismissed because of the purely formal nature of the illegality found, the Court considers that since the Commission' s case has been upheld to a substantial extent the parties should bear their own costs .  
Operative part
On those grounds,  THE COURT  hereby :  ( ) Dismisses the application;  ( ) Orders the parties to bear their own costs .  
Top  
 