
Case C-216/Commission of the European Communities
v
Ireland
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Assessment of the effects of certain projects on the environment – Directives 85/337/EEC and 97/11/EC – National legislation – Participation by the public in certain assessment procedures upon payment of fees)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Acts of the institutions – Directives – Implementation by Member States 
(Art. 249, third para., EC)
2.        Environment – Assessment of the effects of certain projects on the environment – Directive 85/(Council Directive 85/337, Art. 6(2) and (3))
1.        Under the third paragraph of Article EC, Member States have the obligation, when they transpose a directive, to ensure
         that it is fully effective, whilst retaining a broad discretion as to the choice of methods. The fact that under another directive
         the levying of fees is expressly permitted cannot found a general presumption that the Community legislature has wished to
         allow fees only when it expressly so provides. The argument that a State cannot charge the disputed fees because the directive
         in question does not contain any provision expressly authorising this cannot be reconciled with the freedom of choice under
         the third paragraph of Article EC.
      
(see paras 26-28)
2.        The levying of an administrative fee is not in itself incompatible with the purpose of Directive 85/on the assessment
         of the effects of certain public and private projects on the environment. It is apparent from that recital, as it is from
         Article 6(2) of that directive, that one of the directive’s objectives is to afford the members of the public concerned the
         opportunity to express their opinion in the course of development consent procedures for projects likely to have significant
         effects on the environment. In that regard, Article 6(3) allows Member States to place certain conditions on participation
         by members of the public concerned by the project. Thus, under that provision, the Member States may determine the detailed
         arrangements for public information and consultation and, in particular, determine the public concerned and specify how that
         public may be informed and consulted. 
      
A fee cannot, however, be fixed at a level which would be such as to prevent the directive from being fully effective, in
         accordance with the objective pursued by it. This would be the case if, due to its amount, a fee were liable to constitute
         an obstacle to the exercise of the rights of participation conferred by Article of Directive 85/337.
      
(see paras 37-38, 42-44)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
November (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Assessment of the effects of certain projects on the environment – Directives 85/337/EEC and 97/11/EC – National legislation – Participation by the public in certain assessment procedures upon payment of fees)
In Case C-216/05,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on May 2005,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by X. Lewis, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Ireland, represented by D. O’Hagan, acting as Agent, B. Murray, Senior Counsel, and G. Simons, Barrister-at-Law, with an address for
         service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, P. Kūris, J. Klučka, R. Silva de Lapuerta (Rapporteur) and J. Makarczyk,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: C. Stix-Hackl,
Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on April 2006,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on June 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities seeks a declaration from the Court that, by making the full
         and effective participation of the public in certain environmental impact assessments subject to prior payment of fees, Ireland
         has failed to comply with its obligations under Articles and of Council Directive 85/337/EEC of June on the assessment
         of the effects of certain public and private projects on the environment (OJ L 175, p. 40), as amended by Council Directive
         97/11/EC of March (OJ L 73, p. 5) (‘Directive 85/337’).
      
 Legal framework
 Community law
According to the sixth recital in the preamble to Directive 85/337, ‘development consent for public and private projects which
         are likely to have significant effects on the environment should be granted only after prior assessment of the likely significant
         environmental effects of these projects has been carried out; … this assessment must be conducted on the basis of the appropriate
         information supplied by the developer, which may be supplemented by the authorities and by the people who may be concerned
         by the project in question’.
      
Article of Directive 85/thus provides:
      
‘1.      Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that the authorities likely to be concerned by the project by reason
         of their specific environmental responsibilities are given an opportunity to express their opinion on the information supplied
         by the developer and on the request for development consent. To this end, Member States shall designate the authorities to
         be consulted, either in general terms or on a case-by-case basis. The information gathered pursuant to Article shall be
         forwarded to those authorities. Detailed arrangements for consultation shall be laid down by the Member States.
      
2.      Member States shall ensure that any request for development consent and any information gathered pursuant to Article are
         made available to the public within a reasonable time in order to give the public concerned the opportunity to express an
         opinion before the development consent is granted.
      
3.      The detailed arrangements for such information and consultation shall be determined by the Member States, which may in particular,
         depending on the particular characteristics of the projects or sites concerned:
      
–        determine the public concerned,
–        specify the places where the information can be consulted,
–        specify the way in which the public may be informed, for example by bill-posting within a certain radius, publication in local
         newspapers, organisation of exhibitions with plans, drawings, tables, graphs, models,
      
–        determine the manner in which the public is to be consulted, for example, by written submissions, by public enquiry,
–        fix appropriate time-limits for the various stages of the procedure in order to ensure that a decision is taken within a reasonable
         period.’
      
Article of Directive 85/provides that ‘the results of consultations and the information gathered pursuant to Articles
         5, and must be taken into consideration in the development consent procedure’.
      
 National legislation
Section of the Planning and Development Act, (‘the Act’) provides:
      
‘(1)      The Minister shall by regulations provide for such matters of procedure and administration as appear to the Minister to be
         necessary or expedient in respect of applications for permission for the development of land.
      
(2)      Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1), regulations under this section may make provision for the following
         –
      
…
(c)      enabling persons to make submissions or observations on payment of the prescribed fee and within a prescribed period;
…’.
According to section 130(1)(a) of the Act, ‘any person other than a party may make submissions or observations in writing
         to the Board [An Bord Pleanála, the Planning Appeals Board] in relation to an appeal or referral, other than a referral under
         section 96(5)’.
      
Section of the Act provides:
      
‘(1)      Subject to the approval of the Minister, the Board may determine fees in relation to appeals, referrals, the making of an
         application under section 37(5), the making of submissions or observations to the Board under section 130, and requests for
         oral hearings under section 134, and may provide for the payment of different fees in relation to different classes or descriptions
         of appeals and referrals, for exemption from the payment of fees in specified circumstances and for the waiver, remission
         or refund in whole or in part of fees in specified circumstances.
      
(2)      The Board shall review the fees determined under subsection (1) from time to time, but at least every three years, having
         regard to any change in the consumer price index since the determination of the fees for the time being in force, and may
         amend the fees to reflect the results of that review, without the necessity of the Minister’s approval under subsection (1).
      
…
(4)      Where the Board determines or amends fees in accordance with this section, it shall give notice of the fees in at least one
         newspaper circulating in the State, not less than eight weeks before the fees come into effect.
      
…
(6)      The Board shall specify fees for the making of copies under section 5(6)(a), not exceeding the cost of making the copies.’
 Facts and pre-litigation procedure
Following two complaints sent to the Commission in concerning Irish legislation proposed at that time on planning and
         development, the Commission, by letter of August 2000, called on the Irish authorities to comment on certain aspects of
         the proposed legislation, in particular in relation to the payment of a fee in order for members of the public to have their
         views taken into consideration in development consent procedures.
      
Having given Ireland formal notice to submit its observations on the compatibility of such fees with the exercise of the right
         of public participation provided for in Articles and of Directive 85/337, the Commission, on January 2003, issued a
         reasoned opinion requesting that Member State to take the necessary measures to comply with the opinion within two months
         from receipt thereof.
      
Finding the response from Ireland to be unsatisfactory, the Commission brought the present action.
      
 The action
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission puts forward a single plea in law in support of its action, alleging that, by making the participation of the
         public in certain environmental impact assessments subject to prior payment of participation fees, the Irish legislation infringes
         Article of Directive 85/and, consequently, Article thereof.
      
In support of its plea, the Commission bases the infringement of Article on four arguments.
      
First of all, it observes that no provision of Directive 85/expressly authorises the levying of such fees, whereas other
         directives on related subjects, such as Council Directive 90/313/EEC of June on the freedom of access to information
         on the environment (OJ L 158, p. 56), expressly authorise the levying of a fee.
      
The Commission submits, second, that the levying of such fees is contrary to the scheme and purpose of Directive 85/337, which
         seeks to supplement environmental impact assessments with appropriate information, in that the requirement to pay those fees
         in development consent procedures may have the effect of dissuading members of the public, one of the principal sources of
         information, from participating in the decision-making process or of making their participation more difficult.
      
The Commission contends, third, that the wording of Article 6(2) and (3) of Directive 85/does not admit the interpretation
         advocated by Ireland. The imposition of participation fees as part of the ‘detailed arrangements’ for public consultation
         cannot be regarded as coming within the scope of what is reasonably necessary to give effect to Article 6(2) of that directive.
      
The Commission states, fourth, that, in charging those fees, Ireland has, actually or potentially, created an obstacle to
         the exercise of the rights conferred on the public by Article 6(2) of Directive 85/337, particularly for persons on low income.
      
The infringement of Article of that directive arises from the fact that, in charging participation fees prohibited by Article
         6, Ireland fails to ensure that opinions expressed by members of the public who are not able to pay participation fees are
         taken into account in development consent procedures pertaining to projects likely to have significant effects on the environment.
      
In its statement in defence, Ireland opposes each of the arguments put forward by the Commission in support of the plea alleging
         infringement of Article of Directive 85/337.
      
Ireland submits with respect to the first argument that, since the legal basis for Directive 85/is Article of the
         EEC Treaty (subsequently Article of the EC Treaty, now Article EC), the limits of Community competence and the extent
         thereof are delineated by the precise wording of the directive. Accordingly, prohibitions not contained in the express wording
         of the directive cannot be implied. The principle of subsidiarity in the exercise of Community powers and the measure of discretion
         which Member States have when transposing directives corroborate this view. 
      
As to the argument that the participation fees provided for by the Irish legislation run counter to the spirit and purpose
         of Directive 85/337, Ireland submits that their introduction is not inimical to the concept of public participation established
         by the directive, but rather is intended to facilitate that participation in so far as it permits local authorities to receive
         a contribution towards the costs of administering the system for informing and consulting the public.
      
With respect to the Commission’s third argument, Ireland observes that the wording of Article 6(3) of Directive 85/in
         particular allows for Member States to determine the detailed arrangements for informing and consulting the public and claims
         that it is for the Commission to demonstrate that the detailed arrangements, as laid down by a Member State, prevent the purpose
         of the directive from being fulfilled.
      
As to the last argument put forward by the Commission, Ireland denies that the fees at issue may constitute a barrier to persons
         on low income, adding that they are charged for administrative purposes and are reasonable, both in principle and in amount.
      
Lastly, since the infringement of Article of Directive 85/alleged by the Commission is based solely on the alleged breach
         of Article of that directive because of the charging of the participation fees at issue, that allegation should also be
         dismissed following a finding that there has been no infringement of Article 6.
      
 Findings of the Court
Regarding the alleged infringement of Article of Directive 85/337, the Commission raises, first, the argument that Ireland
         would be empowered to levy fees only if the directive expressly so provided. Such a proposition cannot be accepted.
      
The third paragraph of Article EC provides that ‘a directive shall be binding, as to the result to be achieved, upon each
         Member State to which it is addressed, but shall leave to the national authorities the choice of form and methods’.
      
That provision must be interpreted as meaning that Member States have the obligation, when they transpose a directive, to
         ensure that it is fully effective, whilst retaining a broad discretion as to the choice of methods (see, to that effect, Case
         C‑208/Emmott [1991] ECR I‑4269, paragraph 18).
      
As regards, in particular, the Commission’s argument derived from the fact that, in related fields, both Directive 90/and Directive 2003/4/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of January on public access to environmental
         information and repealing Council Directive 90/(OJ L 41, p. 26) provide expressly in Article that Member States
         may charge such fees, it suffices to state, as did the Advocate General in point of her Opinion, that the fact that under
         another directive the levying of fees is expressly permitted cannot found a general presumption that the Community legislature
         has wished to allow fees only when the legislation expressly so provides.
      
It follows that the Commission’s argument that Ireland cannot charge the disputed fees because Directive 85/does not contain
         any provision expressly authorising the levying of participation fees cannot be reconciled with the freedom of choice under
         the third paragraph of Article EC.
      
Accordingly, this first argument cannot be upheld.
      
By its third argument, which it is appropriate to examine before the second and fourth arguments, the Commission contends
         that Ireland, in establishing the participation fees in question by way of ‘detailed arrangements’ for public consultation,
         went beyond the margin of discretion allowed by Article 6(2) and (3) of Directive 85/337. It suggests that the validity of
         the measure in dispute must be assessed in the light of its necessity in terms of giving effect to those provisions.
      
It follows from Article 6(2) of the directive that the Member States must ensure that the members of the public concerned
         are given an opportunity to express their opinion before development consent is granted for a project. Under Article 6(3),
         each Member State has the power to determine the detailed arrangements for the consultation. That provision lists a number
         of possibilities open to the Member States in this regard, but the list is not exhaustive, as evidenced by the words ‘in particular’.
      
That wording indicates that the Community legislature wished not to limit the powers of the Member States in the determination
         of the detailed arrangements for public consultation but, on the contrary, to give them a wide discretion in defining those
         arrangements.
      
When determining the arrangements, the Member States are, in principle, free to impose a participation fee such as the one
         at issue, provided that it is not such as to constitute an obstacle to the exercise of the rights of participation conferred
         by Article of Directive 85/337.
      
In that light, the Commission’s argument that the charging of the fees at issue is not necessary to give effect to Article
         6(2) of Directive 85/is irrelevant. The directive does not make the exercise by the Member States of their discretion
         under Article 6(3) subject to a test of necessity.
      
In its second and fourth arguments, which it is appropriate to consider together, the Commission claims that the fees in question
         are contrary to the scheme and purpose of Directive 85/in that they restrict the exercise by the public of their rights
         under that directive.
      
The sixth recital in the preamble to Directive 85/states that the prior assessment of the environmental effects of certain
         projects must be conducted ‘on the basis of the appropriate information supplied by the developer, which may be supplemented
         by the authorities and by the people who may be concerned by the project in question’.
      
It is apparent from that recital, as it is from Article 6(2), that one of the directive’s objectives is to afford the members
         of the public concerned the opportunity to express their opinion in the course of development consent procedures for projects
         likely to have significant effects on the environment.
      
The Court notes that Article 6(3) of Directive 85/allows Member States to place certain conditions on participation by
         members of the public concerned by the project. Thus, under that provision, the Member States may determine the detailed arrangements
         for public information and consultation and, in particular, determine the public concerned and specify how that public may
         be informed and consulted.
      
Moreover, and contrary to the Commission’s assertions, that approach is supported by the rules in areas closely related to
         Directive 85/337.
      
Thus, both Directive 90/and Directive 2003/note, in the sixth and eighth recitals in their preambles respectively, the
         necessity to ensure that any natural or legal person in the European Community has a right of access to environmental information
         held by or for public authorities.
      
Article of each of these directives provides that Member States may levy a charge for supplying information but that such
         charge is not to exceed a reasonable amount. Those rules show that, for the Community legislature, the charging of a fee of
         a reasonable amount is not incompatible with the guarantee of access to information.
      
It follows from all the foregoing that the levying of an administrative fee is not in itself incompatible with the purpose
         of Directive 85/337.
      
Although Directive 85/does not preclude fees such as those charged under the national legislation at issue in the present
         case, they cannot, however, be fixed at a level which would be such as to prevent the directive from being fully effective,
         in accordance with the objective pursued by it (see, to that effect, Case C‑97/Commission v France [2001] ECR I‑2053, paragraph 9).
      
This would be the case if, due to its amount, a fee were liable to constitute an obstacle to the exercise of the rights of
         participation conferred by Article of Directive 85/337.
      
The amount of the fees at issue here, namely EUR in procedures before local authorities and EUR at the Board level,
         cannot be regarded as constituting such an obstacle. Nor has the Commission succeeded in refuting Ireland’s argument that
         the level of the fees is justified in the light of the administrative costs involved in processing the observations received
         from persons concerned.
      
In the light of those considerations, the Commission’s arguments that the fees in question are contrary to the scheme and
         purpose of Directive 85/must be rejected.
      
Lastly, the Commission also questions the validity of the fees in question in that the Act authorises the competent minister
         and the Board to determine their amount without limiting that power or defining it more precisely.
      
Suffice it to note, in this respect, that such a delegation is, in principle, a matter of national law and is not in itself
         open to criticism in the light of Directive 85/337. However, the amounts prescribed in the exercise of that delegated power
         must be compatible with that directive. As found earlier, consideration of the arguments put forward by the Commission has
         not revealed that this is not the case with respect to the amount of the fees at issue in the present proceedings.
      
In those circumstances, the Court finds that the plea in law alleging infringement of Article of Directive 85/is, in
         its entirety, without foundation.
      
Since the claim that Article of that directive has been infringed is exclusively based on infringement of Article thereof,
         the necessary conclusion is that the infringement of Article has not been established either.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since Ireland has applied for costs and the Commission has been unsuccessful,
         the latter must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
1.      Dismisses the action;
2.      Orders the Commission of the European Communities to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 