
Case C-524/Ville de Lyon
v
Caisse des dépôts et consignations
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
tribunal administratif de Paris)
(Preliminary rulings – Aarhus Convention – Directive 2003/4/EC – Public access to information in environmental matters – Directive 2003/87/EC – Scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading – Regulation (EC) No 2216/– Standardised, secured system of registries – Access to data on greenhouse gas emission allowance trading – Refusal to report – Central administrator – Administrators of national registries – Confidential nature of the data held in the registries – Exceptions)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Environment – Atmospheric pollution – Directive 2003/– Scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading – Integrated
            system of registries in the European Union and the Member States – Data on allowance trading – Reporting and confidentiality
(Commission Regulation No 2216/2004; European Parliament and Council Directive 2003/87, Art. 19, as amended by Directive 2004/101)
2.        Environment – Atmospheric pollution – Directive 2003/– Scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading – Integrated
            system of registries in the European Union and the Member States – Data on allowance trading – Confidentiality of those data
            – Reporting to public
(Commission Regulation No 2216/2004, Arts 9, 10, and Annex XVI, paragraphs and 12; European Parliament and Council Directive
            2003/87, as amended by Directive 2004/101)
3.        Environment – Atmospheric pollution – Directive 2003/– Scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading – Integrated
            system of registries in the European Union and the Member States – Data on allowance trading – Confidentiality of those data
            – Reporting to public
(Commission Regulation No 2216/2004, Annex XVI, paragraph 12; European Parliament and Council Directive 2003/87, as amended
            by Directive 2004/101)
1.        The reporting of trading data relating to the names of holders of the transferring accounts and acquiring accounts of the
         emission allowances, allowances or Kyoto units involved in those transactions and the date and time of those transactions,
         comes exclusively under the specific rules governing public reporting and confidentiality contained in Directive 2003/establishing
         a scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Community, in the version resulting from Directive 2004/101,
         and in Regulation No 2216/for a standardised and secured system of registries pursuant to Directive 2003/and Decision
         No 280/2004.
      
Those are data relating to transferred allowances, an accurate accounting of which is to be kept by the Member States in their
         respective national registries, of which the technical features and rules relating to the keeping, reporting and confidentiality
         of the information contained in those registries are determined by Regulation No 2216/2004.  They accordingly come within
         the ambit of Article of Directive 2003/and not that of Article 17.  Since Article of Directive 2003/does not refer
         to Directive 2003/in the same way as in Article 17, it must be held that the Union legislature did not intend to make requests
         concerning trading data subject to the general provisions of Directive 2003/but that, on the contrary, it sought to introduce,
         in respect of those data, a specific, exhaustive scheme for their public reporting and confidentiality.
      
(see paras 39-41, operative part 1)
2.        Trading data relating to the names of holders of the transferring accounts and acquiring accounts of the emission allowances,
         allowances or Kyoto units involved in those transactions and the date and time of those transactions, requested by a public
         authority wishing to renegotiate an agreement on public service delegation, are confidential data within the meaning of Regulation
         No 2216/for a standardised and secured system of registries pursuant to Directive 2003/and Decision No 280/2004. Under
         Articles and of that regulation, read in conjunction with paragraphs and of Annex XVI to that regulation, such
         data, if the holders of the accounts concerned have not previously given their consent, may be freely consulted by the general
         public only in the public area of the Community independent transaction log’s website from January onwards of the fifth
         year (X+5) following the year (X) of completion of the transactions relating to transfers of emission allowances.
      
(see paras 52-53, operative part 2)
3.        Although, for the purposes of implementation of Regulation No 2216/for a standardised and secured system of registries
         pursuant to Directive 2003/and Decision No 280/2004, it is the Central Administrator who has sole competence to report
         to the general public the data referred to in paragraph of Annex XVI to that regulation, the administrator of the national
         registry who has received a request for reporting of such trading data must independently reject that request inasmuch as,
         if the holders of the accounts concerned have not previously given their consent, that administrator is required to guarantee
         the confidentiality of the data until they have become legally reportable to the general public by the Central Administrator.
      
(see para. 59, operative part 3)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
December (*)
      
(Preliminary rulings – Aarhus Convention – Directive 2003/4/EC – Public access to information in environmental matters – Directive 2003/87/EC – Scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading – Regulation (EC) No 2216/– Standardised, secured system of registries – Access to data on greenhouse gas emission allowance trading – Refusal to report – Central administrator – Administrators of national registries – Confidential nature of the data held in the registries – Exceptions)
In Case C‑524/09,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the tribunal administratif de Paris (France), made by decision
         of November 2009, received at the Court on November 2009, in the proceedings
      
Ville de Lyon
v
Caisse des dépôts et consignations,
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of J.-C. Bonichot, President of the Chamber, K. Schiemann, L. Bay Larsen, C. Toader (Rapporteur) and A. Prechal,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: R. Şereş, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on October 2010,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        the Ville de Lyon, by C. Enckell, avocat,
–        the Caisse des dépôts et consignations, by T. Garancher and L. Deruy, avocats,
–        the French Government, by G. de Bergues and S. Menez, acting as Agents,
–        the Austrian Government, by E. Riedl, acting as Agent,
–        the European Commission, by O. Beynet and E. White, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on October 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation, in the context of the scheme established by Directive
         2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of October establishing a scheme for greenhouse gas emission
         allowance trading within the Community and amending Council Directive 96/61/EC (OJ L 275, p. 32), in the version resulting
         from Directive 2004/101/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of October (OJ L 338, p. 18) (‘Directive
         2003/87’), of the detailed rules for access to information on greenhouse gas emission allowance trading held by administrators
         of national registries, as defined in Commission Regulation (EC) No 2216/of December for a standardised and secured
         system of registries pursuant to Directive 2003/and Decision No 280/2004/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
         (OJ L 386, p. 1), in conjunction with Directive 2003/4/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of January
         on public access to environmental information and repealing Council Directive 90/313/EEC (OJ L 41, p. 26).
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between the Ville de Lyon and the Caisse des dépôts et consignations (‘the CDC’)
         concerning the latter’s refusal to supply the Ville de Lyon with data relating to volumes of greenhouse gas emission allowances
         sold by certain operators in 2005.
      
 Legal context
 International law
The Convention on Access to Information, Public Participation in Decision-making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters,
         known as the ‘Aarhus Convention’, was signed on June and approved on behalf of the European Community by Council Decision
         2005/370/EC of February (OJ L 124, p. 1).
      
Article 4(4) of that convention provides:
      
‘A request for environmental information may be refused if the disclosure would adversely affect:
…
(d)      the confidentiality of commercial and industrial information, where such confidentiality is protected by law in order to protect
         a legitimate economic interest. Within this framework, information on emissions which is relevant for the protection of the
         environment shall be disclosed;
      
…
(f)      the confidentiality of personal data and/or files relating to a natural person where that person has not consented to the
         disclosure of the information to the public, where such confidentiality is provided for in national law;
      
…
The aforementioned grounds for refusal shall be interpreted in a restrictive way, taking into account the public interest
         served by disclosure and taking into account whether the information requested relates to emissions into the environment.’
      
 European Union legislation
 Directive 2003/Article of Directive 2003/4, entitled ‘Definitions’, provides in paragraph (1)(a) to (c):
      
‘For the purposes of this Directive:
1.      “Environmental information” shall mean any information in written, visual, aural, electronic or any other material form on:
(a)       the state of the elements of the environment, such as air and atmosphere, water, soil, land, landscape and natural sites …;
(b)       factors, such as … emissions, discharges and other releases into the environment, affecting or likely to affect the elements
         of the environment referred to in (a);
      
(c)       measures (including administrative measures), such as policies, legislation, plans, programmes, environmental agreements,
         and activities affecting or likely to affect the elements and factors referred to in (a) and (b) as well as measures or activities
         designed to protect those elements; …’
      
Under Article 3(1) of that directive, ‘Member States shall ensure that public authorities are required, in accordance with
         the provisions of this Directive, to make available environmental information held by or for them to any applicant at his
         request and without his having to state an interest’. Article 3(3) further provides that ‘[i]f a request is formulated in
         too general a manner, the public authority shall as soon as possible, and at the latest within the timeframe laid down in
         paragraph 2(a), ask the applicant to specify the request and shall assist the applicant in doing so, e.g. by providing information
         on the use of the public registers referred to in paragraph 5(c) …’. 
      
Article of that same directive, entitled ‘Exceptions’, provides in paragraph 2:
      
‘Member States may provide for a request for environmental information to be refused if disclosure of the information would
         adversely affect:
      
…
(d)      the confidentiality of commercial or industrial information where such confidentiality is provided for by national or Community
         law to protect a legitimate economic interest, including the public interest in maintaining statistical confidentiality and
         tax secrecy;
      
…
The grounds for refusal mentioned in paragraphs and shall be interpreted in a restrictive way, taking into account for
         the particular case the public interest served by disclosure. In every particular case, the public interest served by disclosure
         shall be weighed against the interest served by the refusal. Member States may not, by virtue of paragraph 2(a), (d), (f),
         (g) and (h), provide for a request to be refused where the request relates to information on emissions into the environment.
         
      
…’
 Directive 2003/Article of Directive 2003/states that the purpose of that directive is to establish a scheme for greenhouse gas emission
         allowance trading within the European Union (‘the EU’) in order to promote reductions of emissions of greenhouse gases, particularly
         carbon dioxide, in a cost-effective and economically efficient manner.
      
That directive thus seeks to implement the EU’s obligations to reduce emissions under the Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations
         Framework Convention on Climate Change. That protocol was approved on behalf of the European Community by Council Decision
         2002/358/EC of April (OJ L 130, p. 1).
      
Article of Directive 2003/provides for an initial period for allocation and issue of allowances from January to December 2007, then for allocation periods of five years each, beginning on January 2008.
      
The conditions and procedures under which the national authorities are to allocate allowances to operators of installations
         on the basis of a national allocation plan during those allocation periods are set out in Articles to of Directive 2003/87.
         Moreover, under Articles 12(3) and 14(3) of that directive, Member States are to ensure (i) that, by April each year at
         the latest, the operator of each installation surrenders a number of allowances equal to the total emissions from that installation
         during the preceding calendar year as verified in accordance with Article 15, and that those allowances are subsequently cancelled,
         and (ii) that each operator of an installation reports the emissions from that installation during each calendar year to the
         competent authority after the end of that year.
      
Recital (13) in the preamble to that directive states that ‘[i]n order to ensure transparency, the public should have access
         to information relating to the allocation of allowances and to the results of monitoring of emissions, subject only to restrictions
         provided for in Directive 2003/4…’.
      
Article of Directive 2003/87, entitled ‘Access to information’, provides:
      
‘Decisions relating to the allocation of allowances, information on project activities in which a Member State participates
         or authorises private or public entities to participate, and the reports of emissions required under the greenhouse gas emissions
         permit and held by the competent authority, shall be made available to the public in accordance with Directive 2003/4/EC.’
      
Article 19(2) of Directive 2003/provides, first, that any person may hold allowances and, second, that the registry is
         to be accessible to the public and contain separate accounts to record the allowances held by each person to whom and from
         whom allowances are issued or transferred.
      
Article 19(3) of that directive states: ‘[i]n order to implement this Directive, the Commission shall adopt a Regulation in
         accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 23(2) for a standardised and secured system of registries in the form
         of standardised electronic databases containing common data elements to track the issue, holding, transfer and cancellation
         of allowances, to provide for public access and confidentiality as appropriate and to ensure that there are no transfers incompatible
         with obligations resulting from the Kyoto Protocol. …’
      
Article 20(1) and (2) of that directive provide:
      
‘1.      The Commission shall designate a Central Administrator to maintain an independent transaction log recording the issue, transfer
         and cancellation of allowances. 
      
2.      The Central Administrator shall conduct an automated check on each transaction in registries through the independent transaction
         log to ensure there are no irregularities in the issue, transfer and cancellation of allowances.’
      
 Regulation No 2216/Article of Regulation No 2216/2004, entitled ‘Registry administrators’, provides:
      
‘1.      Each Member State and the Commission shall designate a registry administrator to operate and maintain its registry in accordance
         with the provisions of this Regulation.
      
…
3.      The Member States and the Commission shall retain ultimate responsibility and authority for the operation and maintenance
         of their registries. 
      
4.      The Commission shall coordinate the implementation of the requirements of this Regulation with the registry administrators
         of each Member State and the Central Administrator.’
      
In section 1, entitled ‘Reporting and Confidentiality’, of Chapter III of Regulation No 2216/2004, relating to ‘Contents of
         the registries’, Article of that regulation provides, under the title ‘Reporting’:
      
‘1.      Each registry administrator shall make available the information listed in Annex XVI at the frequencies and to the recipients
         set out in Annex XVI in a transparent and organised manner via his registry web site. Registry administrators shall not release
         additional information held in the registry.
      
2.      The Central Administrator shall make available the information listed in Annex XVI at the frequencies and to the recipients
         set out in Annex XVI in a transparent and organised manner via the Community independent transaction log web site. The Central
         Administrator shall not release additional information held in the Community independent transaction log.
      
3.      Each web site shall allow the recipients of the reports listed in Annex XVI to query those reports using search facilities.
4.      Each registry administrator is responsible for the accuracy of the information that originates from his registry and is made
         available via the Community independent transaction log website.
      
5.      Neither the Community independent transaction log nor registries shall require account holders to submit price information
         concerning allowances or Kyoto units.’
      
In the version applicable at the material time in the main proceedings, under the title ‘Confidentiality’, Article of Regulation
         No 2216/2004, which is found in the same section of the aforementioned Chapter III, provides in paragraphs and 2:
      
‘1.      All information, including the holdings of all accounts and all transactions made, held in the registries and the Community
         independent transaction log shall be considered confidential for any purpose other than the implementation of the requirements
         of this Regulation, Directive 2003/87/EC or national law.
      
2.      Information held in the registries may not be used without the prior consent of the relevant account holder except to operate
         and maintain those registries in accordance with the provisions of this Regulation.’
      
Under the title ‘Communication link between the Community independent transaction log and the general public, and each registry
         and the general public’, paragraphs and of Annex XV to Regulation No 2216/are worded as follows:
      
‘5.      The public area of the website of the Community independent transaction log and the public website of a registry shall not
         require authentication of its users representing the general public. 
      
6.      The public area of the Community independent transaction log website and the public area of a registry website shall not permit
         its users representing the general public to directly access data from the database of the Community independent transaction
         log or the database of that registry. Data which is publicly accessible in accordance with Annex XVI shall be accessed via
         a separate database.’
      
Annex XVI to Regulation No 2216/2004, entitled ‘Reporting requirements of each registry administrator and the Central Administrator’,
         contains a section relating to ‘Publicly available information from the Community independent transaction log’, which reads
         as follows:
      
‘11.      The Central Administrator shall display and update the information in paragraph in respect of the registry system on the
         public area of the Community independent transaction log’s web site, in accordance with the specified timing.
      
12.      The following information for each completed transaction relevant for the registries system for year X shall be displayed
         from January onwards of year (X+5): 
      
…
(c)      account holder name of the transferring account: the holder of the account (person, operator, Commission, Member State);
(d)      account holder name of the acquiring account: the holder of the account (person, operator, Commission, Member State);
(e)      allowances or Kyoto units involved in the transaction by unit identification code comprising the elements set out in Annex
         VI;
      
…
(g)      date and time at which the transaction was completed ….
…’
That annex also contains a section, entitled ‘Information from each registry to be made available to account holders’, which
         states:
      
‘13.      Each registry administrator shall display and update the information in paragraph in respect of its registry on the secure
         area of that registry’s web site, in accordance with the specified timing.
      
14.      The following elements for each account, by unit identification code comprising the elements set out in Annex VI, shall be
         displayed on the account holder’s request to that account holder only:
      
(a)      current holdings of allowances or Kyoto units;
(b)      list of proposed transactions initiated by that account holder, detailing for each proposed transaction the elements in paragraph
         12(a) to (f), the date and time at which the transaction was proposed (in Greenwich Mean Time), the current status of that
         proposed transaction and any response codes returned consequent to the checks made pursuant to Annex IX;
      
(c)      list of allowances or Kyoto units acquired by that account as a result of completed transactions, detailing for each transaction
         the elements in paragraph 12(a) to (g); 
      
(d)      list of allowances or Kyoto units transferred out of that account as a result of completed transactions, detailing for each
         transaction the elements in paragraph 12(a) to (g).’
      
 National law
Article of Law No 78-of July laying down various measures to improve relations between administrative authorities
         and the public and various administrative, social and fiscal provisions (JORF, July 1978, p. 2851), in the version applicable
         at the material time in the main proceedings (‘Law No 78-753’), provides in the first and second paragraphs of Article 1:
         
      
‘The right of any person to information is specified and guaranteed by the provisions of Chapters I, III and IV of this title
         as regards freedom of access to administrative documents. 
      
For the purposes of Chapters I, III and IV of this title, “administrative documents” shall mean documents drawn up or held
         by the State, local authorities and other public law persons or private law persons responsible for the administration of
         a public service, in the context of their public service duties, irrespective of the medium used for the capture, storage
         or transmission of the information in those documents …’.
      
Article II of that law provides that ‘[a]dministrative documents, the supply of which would adversely affect … commercial
         or industrial confidentiality, shall not be supplied save to the person concerned’.
      
In environmental matters, public access to environmental information is governed by specific provisions in the French Environmental
         Code, Article L. 124-of which reads as follows:
      
‘The right of any person to have access to environmental information held, received or drawn up by or for the public authorities
         referred to in Article L. 124-shall be exercised under the conditions defined by the provisions of Title I of Law No 78-…’.
      
Article L. 124-of that code is worded as follows:
      
‘Any information available, irrespective of the medium, the subject of which is: 
(1) The state of the elements of the environment, inter alia air, atmosphere, water, soil, land, landscape, natural sites,
         coastal or marine areas and biological diversity, as well as the interaction among these elements;
      
(2) Decisions, activities and factors, in particular substances, energy, noise, radiation, waste, emissions, discharges and
         other releases likely to affect the state of the elements referred to in (1);
      
…
(5) The relationships established by or on behalf of the public authorities in respect of the application of environment-related
         legislative and regulatory provisions;
      
… 
shall be considered to be environmental information for the purposes of the present chapter’.  
The first paragraph of Article L. 229-of that code provides for the creation and maintenance of a national registry of
         greenhouse gas emission allowances recording the allowances issued, held, transferred and cancelled (‘the national registry’).
         The third paragraph of that article states that the registry is accessible to the public in accordance with the conditions
         laid down by decree.
      
Decree No 2004-of December relating to the national registry of greenhouse gas emission allowances provided for
         in Article L 229-of the Environmental Code (JORF, December 2004, p. 22123) was enacted in that regard. That decree provides
         that the CDC is responsible for setting up and maintaining that national registry. Article of that decree provides:
      
‘I. – The missions of the [CDC] pursuant to the present Decree include:
…
6.      Making available to the public, on a specialised internet site and under the conditions set out by the regulation referred
         to in Article 19(3) of Directive [2003/87], the information which the registry holder is required to make public; 
      
…
II      The [CDC] shall take the necessary measures to ensure the confidentiality of the information which it collects in the exercise
         of its duties and to prevent any use of that information, including within that body, in respect of activities other than
         those duties.
      
…’
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
By letter of February 2006, the Ville de Lyon requested the CDC to communicate to it the volumes of the greenhouse gas emission
         allowances (‘the emission allowances’) sold in by the operators of urban heating sites situated throughout France
         to which emission allowances were allocated, and also the dates of the transactions and their recipients (together ‘the trading
         data’). According to the Ville de Lyon, that data was useful to it for comparative purposes, for the renegotiation of an agreement
         delegating a public service in respect of urban heating at the La Duchère site in the municipality of Lyon.
      
By decision of March 2006, the CDC refused to supply that information on the ground that paragraphs and of Annex XVI
         to Regulation No 2216/and Article thereof preclude its supply. The Ville de Lyon brought an action before the Commission
         d’accès aux documents administratifs (Committee on Access to Administrative Documents) (CADA), which issued an opinion in
         favour of the supply of the documents relating to the trading data.
      
However, by decision of November 2006, the CDC reiterated its refusal to supply the information. In its view, as the administrator
         of the national registry, the trading data requested fell within the competence of the Central Administrator, who could supply
         that information only by placing it on the Internet after a five-year period had elapsed after completion of the transactions.
         Moreover, the provisions of Directive 2003/are not intended to govern the communication of that trading data in the context
         of the scheme for emission allowances, for which the EU legislature has laid down specific rules in Directive 2003/and
         Regulation No 2216/2004.
      
By application of January 2007, the Ville de Lyon brought an action before the referring court, seeking, first, that the
         refusal decisions of March and November be set aside and, second, that the CDC be ordered to supply it with the
         documents relating to the trading data requested.
      
In those circumstances the Tribunal administratif de Paris decided to stay proceedings and refer the following questions to
         the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Is the supply or refusal to supply the information provided for in point of Annex XVI to Regulation (EC) No 2216/the
         responsibility of the Central Administrator alone or the responsibility also of the administrator of the national registry?
      
2.      If it is the responsibility of the administrator of the national registry, must that information be considered to be “information
         on emissions into the environment” within the meaning of Article of Directive 2003/4/EC, against whose supply “the confidentiality
         of commercial or industrial information” could not be invoked, or is the supply of that information governed by specific rules
         on confidentiality?
      
3.      In the event that specific rules on confidentiality apply, is that information not to be supplied before a period of five
         years has elapsed or does that time-limit concern only the five-year allowance allocation period under Directive 2003/87/EC?
      
4.      In the event that that five-year time-limit does apply, does Article of Regulation No 2216/allow a derogation from
         it and can a refusal to derogate from it be invoked, on the basis of that article, against a local authority requesting the
         supply of that information in order to negotiate an agreement on public service delegation in respect of urban heating?’
      
 Consideration of the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 The second question
By its second question, which should be considered first, the referring court asks, in essence, whether the reporting of trading
         data, such as that requested in the main proceedings by the Ville de Lyon, is governed by one of the derogations provided
         for in Article of Directive 2003/or by the provisions of Directive 2003/and Regulation No 2216/2004, adopted pursuant
         to that directive.
      
It should be noted as a preliminary point that, in adhering to the Aarhus Convention, the European Union undertook to ensure,
         within the scope of EU law, a general principle of access to environmental information held by the public authorities.
      
In adopting Directive 2003/4, the European Union intended to implement the Aarhus Convention by providing for a general scheme
         to ensure that any natural or legal person in a Member State of the European Union has a right of access to environmental
         information held by or on behalf of the public authorities, without that person having to show an interest.
      
In the scheme for emission allowance trading established in the European Union by Directive 2003/87, Article thereof provides
         inter alia that decisions relating to the allocation of allowances to operators of installations authorised to emit greenhouse
         gases and the reports of emissions required under the greenhouse gas emissions permit and held by the competent authority
         are to be made available to the public in accordance with Directive 2003/4.
      
Although the EU legislature thus integrated, within the context of Directive 2003/87, requirements on public access to that
         type of information, it did not thereby intend to make the reporting of all information or data having a connection with the
         implementation of Directive 2003/subject to the requirements of Directive 2003/4.
      
In that regard, it should be noted that the trading data requested by the Ville de Lyon does not come within the scope of
         Article of Directive 2003/87, which refers to Directive 2003/4. That data is, however, referred to in Article of Directive
         2003/87, that is to say, data relating to transferred allowances, an accurate accounting of which is to be kept by the Member
         States in their respective national registries, of which the technical features and rules relating to the keeping, reporting
         and confidentiality of the information contained in those registries are determined by Regulation No 2216/2004.
      
Since Article of Directive 2003/does not refer to Directive 2003/in the same way as in Article 17, it must be held
         that the EU legislature did not intend to make requests concerning trading data such as that at issue in the main proceedings
         subject to the general provisions of Directive 2003/but that, on the contrary, it sought to introduce, in respect of that
         data, a specific, exhaustive scheme for public reporting and confidentiality of that data. 
      
The answer to the second question is therefore that a request for the reporting of trading data such as that requested in
         the main proceedings, relating to the names of holders of the transferring accounts and acquiring accounts of the emission
         allowances, allowances or Kyoto units involved in those transactions and the date and time of those transactions, comes exclusively
         under the specific rules governing public reporting and confidentiality contained in Directive 2003/and in Regulation No 2216/2004.
      
 The third and fourth questions
By its third and fourth questions, which should be considered together, the referring court asks, in essence, first, whether
         the reporting of trading data such as that at issue in the main proceedings comes within the scope of the specific confidentiality
         rules laid down in Articles and of Regulation No 2216/2004. Second, that court asks whether the trading data concerning
         each completed transaction referred to in paragraphs and of Annex XVI to that regulation should be published after a
         five-year period has elapsed following completion of the transaction in question or whether information relating to all of
         the transactions effected during the course of a five-year allowance period for the purposes of Directive 2003/should be
         published at the end of that five-year period. 
      
If that publication is to take place at the end of a five-year period following completion of the transaction in question,
         that court then wishes to know whether the renegotiation of an agreement on public service delegation such as that at issue
         in the main proceedings may be considered to be intended to implement the requirements of Regulation No 2216/2004, Directive
         2003/or national law within the meaning of Article 10(1) of that regulation, which could result in the confidentiality
         no longer being able to prevent the reporting of the trading data requested. 
      
As held in paragraph of this judgment, trading data such as that requested by the Ville de Lyon concerning the names of
         holders of the transferring accounts and acquiring accounts of the emission allowances, allowances or Kyoto units involved
         in those transactions and the date and time of those transactions come within the scope of Directive 2003/and Regulation
         No 2216/2004.
      
In that regard, Article 19(2) of Directive 2003/does indeed provide that such information is to be recorded in the national
         registries, that those registries are to be accessible to the public and to contain separate accounts to record the allowances
         held by each person to whom and from whom allowances are issued or transferred. However, as Article 19(3) called on it to
         do, the Commission adopted Regulation No 2216/relating to the standardised and secured system of registries, necessary
         for the implementation of that directive, by which the Commission inter alia laid down the rules for guaranteeing public access
         to the data recorded in that system and the confidentiality thereof as appropriate.
      
It is apparent from Article of Regulation No 2216/that the administrators of national registries, such as the CDC in
         France, and the Central Administrator, designated by the Commission, are to make available the information listed in Annex
         XVI at the frequencies and to the recipients set out in that annex in a transparent and organised manner via their registry
         website or the website of the Community independent transaction log.
      
Under Article 10(1) of Regulation No 2216/2004, all information, including data relating to transactions made, held in all
         registries, is to be considered confidential for any purpose other than the implementation of the requirements of that regulation,
         Directive 2003/or national law. Moreover, under Article 19(2), that information may not be used without the prior consent
         of the relevant account holder except to operate and maintain those registries.
      
It should be noted, first, that the renegotiation of an agreement on public service delegation by a public entity such as
         the Ville de Lyon is not, in principle, an activity implementing the requirements of Regulation No 2216/2004, Directive 2003/or national law. 
      
Second, it is common ground that the Ville de Lyon is not the holder of an account and that, consequently, it does not have
         access, on the terms laid down in paragraphs and of Annex XVI to Regulation No 2216/2004, to information which may be
         displayed in the non-public area of the national registry in the event that the urban heating suppliers in the main proceedings
         were to make a request.
      
It follows that, in circumstances such as those of the main proceedings and, in any event, in the absence of the prior consent
         of the relevant account holders, as required by Article 10(2) of Regulation No 2216/2004, to use of the information concerning
         them for purposes other than the operation and maintenance of the registries, information such as the trading data requested
         in the main proceedings must remain confidential, with the result that the Ville de Lyon may only claim access to information
         relating to transactions involving emission allowances on the same terms as for the general public, that is, free consultation,
         in accordance with paragraphs and of Annex XV to Regulation No 2216/2004, of the public area of the Community independent
         transaction log’s website and the public area of the websites of the national registries, which are distinct from the databases
         of that log and those registries.
      
Regarding the frequency with which information such as that at issue in the main proceedings is put online in the public area,
         the referring court asks whether it is possible to align that frequency with the periods covered by the national allowance
         plans, namely, in the main proceedings, the periods from January to December and from January to December 2012, which would mean that the information relating to transactions on allowances attributed under a national allocation
         plan would be accessible to the public immediately at the end of those periods, namely, in in the first case and in in the second.
      
In that regard, it suffices to find that paragraphs and of Annex XVI to Regulation No 2216/do not provide for such
         an alignment. It is explicitly clear from those paragraphs and from paragraph 12(c) to (e) and (g) that data such as that
         requested in the main proceedings concerning the names of holders of the transferring accounts and acquiring accounts of the
         emission allowances, allowances or Kyoto units involved in those transactions and the date and time of those transactions,
         are to be placed online in the public area of the Community independent transaction log’s website by the Central Administrator
         from January onwards of the fifth year (X+5) following the year (X) of completion of the transactions concerned.
      
The answer to the third and fourth questions is therefore that trading data such as that requested in the main proceedings
         by a public authority wishing to renegotiate an agreement on public service delegation is confidential data within the meaning
         of Regulation No 2216/and that, under Articles and of that regulation, read in conjunction with paragraphs and
         of Annex XVI to that regulation, such data, in the absence of the prior consent of the relevant account holders, may be
         freely consulted by the general public only in the public area of the Community independent transaction log’s website from
         January onwards of the fifth year (X+5) following the year (X) of completion of the transactions relating to transfers
         of emission allowances.
      
 The first question
By its first question, the referring court asks, in essence, whether, when a request in that regard is submitted to it, the
         administrator of the national registry, through which data such as that at issue in the main proceedings passes and the reporting
         of which is the responsibility of the Central Administrator, has authority independently to refuse such reporting.
      
As held in paragraph of this judgment, in the scheme provided for by Regulation No 2216/2004, in particular paragraphs
         and of Annex XVI thereto, it is expressly provided that data concerning the names of holders of the transferring accounts
         and acquiring accounts of the emission allowances, allowances or Kyoto units involved in those transactions and the date and
         time of those transactions, are to be made available to the general public by being placed online in the public area of the
         Community independent transaction log’s website and that, in that regard, the Central Administrator has sole competence to
         carry out such reporting.
      
Such placing online is to be effected from January onwards of the fifth year (X+5) following the year (X) of completion
         of the transactions effecting transfer of the emission allowances, the date from which the trading data ceases to benefit
         from the confidentiality scheme established by the EU legislature.
      
Consequently, if a request addressed to an administrator of a national registry relates to the reporting of information concerning
         the names of holders established within the national territory of that administrator, transferring accounts and acquiring
         accounts of the emission allowances, allowances or Kyoto units involved in those transactions and the date and time of those
         transactions, that administrator is required, in the absence of the prior consent of the relevant account holders, to guarantee
         the confidentially owed such information until it has been legally reported to the general public by the Central Administrator.
         In such a situation, it is for the administrator of the national registry himself to reject the reporting request thus addressed
         to him.
      
If, on the other hand, that information has already been placed online by the Central Administrator, in accordance with paragraphs
         and of Annex XVI to Regulation No 2216/2004, in the public area of the Community independent transaction log’s website,
         the administrator of the national registry has authority to report such information to the requesting party or to indicate
         the website where such information is legally available.
      
The answer to the first question is therefore that although, for the purposes of implementation of Regulation No 2216/2004,
         it is the Central Administrator who has sole competence to report to the general public the data referred to in paragraph
         of Annex XVI to that regulation, the administrator of the national registry who has received a request for reporting of
         such trading data must independently reject that request since, in the absence of the prior consent of the relevant account
         holders, that administrator is required to guarantee the confidentiality of that data until it has become legally reportable
         to the general public by the Central Administrator.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      A request for the reporting of trading data such as that requested in the main proceedings, relating to the names of holders
            of the transferring accounts and acquiring accounts of the emission allowances, allowances or Kyoto units involved in those
            transactions and the date and time of those transactions, comes exclusively under the specific rules governing public reporting
            and confidentiality contained in Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of October establishing
            a scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Community and amending Council Directive 96/61/EC, in the
            version resulting from Directive 2004/101/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of October 2004, and in Commission
            Regulation (EC) No 2216/of December for a standardised and secured system of registries pursuant to Directive
            2003/and Decision No 280/2004/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council. 
2.      Trading data such as that requested in the main proceedings by a public authority wishing to renegotiate an agreement on public
            service delegation is confidential data within the meaning of Regulation No 2216/and, under Articles and of that
            regulation, read in conjunction with paragraphs and of Annex XVI to that regulation, such data, in the absence of the
            prior consent of the relevant account holders, may be freely consulted by the general public only in the public area of the
            Community independent transaction log’s website from January onwards of the fifth year (X+5) following the year (X) of
            completion of the transactions relating to transfers of emission allowances.
3.      Although, for the purposes of implementation of Regulation No 2216/2004, it is the Central Administrator who has sole competence
            to report to the general public the data referred to in paragraph of Annex XVI to that regulation, the administrator of
            the national registry who has received a request for reporting of such trading data must independently reject that request
            since, in the absence of the prior consent of the relevant account holders, that administrator is required to guarantee the
            confidentiality of that data until it has become legally reportable to the general public by the Central Administrator.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 