
Case C-19/Heirs of Paul Chevassus-Marche
v
Groupe Danone and Others 
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Cour de cassation (France))
(Approximation of laws – Directive 86/653/EEC – Self-employed commercial agents – Right of an agent entrusted with a specific geographical area to a commission – Transactions concluded without any action on the part of the principal)
Summary of the Judgment
Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Self-employed commercial agents – Directive 86/(Council Directive 86/653, Arts 7(2), first indent, 10(1) and (2), and 11(1))
The first indent of Article 7(2) of Directive 86/on the coordination of the laws of the Member States relating to self-employed
         commercial agents must be interpreted as meaning that a commercial agent entrusted with a specific geographical area does
         not have the right to a commission for transactions concluded by customers belonging to that area with a third party without
         any action, direct or indirect, on the part of the principal.
      
Although that provision merely refers to any ‘transactions concluded during the period covered by the agency contract’, without
         any other requirement than that those transactions have been entered into with a customer belonging to a geographical area
         or a group of customers for whom the commercial agent is responsible, it nevertheless follows from the combination of Article
         10(1) and Article 10(2) of Directive 86/that the commercial agent’s right to commission arises either when the principal
         has or should have carried out his obligation, or when the third party to the agency contract, that is the customer, has or
         should have carried out his obligation. In each instance, the presence of the principal in the transactions for which the
         commercial agent can claim commission is indispensable. That is supported by the wording of Article 11(1) of that directive,
         according to which the commercial agent’s right to commission can be extinguished only if and to the extent that it is established
         that the contract between the third party and the principal will not be executed, and that fact is due to a reason for which
         the principal is not to blame.
      
It is for the national court to establish whether or not the evidence before it, assessed in the light of the aim of protecting
         the commercial agent which is one of the objectives of that directive and of the obligation on the principal to act dutifully
         and in good faith under Article of that directive, allows it to establish the existence of such action, be that action of
         a legal nature, for example through the intermediary of a representative, or of a factual nature.
      
(see paras 16, 19-23, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
January (*)
      
(Approximation of laws – Directive 86/653/EEC – Self-employed commercial agents – Right of an agent entrusted with a specific geographical area to a commission – Transactions concluded without any action on the part of the principal)
In Case C‑19/07,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Cour de cassation (France), made by decision of December
         2006, received at the Court on January 2007, in the proceedings
      
Heirs of Paul Chevassus-Marche
v
Groupe Danone,
Kro beer brands SA (BKSA),
Évian eaux minérales d’Évian SA (SAEME),
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of P. Jann (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, A. Tizzano, A. Borg Barthet, M. Ilešič and E. Levits, Judges,
         
      
Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        the heirs of  Mr Chevassus-Marche, by SCP Waquet, Farge and Hazan, lawyers,
–        Groupe Danone, Kro beer brands SA (BKSA) and Évian eaux minérales d’Évian SA (SAEME), by SCP Célice, Blancpain and Soltner,
         lawyers,
      
–        the French Government, by G. de Bergues and A.-L. During, acting as Agents,
–        the German Government, by M. Lumma and A. Dittrich, acting as Agents,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by H. Støvlbæk and A. Bordes, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 7(2) of Council Directive 86/653/EEC of December on the coordination of the laws of the Member States relating to self-employed commercial agents (OJ L 382,
         p. 17) (‘Directive 86/653’).
      
The reference has been made in the course of proceedings between the heirs of Mr Chevassus-Marche and Groupe Danone, Kro beer
         brands SA and Évian eaux minérales d’Évian SA regarding the liability of those companies for the payment of commission to
         Mr Chevassus-Marche.
      
 Legal context
Article 1(2) of Directive 86/defines a commercial agent as being ‘a self-employed intermediary who has continuing authority
         to negotiate the sale or the purchase of goods on behalf of another person, hereinafter called the “principal”, or to negotiate
         and conclude such transactions on behalf of and in the name of that principal’.
      
Article 4(1) of Directive 86/states:
      
‘In his relations with his commercial agent a principal must act dutifully and in good faith.’
Article of that directive provides:
      
‘1. A commercial agent shall be entitled to commission on commercial transactions concluded during the period covered by the
         agency contract:
      
(a)      where the transaction has been concluded as a result of his action; or
(b)      where the transaction is concluded with a third party whom he has previously acquired as a customer for transactions of the
         same kind.
      
2.      A commercial agent shall also be entitled to commission on transactions concluded during the period covered by the agency
         contract:
      
–        either where he is entrusted with a specific geographical area or group of customers,
–        or where he has an exclusive right to a specific geographical area or group of customers, 
and where the transaction has been entered into with a customer belonging to that area or group.
Member State[s] shall include in their legislation one of the possibilities referred to in the above two indents.’
As regards the time when the right to commission arises, Article 10(1) and (2) of Directive 86/states:
      
‘1.      The commission shall become due as soon as and to the extent that one of the following circumstances obtains:
(a)      the principal has executed the transaction; or
(b)      the principal should, according to his agreement with the third party, have executed the transaction; or
(c)      the third party has executed the transaction.
2.      The commission shall become due at the latest when the third party has executed his part of the transaction or should have
         done so if the principal had executed his part of the transaction, as he should have.’
      
As regards the extinguishment of the right to commission, Article 11(1) of that directive provides:
      
‘The right to commission can be extinguished only if and to the extent that:
–        it is established that the contract between the third party and the principal will not be executed, and
–        that fac[t] is due to a reason for which the principal is not to blame.’
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
In 1987, BSN, now Groupe Danone, concluded with Mr Chevassus-Marche an exclusive mandate to represent its subsidiaries, Brasseries
         Kronenberg, now Kro beer brands SA, and Évian eaux minérales d’Évian SA in their dealings with the importers, wholesalers
         and retailers of their goods in a specific geographical area including the islands of Mayotte and La Réunion (a French overseas
         collectivity and a French overseas department respectively).
      
Following the termination of that contract, Mr Chevassus-Marche requested from Groupe Danone and its subsidiaries the payment
         of various sums, among which were commissions relating to purchases made by two companies established in his geographical
         area. Those requests were refused on the ground that the purchases concerned had been made from central buying offices or
         dealers in metropolitan France, outside the control of Groupe Danone and it subsidiaries and without any action on the part
         of Mr Chevassus-Marche.
      
Since the Paris Commercial Court and the Paris Court of Appeal dismissed his action insofar as it concerned the payment of
         those commissions, Mr Chevassus-Marche lodged an appeal at the Cour de Cassation, which was continued by his heirs following
         his death.
      
The Cour de Cassation considers that in order to give judgment in the main proceedings it requires an interpretation of Article
         7(2) of Directive 86/653. Consequently, it has decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following question to the Court
         for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Is Article 7(2) of … Directive 86/653/EEC … to be interpreted as meaning that a commercial agent entrusted with a specific
         geographical area is entitled to commission where a commercial transaction between a third party and a customer belonging
         to that area has been concluded without any action, either direct or indirect, on the principal’s part ?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
By that question, the national court asks, in essence, whether the first indent of Article 7(2) of Directive 86/should
         be interpreted as meaning that a commercial agent entrusted with a specific geographical area has the right to a commission
         for transactions concluded by customers belonging to that area with a third party, without any action, direct or indirect,
         on the part of the principal.
      
In Case C-104/Kontogeorgas [1996] ECR I-6643, the Court was called upon to interpret Article of Directive 86/in a situation where the principal
         itself sold its goods to customers belonging to a geographical area which it had entrusted to a commercial agent. When asked
         whether that agent could claim commission for transactions concluded without any action on his part, the Court held, at paragraph
         of the judgment, that Article of that directive provides for entitlement to commission in two alternative cases. Paragraph
         refers to the agent’s ongoing or previous activities, whereas paragraph provides that a commercial agent is to be remunerated
         for all transactions entered into with customers belonging to a certain area or group, no mention being made of the need for
         any particular activity on the part of the agent.
      
In the situation in question in Kontogeorgas the Court held that the first indent of Article 7(2) of Directive 86/must be interpreted as meaning that, where a commercial
         agent is entrusted with a geographical area, he is entitled to commission on transactions concluded with customers belonging
         to that area, even if they were concluded without any action on his part (Kontogeorgas, paragraph 19). 
      
The present order for reference asks whether that interpretation should also apply in a situation, such as that in the dispute
         in the main proceedings, where the sales of goods concluded with the customers established in the geographical sector entrusted
         to the relevant commercial agent were concluded not only without any action by that agent but also without any action, direct
         or indirect, on the part of the principal.
      
In that regard, it must be acknowledged that, as the heirs of Mr Chevassus-Marche have pointed out, Article 7(2) of Directive
         86/merely refers to any ‘transactions concluded during the period covered by the agency contract’, without any other requirement
         than that those transactions have been entered into with a customer belonging to a geographical area or a group of customers
         for whom the commercial agent is responsible. There is no more an express requirement for action on the part of the principal
         than there is for action on the part of the commercial agent. 
      
However, Article 7(2) of Directive 86/must be read together with Article of that directive, which specifies the conditions
         to which the commercial agent’s right to commission is subject.
      
Article of that directive establishes the circumstances which give rise to that right. Article 10(1) distinguishes three
         alternative circumstances which are capable – each on its own – of constituting the event giving rise to the right to commission.
         The right is thus acquired as soon as and to the extent that the principal has executed the transaction or should have executed
         it, according to his agreement with the third party, or as soon as or to the extent that the third party has executed the
         transaction. Article 10(2) of Directive 86/states that the commission becomes due, at the latest, when that third party
         has executed his part of the transaction or should have done so if the principal had executed his part of the transaction.
      
It follows from the combination of those two paragraphs of Article of Directive 86/that the commercial agent’s right
         to commission arises either when the principal has or should have carried out his obligation, or when the third party to the
         agency contract, that is the customer, has or should have carried out his obligation. In each instance, the presence of the
         principal in the transactions for which the commercial agent can claim commission is indispensable.
      
That interpretation of Article of Directive 86/is supported by the wording of Article 11(1) of that directive, according
         to which the commercial agent’s right to commission can be extinguished only if and to the extent that it is established that
         the contract between the third party and the principal will not be executed, and that fact is due to a reason for which the
         principal is not to blame. That sole ground for extinguishment, which requires the combination of two sets of circumstances
         in which express reference is made to the principal, emphasises the importance of his role for the existence of the right
         to commission.
      
It therefore follows from Articles 7(2), 10(1) and (2), and 11(1) of Directive 86/653, read in conjunction with each other,
         that the commercial agent can claim commission on the basis of a transaction only to the extent that the principal acted,
         directly or indirectly, in the conclusion of that transaction. 
      
It is for the national court to establish whether or not the evidence before it, assessed in the light of the aim of protecting
         the commercial agent – which is one of the objectives of that directive (Case C-215/Bellone [1998] ECR I-2191, paragraph 13; Case C-381/Ingmar [2000] ECR I-9305, paragraph 20; and Case C-465/Honyvem Informazioni Commerciali [2006] ECR I-2879, paragraph 19) – and of the obligation on the principal to act dutifully and in good faith under Article
         of that directive, allow it to establish the existence of such action, be that action of a legal nature, for example through
         the intermediary of a representative, or of a factual nature.
      
Having regard to the foregoing considerations, the reply to the question referred must be that the first indent of Article
         7(2) of Directive 86/must be interpreted as meaning that a commercial agent entrusted with a specific geographical area
         does not have the right to a commission for transactions concluded by customers belonging to that area with a third party
         without any action, direct or indirect, on the part of the principal. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
The first indent of Article 7(2) of Directive 86/653/EEC of December on the coordination of the laws of the Member
            States relating to self-employed commercial agents must be interpreted as meaning that a commercial agent entrusted with a
            specific geographical area does not have the right to a commission for transactions concluded by customers belonging to that
            area with a third party without any action, direct or indirect, on the part of the principal. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 