
Order of the Court (Sixth Chamber) of June – Verein Deutsche Sprache v Council
(Case C-93/P)
Appeal – Contents of the internet site of the Presidency of the Council – Council’s failure to guarantee that the entire contents of the site exist in the German language – Action for failure to act – Position taken – Action for annulment – Actionable measures – Effective judicial protection – Appeal clearly unfounded
1.                     Procedure – Application initiating proceedings – Formal requirements – Statement of the forms of order sought – Implicit claims
            seeking a declaration of an institution’s failure to act (Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 21; Rules of Procedure of
            the General Court, Art. 44(1)(d)) (see paras 18-21)
2.                     Actions for annulment – Actionable measures – Definition – Measures producing binding legal effects – Presentation of the
            internet sites of the Presidencies of the Council – Letter sent by an institution – Not included (Art. 263, fourth para.,
            TFEU) (see paras 25-29)
3.                     Union law – Principles – Right to effective judicial protection – Inadmissibility of an action for annulment of measures that
            do not produce binding legal effects – Whether possible for persons to challenge such measures by means of an action for the
            Union’s non-contractual liability (Arts TFEU and 340, second para., TFEU) (see paras 30-31)
Re: 
Appeal brought against the order of the General Court (Third Chamber) of December in Case T‑245/Verein Deutsche Sprache
 v 
Council
 by which that court dismissed as manifestly inadmissible the appellant’s action for a declaration that the Council had infringed
                  European Union law by, in particular, failing to ensure that the entire contents of the Council Presidency’s website be available
                  in German – Failure to take account of the nature and purpose of the action – No legal scrutiny of the Council’s position
                  – Breach of the obligation to safeguard the unity and consistency of Union law.
               
Operative part 
1.
	The appeal is dismissed. 
2.
	Verein Deutsche Sprache eV is ordered to pay the costs.
Top  
 