
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-472/Siomab SA
v
Institut bruxellois pour la gestion de l’environnement
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Cour d’appel de Bruxelles)
(Environment – Waste – Regulation (EEC) No 259/on shipments of waste – Competence of the authority of dispatch to verify the classification of the purpose of a shipment (recovery or disposal)
         and to object to a shipment based on an incorrect classification – Objection procedure)
      
Summary of the Judgment
Environment – Waste – Regulation No 259/on shipments of waste – Shipments of waste for recovery – Incorrect classification
            of a planned shipment by the notifier – Not competent for the authority of dispatch to reclassify that shipment on its own
            initiative and to refuse to transmit the consignment note – Duty of that authority to inform the notifier of its objections
            to that classification
(Council Regulation No 259/Arts 6(8) and 7(2))
Regulation No 259/on the supervision and control of shipments of waste within, into and out of the European Community,
         as amended by Decisions 98/and 1999/816, is to be interpreted as meaning that, where a Member State has recourse, under
         Article 6(8) of that regulation, to the specific procedure whereby the competent authority of dispatch may transmit the consignment
         note for a shipment of waste for recovery itself, instead of the notifier, to the competent authority of destination, that
         competent authority of dispatch, if it considers it necessary to object to the shipment on the ground that it has been incorrectly
         classified by the notifier, may not reclassify the shipment on its own initiative. It is required to transmit that document
         to the other competent authorities and to the consignee and to inform the notifier and the other competent authorities concerned
         of its objection by any appropriate means before the end of the period laid down in Article 7(2) of the regulation at the
         latest. 
      
(see para. 35, operative part)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)October 2004(1)
(Environment  –  Waste  –  Regulation (EEC) No 259/on shipments of waste  –  Competence of the authority of dispatch to verify the classification of the purpose of a shipment (recovery or disposal)
                  and to object to a shipment based on an incorrect classification  –  Objection procedure)
               
 In Case C-472/02,
             REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Cour d'appel de Bruxelles (Belgium), made by decision of
            December 2002, received at the Court on December 2002, in the proceedings  
            
Siomab SA
v
Institut bruxellois pour la gestion de l'environnement,
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),,
 composed of: R. Silva de Lapuerta, President of the Chamber, C. Gulmann, (Rapporteur) and S. von Bahr, Judges,
            
 Advocate General: P. Léger,Registrar:  M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator,
             having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on June 2004,after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
            
–
 Siomab SA, by J. Vanden Eynde and J.-M. Wolter, avocats,
            
–
 the Institut bruxellois pour la gestion de l'environnement (IBGE), by J. Sambon, avocat, 
            
–
 the Federal Republic of Gemany, by W.-D. Plessing, M. Lumma and C.‑D. Quassowski, acting as Agents,
            
–
 the Italian Republic, by I. Braguglia, acting as Agent, and F. Fiorilli, avvocato dello Stato, 
            
–
 the Kingdom of the Netherlands, by H. Sevenster, acting as Agent,
            
–
 the Commission of the European Communities, by F. Simonetti and M. Konstantinidis, acting as Agents, 
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on July 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Council Regulation (EEC) No 259/of February on the supervision and control of shipments of waste within, into and out of the European Community (OJ L 30, p. 1),
         as amended by Commission Decision 98/368/EC of May (OJ L 165, p. 20) and Commission Decision 1999/816/EC of November (OJ L 316, p. 45) (‘the Regulation’).
         
            
 The reference was made in the course of proceedings between Siomab SA (‘Siomab’) and the Institut bruxellois pour la gestion
         de l’environnement (‘the IBGE’) concerning a shipment of waste that Siomab intended to make to Germany.
         
I – 
Legal background
Community law
            
 The essential objective of Council Directive 75/442/EEC of July on waste (OJ L 194, p. 39), as amended by Council
         Directive 91/156/EEC of March (OJ L 78, p. 32) and Commission Decision 96/350/EC of May (OJ L 135,
         p. 32, ‘the Directive’), is the protection of human health and the environment against harmful effects caused by the collection,
         transport, treatment, storage and tipping of waste. 
         
            
 In Article 1(e) of the Directive ‘disposal’ is defined as ‘any of the operations provided for in Annex II A’, and in Article
         1(f) ‘recovery’ is defined as ‘any of the operations provided for in Annex II B’. 
         
            
 The Regulation organises, inter alia, the supervision and control of shipments of waste between Member States. 
         
            
 Article 2(i) of the Regulation provides that ‘disposal is as defined in Article 1(e) of Directive 75/442/EEC’ and Article 2(k) provides that ‘recovery is as defined in Article 1(f) of Directive 75/442/EEC’. 
         
            
 Title II of the Regulation, entitled ‘Shipments of waste between Member States’, contains two separate chapters, one of which
         concerns the procedure applicable to shipments of waste for disposal (Chapter A, Articles to 5) and the other the procedure
         applicable to shipments of waste for recovery (Chapter B, Articles to 11). 
         
            
 Under Articles 3(1) and 6(1) of the Regulation, where a waste producer or holder (‘the notifier’) intends to ship waste for
         disposal or recovery from one Member State to another Member State and/or pass it in transit through one or several other
         Member States, he is to notify the authority designated by the Member State in which the shipment is to be received (‘the
         competent authority of destination’). He must also send copies of the notification to the authorities designated by the Member
         State from which the shipment is dispatched (‘the competent authority of dispatch’) and by the Member State through which
         the shipment is in transit (‘the competent authority of transit’) and to the person or undertaking to whom or to which the
         waste is shipped (‘the consignee’). 
         
            
 According to Articles 3(3) and 6(3) of the Regulation, notification is to be effected by means of a consignment note issued
         by the competent authority of dispatch. Articles 3(5) and 6(5) specify the information that the notifier is to supply on the
         consignment note, which includes information relating to the disposal or recovery operations. 
         
            
 Under Articles 3(6) and 6(6) of that regulation, the notifier is required to conclude a contract with the consignee and a
         copy of that contract must be supplied to the competent authority on request. 
         
            
 Article 3(8), first subparagraph, and Article 6(8) of the Regulation provide that a competent authority of dispatch may, in
         accordance with national legislation, decide to transmit the notification itself instead of the notifier to the competent
         authority of destination, with copies to the consignee and to the competent authority of transit. 
         
            
 The second subparagraph of Article 3(8) of the Regulation, which concerns waste for disposal, adds:
         ‘The competent authority of dispatch may decide not to proceed with notification if it has itself immediate objections to
         raise against the shipment in accordance with Article 4(3). It shall immediately inform the notifier of these objections.’
         
         
            
 In accordance with Articles 4(1) and 7(1) of the Regulation, on receipt of the notification of a planned shipment the competent
         authority of destination is to send, within three working days, an acknowledgement to the notifier and copies thereof to the
         other authorities concerned and to the consignee. 
         
            
 Article 7(2) of the Regulation prescribes a period of days following dispatch of the acknowledgement within which the competent
         authorities of destination, dispatch and transit must raise any objections they have to the notified shipment of waste for
         recovery. That provision states, in particular, that objections must be based on Article 7(4). 
         
            
 Article 7(4)(a) of the Regulation lists the cases in which the competent authorities of destination and dispatch may raise
         reasoned objections to the planned shipment. 
         
National rules
            
 Pursuant to Article of the Order of July of the Government of the Brussels Capital Region, relating to the import
         and export of waste, the IBGE is itself to transmit, in accordance with Article 6(8) of the Regulation, the notifications
         concerning the export of waste to the competent authorities of destination, with a copy to the consignee. 
         
The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred to the Court
            
 Siomab operates an incineration plant for household waste and similar products in Brussels. The plant produces residues, in
         particular, salts.
         
            
 On November 2001, Siomab concluded a contract with GTS-Grunde Teutschenthal Sicherungs GmbH & Co. KG for burying the salts
         in the galleries of the salt mines at Teutschenthal, in Germany.
         
            
 In order to ship that waste, Siomab sent the IBGE a notification file on December for transmission to the competent
         authority of destination, the Landesamt für Geologie und Bergwesen Sachsen-Anhalt.
         
            
 In the documents sent under that cover to the IBGE, Siomab classified the planned shipment as a recovery operation of type
         ‘R Recycling/reclamation of other inorganic materials’, listed in Annex II B to the Directive. The IBGE took the view that
         the operation concerned was a shipment of waste for disposal of type ‘D Permanent storage (e.g. emplacement of containers
         in a mine, etc.’, listed in Annex II A to the Directive. After consulting Siomab, the IBGE amended the notification form to
         reflect its view and, on December 2001, informed Siomab that its export application had been sent to the competent authority
         in Germany. That authority objected to the requested shipment on the ground that under national mining law only recovery,
         and not disposal, is permissible in the Teutschenthal mine.
         
            
 On April 2002, Siomab once again sent its file to the IBGE, retaining the classification of the operation as a shipment
         of type R 5, and relying on the case-law of the Court (Case C-6/ASA [2002] ECR I-1961) to argue that the IBGE was required to transmit the notification, in its original version, to the competent
         authority of destination, and that it was not entitled to reclassify the purpose of the shipment.
         
            
 On April 2002, the IBGE, adhering to its assessment, returned the file to Siomab on the ground that the classification
         of the operation was incorrect.
         
            
 Siomab then brought an action before the Conseil d’État (Council of State) seeking annulment of the IBGE’s decision to refuse
         to transmit the notification of the shipment of waste to the competent authority of destination.
         
            
 On May 2002, in interlocutory proceedings, Siomab requested the President of the Tribunal de première instance de Bruxelles
         (Court of First Instance, Brussels), Belgium, to order the IBGE to transmit, without amendment, the notification of the shipment
         of waste to the competent authority of destination. That request was rejected by order of July 2002.
         
            
 Siomab lodged an appeal against that order with the Cour d’appel de Bruxelles (Court of Appeal, Brussels), claiming, inter
         alia, that it was not for the IBGE to reclassify on its own initiative the purpose of the shipment of waste and that, in the
         context of the specific procedure for recovery operations, the Regulation does not empower the competent authority of dispatch
         to refuse to transmit the notification. The IBGE contended that, on the contrary, it had a duty to verify the classification
         of the planned shipment and that it was therefore not required to make notification in the case of abuse of the Regulation.
         
            
 In those circumstances, the Cour d’appel de Bruxelles took the view that an interpretation of the Regulation was necessary
         in order to settle the dispute before it and decided to stay proceedings and refer the following question to the Court for
         a preliminary ruling:
         ‘Where a Member State has recourse to the mechanism by which the competent authority of dispatch gives notice of a consignment
         note under Articles 3(8) and 6(8) of [the] Regulation …, must Articles 3(8), 4(3), 6(8), 7(4) and of the Regulation be
         interpreted as meaning:
         
(a)
that the competent authority of dispatch within the meaning of the Regulation, which is empowered to verify whether a planned
               shipment classified in the notification as a “shipment of waste for recovery” actually fits that classification, may, when
               it considers that the classification is incorrect, 
            
–
refuse to transmit the consignment note because of that incorrect classification and ask the notifier to transmit a new consignment
                     note to it,
                  
–
transmit the consignment note after reclassifying the planned shipment as a “shipment of waste for disposal”,
–
transmit the consignment note containing the incorrect classification, immediately accompanying its transmission with an objection
                     based on that incorrect classification,
                  
(b)
or, on the contrary, that the competent authority of dispatch is required to send the notification as classified by the notifier
               to the competent authority of destination, while retaining the power, if it considers that the purpose of the shipment has
               been incorrectly classified, also to raise a reasoned objection on the basis of that erroneous classification, at the same
               time or subsequently?’ 
            
The question referred by the national court
            
 It should be noted first of all that, under the system established by the Regulation, all the competent authorities to which
         notification of a planned shipment of waste is addressed must check that the classification by the notifier is consistent
         with the provisions of the Regulation and object to a shipment which is incorrectly classified (ASA, paragraph 40, and Case C-458/Commission v Luxembourg [2003] ECR I-1553, paragraph 21). 
         
            
 If the competent authority of dispatch considers that the purpose of the shipment has been incorrectly classified in the notification,
         the ground for its objection to the shipment must be the classification error itself, without reference to one of the specific
         provisions of the Regulation setting out the objections which the Member States may raise against a shipment of waste. The
         effect of that objection is, as with the other objections provided for in the Regulation, to prevent the shipment (ASA, paragraph 47). However, it is not for the competent authority of dispatch to reclassify on its own initiative the purpose
         of the shipment of waste, since such a unilateral reclassification would result in one and the same shipment being examined
         by different competent authorities in the light of provisions falling under different chapters of the Regulation, which would
         be incompatible with the system established by the Regulation (ASA, paragraph 48).
         
            
 Moreover, the Court has held that the procedure laid down by the Regulation provides the notifier with a guarantee that the
         planned shipment will be examined within the periods prescribed by the Regulation and that he will be informed, upon the expiry
         of those periods at the latest, whether, and on what conditions, if any, the shipment can be carried out. Therefore, any objection
         in respect of the incorrect classification of the notified shipment as a shipment of waste for recovery must be raised by
         the competent authority of dispatch within the period prescribed by Article 7(2) of the Regulation (ASA, paragraph 49).
         
            
 That interpretation of the Regulation also applies in situations where, as is the case here, the competent authority of dispatch,
         which considers that it has to raise an objection to a shipment declared as a shipment of waste for recovery, has been notified
         of the planned shipment under the specific procedure provided for in Article 6(8) of the Regulation, according to which the
         authority itself, rather than the notifier, notifies the other authorities and the consignee of the planned shipment.
         
            
 There is no reason to consider that the mere fact that the procedure to be followed when notifying the planned shipment to
         the parties concerned is not the standard procedure ought to result in the competent authority of dispatch being empowered
         to reclassify on its own initiative the purpose of the shipment.
         
            
 Against that background, it should be noted that the second subparagraph of Article 3(8) of the Regulation, which concerns
         the procedure for shipments of waste for disposal, grants the competent authority of dispatch the option of refusing to transmit
         the notification of a planned shipment where ‘it has itself immediate objections to raise against the shipment in accordance
         with Article 4(3)’. Therefore, by not granting the competent authority of dispatch that option under the procedure for shipment
         of waste for recovery, the Community legislature meant, by implication but necessarily, to exclude it in that procedure.
         
            
 In those circumstances, it must be held that, in a situation such as the one at issue in the main proceedings, a competent
         authority of dispatch which considers that the classification of the purpose of a shipment is incorrect cannot on its own
         initiative reclassify that purpose and refuse to transmit the consignment note to the other authorities and the consignee.
         It is entitled only, at the latest by the end of a period of days following dispatch of the acknowledgement of receipt
         of the notification of the shipment by the authority of destination, to inform the notifier and the other competent authorities
         concerned, by any appropriate means, of its objection based on the incorrectness of that classification.
         
            
 For the reasons given by the Advocate General in points and of his Opinion, such an interpretation of the Regulation
         in no way compromises the powers of the competent authority of dispatch under that regulation to object to a shipment which
         has been incorrectly classified by the notifier and, at the same time, protects the notifier’s interest in knowing the position
         of the other authorities regarding that planned shipment.
         
            
 In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the question referred by the national court must be that the Regulation is to
         be interpreted as meaning that, where a Member State has recourse, under Article 6(8) of that regulation, to the specific
         procedure whereby the competent authority of dispatch transmits the consignment note for a shipment of waste for recovery,
         that authority, if it considers it necessary to object to the shipment on the ground that it has been incorrectly classified
         by the notifier, may not reclassify the shipment on its own initiative and is required to transmit that document to the other
         competent authorities and the consignee. It is then for that authority to inform the notifier and the other competent authorities
         concerned of its objection by any appropriate means before the end of the period laid down in Article 7(2) of the Regulation
         at the latest.
         
Costs
            
 The costs incurred by the German, Italian and Netherlands Governments and by the Commission, which have submitted observations
         to the Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the proceedings
         pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
 On those grounds, the Court (Fifth Chamber) rules as follows:
         Council Regulation (EEC) No 259/of February on the supervision and control of shipments of waste within, into and
               out of the European Community, as amended by Commission Decision 98/368/EC of May and Commission Decision 1999/816/EC
               of November 1999, is to be interpreted as meaning that, where a Member State has recourse, under Article 6(8) of that regulation,
               to the specific procedure whereby the competent authority of dispatch transmits the consignment note for a shipment of waste
               for recovery, that authority, if it considers it necessary to object to the shipment on the ground that it has been incorrectly
               classified by the notifier, may not reclassify the shipment on its own initiative and is required to transmit that document
               to the other competent authorities and the consignee. It is then for that authority to inform the notifier and the other competent
               authorities concerned of its objection by any appropriate means before the end of the period laid down in Article 7(2) of
               the Regulation at the latest. Signatures.
      
 –
            
Language of the case: French.
Top  
 