
Case C-147/Jürgen Römer
v
Freie und Hansestadt Hamburg
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Arbeitsgericht Hamburg)
(Equal treatment in employment and occupation – General principles of European Union law – Article TFEU – Directive 2000/78/EC – Scope – Concept of ‘pay’ – Exclusions – Occupational pension scheme in the form of a supplementary retirement pension for former employees of a local authority and
         their survivors – Method of calculating that pension favouring married recipients over those living in a registered life partnership – Discrimination based on sexual orientation)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Social policy – Equal treatment in employment and occupation – Directive 2000/– Scope
(Art. TFEU; Council Directive 2000/78, recital in the preamble and Art. 3(3))
2.        Social policy – Equal treatment in employment and occupation – Directive 2000/– Prohibition of discrimination based on
            sexual orientation 
(Council Directive 2000/78, Arts 1, and 3(1)(c))
3.        Social policy – Equal treatment in employment and occupation – Directive 2000/– Prohibition of discrimination based on
            sexual orientation
(Art. EC; Council Directive 2000/78, Art. 2)
1.        Directive 2000/establishing a general framework for equal treatment in employment and occupation is to be interpreted as
         meaning that supplementary retirement pensions, such as those paid by a public employer to former employees and their survivors
         on the basis of national law, which constitute pay within the meaning of Article TFEU do not fall outside the material
         scope of the Directive on account either of Article 3(3) thereof or of recital in the preamble thereto.
      
(see para. 36, operative part 1)
2.        Article in conjunction with Articles and 3(1)(c) of Directive 2000/establishing a general framework for equal treatment
         in employment and occupation preclude a provision of national law, under which a pensioner who has entered into a registered
         life partnership receives a supplementary retirement pension lower than that granted to a married, not permanently separated,
         pensioner, if:
      
– in the Member State concerned, marriage is reserved to persons of different gender and exists alongside a registered life
         partnership which is reserved to persons of the same gender, and
      
– there is direct discrimination on the ground of sexual orientation because, under national law, that life partner is in
         a legal and factual situation comparable to that of a married person as regards that pension. It is for the referring court
         to assess the comparability, focusing on the respective rights and obligations of spouses and persons in a registered life
         partnership, as they are governed within the corresponding institutions, that are relevant taking account of the purpose of
         and the conditions for the grant of the benefit in question.
      
(see para. 52, operative part 2)
3.        However, neither Article EC nor Directive 2000/establishing a general framework for equal treatment in employment and
         occupation enables a situation to be brought within the scope of Union law in respect of the period before the expiry of the
         period allowed for transposing that directive, during which, under a national provision on supplementary retirement and survivors’
         pension for employees of a public employer, a pensioner who has entered into a registered life partnership receives a supplementary
         retirement pension lower than that granted to a married, not permanently separated, pensioner.
      
Should a national provision constitute discrimination within the meaning of Article of Directive 2000/78, the right to equal
         treatment could be claimed by an individual at the earliest after the expiry of the period for transposing the Directive,
         and it would not be necessary to wait for that provision to be made consistent with Union law by the national legislature.
      
(see paras 61, 64, operative part 3)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
May (*)
      
(Equal treatment in employment and occupation – General principles of European Union law – Article TFEU – Directive 2000/78/EC – Scope – Concept of ‘pay’ – Exclusions – Occupational pension scheme in the form of a supplementary retirement pension for former employees of a local authority and
         their survivors – Method of calculating that pension favouring married recipients over those living in a registered life partnership – Discrimination based on sexual orientation)
      
In Case C‑147/08,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Arbeitsgericht Hamburg (Germany), made by decisions of April and January 2009, received at the Court on April and January 2009, in the proceedings
      
Jürgen Römer
v
Freie und Hansestadt Hamburg,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, A. Tizzano, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, K. Lenaerts, J.-C. Bonichot, A. Arabadjiev, D. Šváby
         (Rapporteur), Presidents of Chambers, E. Juhász, G. Arestis, A. Borg Barthet and T. von Danwitz, Judges,
      
Advocate General: N. Jääskinen,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Mr Römer, by H. Graupner, Rechtsanwalt,
–        the Freie und Hansestadt Hamburg, by Mr Härtel, acting as Agent,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by V. Kreuschitz and J. Enegren, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on July 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Council Directive 2000/78/EC of November establishing
         a general framework for equal treatment in employment and occupation (OJ L 303, p. 16), and of the general principles
         of European Union law and Article EC (the corresponding article now being Article TFEU) relating to discrimination
         on grounds of sexual orientation in employment and occupation.
      
The reference has been made in the course of proceedings between Mr Römer and the Freie und Hansestadt Hamburg in relation
         to the amount of supplementary retirement pension to which he is entitled.
      
 Legal context
 European Union law
Recitals and in the preamble to Directive 2000/state:
      
‘(13)  This Directive does not apply to social security and social protection schemes whose benefits are not treated as income within
         the meaning given to that term for the purpose of applying Article 141[EC] …
      
…
(22)      This Directive is without prejudice to national laws on marital status and the benefits dependent thereon.’
Article of Directive 2000/provides:
      
‘The purpose of this Directive is to lay down a general framework for combating discrimination on the grounds of religion
         or belief, disability, age or sexual orientation as regards employment and occupation, with a view to putting into effect
         in the Member States the principle of equal treatment.’
      
Under Article of the Directive:
      
‘1.      For the purposes of this Directive, the “principle of equal treatment” shall mean that there shall be no direct or indirect
         discrimination whatsoever on any of the grounds referred to in Article 1.
      
2.      For the purposes of paragraph 1:
(a)      direct discrimination shall be taken to occur where one person is treated less favourably than another is, has been or would
         be treated in a comparable situation, on any of the grounds referred to in Article 1;
      
(b)      indirect discrimination shall be taken to occur where an apparently neutral provision, criterion or practice would put persons
         having a particular religion or belief, a particular disability, a particular age, or a particular sexual orientation at a
         particular disadvantage compared with other persons unless: 
      
(i)      that provision, criterion or practice is objectively justified by a legitimate aim and the means of achieving that aim are
         appropriate and necessary …
      
…’
Article of the Directive is worded as follows:
      
‘1.      Within the limits of the areas of competence conferred on the Community, this Directive shall apply to all persons, as regards
         both the public and private sectors, including public bodies, in relation to:
      
…
(c)      employment and working conditions, including dismissals and pay;
…
3.      This Directive does not apply to payments of any kind made by state schemes or similar, including state social security or
         social protection schemes. 
      
…’
Under the first paragraph of Article of Directive 2000/78, Member States were, in principle, to have adopted the laws,
         regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with the Directive by December at the latest or could
         entrust the social partners with the implementation of that directive as regards provisions concerning collective agreements,
         ensuring that those agreements were implemented by the same date.
      
 National law
 The Basic Law
Article 6(1) of the Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany (Grundgesetz für die Bundesrepublik Deutschland, ‘the Basic
         Law’) provides that ‘[m]arriage and family shall enjoy the special protection of the State’.
      
 Law on registered life partnerships
Paragraph 1(1) of the Law on registered life partnerships (Gesetz über die Eingetragene Lebenspartnerschaft) of February
         (‘the LPartG’) provides, as regards the form and the conditions of establishment of such a partnership:
      
‘Two persons of the same sex establish a partnership when they each declare, in person and in the presence of the other, that
         they wish to live together in partnership for life (as life partners). The declarations cannot be made conditionally or for
         a fixed period. Declarations are effective when they are made before the competent authority. …’
      
Paragraph of the LPartG provides:
      
‘The life partners must support and care for one another and commit themselves mutually to a lifetime union. They shall each
         accept responsibilities with regard to the other.’
      
Under Paragraph of that Law:
      
‘The life partners are each required to contribute adequately to the common needs of the partnership. Paragraph 1360a and
         Paragraph 1360b of the Civil Code [Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch, “the BGB”] apply by analogy.’
      
Paragraph 11(1) of that Law, concerning the other effects of registered life partnership, provides:
      
‘Save provision to the contrary, a life partner shall be regarded as a member of the family of the other life partner.’
The Law revising life partnership law (Gesetz zur Überarbeitung des Lebenspartnerschaftsrechts) of December (‘the
         Law of December 2004’), which entered into force on January 2005, amended the LPartG and brought the status of registered
         life partnership yet more closely into line with that of marriage. In particular, provision was made for the apportionment
         of pension rights between partners in the event of the dissolution of a life partnership (Paragraph of the LPartG), as
         is the case between spouses in the event of divorce. In addition, the legislative old-age pension scheme was amended to ensure
         that registered partners receive, in the same way as spouses, a survivor’s pension, even where the partner died before January
         (Paragraph 46(4) of Book VI of the Social Security Code (Sozialgesetzbuch)).
      
 – Provisions applicable in the Land of Hamburg concerning social security
Paragraph of the Law of the Land of Hamburg on supplementary pensions (Hamburgisches Zusatzversorgungsgesetz) of March
         (‘the HmbZVG’) states that the Law applies to persons employed by the Freie und Hansestadt Hamburg and to any person
         to whom that city must pay a pension within the meaning of Paragraph of that law (pension holders). According to Paragraph
         2, the pension is granted in the form of a retirement pension, governed by Paragraphs to of that law, or a survivor’s
         pension, governed by Paragraphs to thereof. According to Paragraphs 2a and 2c of the HmbZVG, the employees of the City
         of Hamburg share pension costs by paying a contribution at the initial rate of 1.25% of taxable pay, by means of a deduction
         from pay. According to Paragraph 2b of the HmbZVG, the contribution obligation begins on the date when the employment relationship
         commences and ends on the date on which it ceases.
      
Paragraph of the HmbZVG provides that the monthly amount of the pension corresponds, for each full year of employment giving
         entitlement to a pension, to 0.5% of the pay included in the calculation of the pension.
      
The pay included in the calculation of the pension is detailed in Paragraph of the HmbZVG, while the periods of employment
         giving entitlement to the pension, and also those which do not, are set out in Paragraph thereof.
      
Paragraph of the HmbZVG contains the transitional provisions concerning pension holders who were covered by the legislation
         formerly in force, who are referred to in the second sentence of Paragraph 1(1) of the HmbZVG. Paragraph 29(1)(1), in conjunction
         with Paragraph 29(1)(5), states that those pension holders continue to receive, by derogation inter alia from Paragraph 6(1)
         and (2), a pension equal to that which they received for July or that to which they would have been entitled, under points
         and of Paragraph 29(1), for the month of December 2003.
      
The matter was previously governed by the Law of the Land of Hamburg on supplementary retirement and survivors’ pensions for
         employees of the Freie und Hansestadt Hamburg (Erstes Ruhegeldgesetz der Freien und Hansestadt Hamburg, ‘the First RGG’).
         Paragraph 10(6) of that law provides;
      
‘The notional net income to be taken into account for the purposes of calculating the pension shall be determined by deducting
         from the income included in the calculation of the pension (Paragraph 8)
      
1.      the amount of income tax which would have had to be paid (less the amount paid to the Church (Kirchenlohnsteuer)) on the basis
         of tax category III/in the case of a married pensioner not permanently separated at the date on which the retirement pension
         is first paid (Paragraph 12(1)), or a pensioner who, on that day, is entitled to claim child benefit or the equivalent, [or]
      
2.      the amount of income tax which would have had to be paid (less the amount paid to the Church) on the basis of tax category
         I at the date on which the retirement pension is first paid in the case of all other pensioners. …’
      
According to the final sentence of Paragraph 8(10) of the First RGG, if the conditions laid down in Paragraph 10(6)(1) of
         that law are not satisfied until after payment of the retirement pension has commenced, the latter provision has to be applied
         from that date if the party concerned so requests.
      
The amount to be deducted from the income tax payable under tax category III/is significantly lower than that to be deducted
         from the income tax payable under tax category I.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
The parties dispute the amount of the pension which the applicant in the main proceedings, Mr Römer, may claim from November
         2001.
      
From until he ceased work on May 1990, on grounds of incapacity, Mr Römer worked for the Freie und Hansestadt Hamburg,
         as an administrative employee. Since 1969, he has lived continuously with Mr U. On October 2001, the applicant in the main
         proceedings and his companion entered into a registered life partnership, in accordance with the LPartG. Mr Römer informed
         his former employer of this by letter of October 2001. By a subsequent letter, dated November 2001, he requested that
         the amount of his supplementary retirement pension be recalculated on the basis of the more favourable deduction under tax
         category III/0, with effect from August 2001, according to the information given by the referring court. The applicant in
         the main proceedings states in his observations, however, that he had asked for that amendment to his pension only from November 2001.
      
By letter of December 2001, the Freie und Hansestadt Hamburg informed Mr Römer of its refusal to amend the calculation
         of the said pension, on the ground that, in accordance with Paragraph 10(6)(1) of the First RGG, only married, not permanently
         separated, pensioners and pensioners entitled to claim child benefit or an equivalent benefit are entitled to have their retirement
         pension calculated on the basis of tax category III/0.
      
In accordance with the ‘statement of pension rights’ drawn up by the Freie und Hansestadt Hamburg on September 2001, Mr
         Römer’s monthly retirement pension, from September 2001, on the basis of a salary reduced by the amount which would have had
         to be paid as income tax on the basis of tax category I, amounted to DEM 204.(EUR 615.88). According to Mr Römer’s calculations,
         which are not disputed by his former employer, the amount of that monthly retirement pension would have been, in September
         2001, DEM 590.(EUR 302.11) higher if tax category III/had been taken into consideration in order to determine the amount
         of the pension.
      
The case was brought before the referring court. Mr Römer considers that, for the calculation of his pension under Paragraph
         10(6)(1) of the First RGG, he is entitled to be treated in the same manner as a married, not permanently separated, pensioner.
         He claims that the criterion of ‘married pensioner not permanently separated’, contained in that provision, must be interpreted
         as including pensioners who have entered into a registered life partnership in accordance with the LPartG.
      
Mr Römer considers that his right to equal treatment with married, not permanently separated, pensioners results, in any event,
         from Directive 2000/78. He also argues that, since that directive was not transposed into national law within the period prescribed
         in Article thereof, that is, by December at the latest, it applies directly to the defendant in the main proceedings.
      
The Freie und Hansestadt Hamburg contends that the term ‘married’, within the meaning of Paragraph 10(6)(1) of the First RGG,
         cannot be interpreted as argued by Mr Römer. It submits, in essence, that Article 6(1) of the Basic Law places marriage and
         family under the special protection of the State. The Freie und Hansestadt Hamburg also submits that there is a parallel between
         the issue of joint taxation and the possibility of making a notional application of tax category III/when calculating supplementary
         retirement pensions paid under the First RGG. It contends that the financial resources available monthly to the parties concerned
         to cover their daily needs are determined by joint taxation during the period of professional activity and, thereafter, by
         the notional application of tax category III/for calculating pensions. The advantage granted to persons who have created
         a family, or who could have done so, is designed to compensate for the extra financial burden involved.
      
In those circumstances, the Arbeitsgericht Hamburg (Labour Court, Hamburg) decided, by decision of April 2008, supplemented
         by a decision of January 2009, to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court of Justice for
         a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Are supplementary pension payments to former employees of the Freie und Hansestadt Hamburg and their survivors, governed by
         [the First RGG], “payments of any kind made by State schemes or similar, including State social security or social protection
         schemes” within the meaning of Article 3(3) of [Directive 2000/78] with the consequence that the matters governed by the First
         RGG fall outside the scope of that directive?
      
2.      [(a)] If the above question is answered in the negative, [a]re the provisions of the First RGG which differentiate, in calculating
         the amount of pension payable, between married pensioners and all other pensioners, that is, which treat married pensioners
         more favourably than, specifically, persons who have entered into a life partnership with a person of the same sex in accordance
         with [the LPartG], “laws on marital status and the benefits dependent thereon” within the meaning of recital in the preamble
         to Directive 2000/78?
      
[(b)] [If the answer is in the affirmative, d]oes it follow that the Directive does not apply to those provisions of the First RGG,
         even though the Directive itself contains no limitation of its scope corresponding to recital in the preamble?
      
3.      If Question 2(a) or Question 2(b) is answered in the negative, [i]n relation to a person who has a entered into a life partnership
         with a person of the same sex and who is not permanently separated from the latter, does Paragraph 10(6) of the First RGG,
         under which the pension entitlements of married, not permanently separated, pensioners are calculated on the basis of the
         notional application of tax category III/(more favourable to a taxable person) but the pension entitlements of all other
         pensioners are calculated on the basis of the notional application of tax category I (less favourable to a taxable person),
         constitute an infringement of Article in conjunction with Article and with Article 3(1)(c) of Directive 2000/78?
      
4.      If Question or Question 2(b) is answered in the affirmative or Question is answered in the negative, [d]oes Paragraph
         10(6) of the First RGG infringe Article EC or a general principle of Community law by reason of the provision or legal
         effect described in Question 3?
      
5.      [a]   If Question or Question is answered in the affirmative, [d]oes it follow that – until such time as Paragraph 10(6) of
         the First RGG is amended to remove the unequal treatment complained of – in relation to the calculation of his [supplementary]
         pension entitlement a pensioner who has entered into a life partnership and is not permanently separated from his partner
         is entitled to insist that the defendant treat him in the same manner as it does a married, not permanently separated, pensioner?
         
      
         [b]   If so – if Directive 2000/is applicable and Question is answered in the affirmative – does this entitlement apply even
         before the expiry of the transposition period prescribed in Article 18(1) of Directive 2000/78?
      
6.      If Question is answered in the affirmative, [i]s that subject to the qualification – in accordance with the grounds of the
         … judgment in Case C‑262/Barber [[1990] ECR I‑1889] – that in the calculation of [supplementary] pension entitlement the principle of equal treatment is to
         be applied only in respect of that proportion of pension entitlement earned by the pensioner for the period from May 1990?
      
7.      In so far as the Court concludes that there is direct discrimination:
(a)      What significance should, in this regard, be attached to the particular fact that, on the one hand, under the Basic Law …
         as well as under European law, the principle of equal treatment must be observed, while, on the other hand, under the law
         of the Federal Republic of Germany, marriage and the family enjoy the special protection of the State, as expressly decreed
         in constitutional-law terms in Article 6(1) of the Basic Law?
      
(b)      Can a directly discriminatory legislative provision be justified –notwithstanding the wording of Directive [2000/78] – because
         it has a different aim, where that aim is a component of the national legal order of the Member State [concerned], but not
         of European law? In that case, does that other aim pursued by [that] Member State’s national legal order simply take precedence
         over the principle of equal treatment?
      
(c)      If the above question is answered in the negative, [w]hat legal criterion should be applied in order to determine in such
         cases how to weigh up the principle of equal treatment under European law and that other legal aim of the Member State’s national
         legal order? Is it perhaps the case here too that, as with the criteria for the legal acceptance of indirect discrimination
         adopted under Article 2(2)(b)(i) of Directive 2000/78, (i) the discriminatory provision must be objectively justified by a
         legitimate aim; and (ii) the means of achieving that aim must be appropriate and necessary?
      
(d)      Does a provision such as Paragraph 10(6) of the First RGG fulfil the requirements for legitimacy under European law in accordance
         with the answers to be given to the above questions? Does it fulfil these purely on account of the special national-law provision
         which has no equivalent in European law, in other words, on account of Article 6(1) of the Basic Law?’
      
 Considerations of the questions referred 
 The first two questions
By its first two questions, which should be answered together, the referring court is asking in essence whether supplementary
         retirement pensions such as those paid on the basis of the First RGG to former employees of the Freie und Hansestadt Hamburg
         and their survivors fall outside the material scope of Directive 2000/on account of Article 3(3) of the Directive or recital
         in the preamble thereto.
      
According to the order for reference, such benefits constitute pay within the meaning of Article TFEU.
      
With regard, first, to Article 3(3) of Directive 2000/78, the referring court asks, more specifically, whether the fact that,
         under that provision, the Directive ‘does not apply to payments of any kind made by State schemes’ means that the scheme at
         issue, as a State scheme, must be regarded as falling outside the scope of the Directive.
      
In that respect, it is sufficient to point out that the Court has held that the scope of Directive 2000/must be understood,
         in the light of Article 3(1)(c) and Article 3(3) read in conjunction with recital in the preamble to the Directive, as
         excluding social security or social protection schemes, the benefits of which are not equivalent to ‘pay’ within the meaning
         given to that term for the application of Article TFEU, and payments of any kind made by the State with the aim of providing
         access to employment or maintaining employment (Case C‑267/Maruko [2008] ECR I‑1757, paragraph 41).
      
Accordingly, Article 3(3) of Directive 2000/cannot be interpreted as meaning that a supplementary retirement pension paid
         by a public scheme and constituting pay within the meaning of Article TFEU falls outside the scope of the Directive.
      
As regards, next, recital in the preamble to Directive 2000/78, under which ‘[the] Directive is without prejudice to national
         laws on marital status and the benefits dependent thereon’, it need only be recalled that the Court has already ruled on the
         scope of that recital, at paragraphs to of its judgment in Maruko.
According to that judgment, since a supplementary retirement pension such as that at issue in the main proceedings has been
         identified as ‘pay’, within the meaning of Article TFEU, and it falls within the scope of Directive 2000/78, recital cannot affect the application of the Directive (see, to that effect, Maruko, paragraph 60).
      
It follows from the foregoing that the answer to Questions and is that Directive 2000/is to be interpreted as meaning
         that supplementary retirement pensions such as those paid to former employees of the Freie und Hansestadt Hamburg and their
         survivors on the basis of the First RGG, which constitute pay within the meaning of Article TFEU, do not fall outside
         the material scope of the Directive either on account of Article 3(3) thereof or on account of recital in the preamble
         thereto.
      
 Questions and By Questions and 7, which should be examined together, the referring court is asking in essence, first, whether Article
         in conjunction with Articles and 3(1)(c) of Directive 2000/preclude a provision such as Paragraph 10(6) of the First
         RGG, under which the supplementary pension paid to a married pensioner is more favourable than that paid to a pensioner who
         has entered into a registered life partnership with a person of the same sex, in so far as such a provision constitutes direct
         or indirect discrimination on the ground of sexual orientation. Second, it seeks to ascertain whether, and under what conditions,
         an objective pursued by a Member State such as the protection of marriage, contained in Article 6(1) of the Basic Law, could
         justify direct discrimination on the ground of sexual orientation.
      
As a preliminary point, it should be observed that, as European Union law stands at present, legislation on the marital status
         of persons falls within the competence of the Member States. However, in accordance with Article thereof, the purpose of
         Directive 2000/is to combat, as regards employment and occupation, certain types of discrimination, including discrimination
         on the ground of sexual orientation, with a view to putting into effect in the Member States the principle of equal treatment.
      
Under Article of the Directive, the ‘principle of equal treatment’ is to mean that there shall be no direct or indirect
         discrimination whatsoever on any of the grounds referred to in Article of that directive.
      
According to Article 2(2)(a) of Directive 2000/78, direct discrimination is to be taken to occur where one person is treated
         less favourably than another person who is in a comparable situation, on any of the grounds referred to in Article of the
         Directive.
      
Accordingly, the existence of direct discrimination, within the meaning of the Directive, presupposes, first, that the situations
         being weighed up are comparable.
      
In that regard, it should be pointed out that, as is apparent from the judgment in Maruko (paragraphs to 73), first, it is required not that the situations be identical, but only that they be comparable and,
         second, the assessment of that comparability must be carried out not in a global and abstract manner, but in a specific and
         concrete manner in the light of the benefit concerned. In that judgment, concerning the refusal to grant a survivor’s pension
         to the life partner of a deceased member of an occupational pension scheme, the Court did not carry out an overall comparison
         between marriage and registered life partnership under German law, but, on the basis of the analysis of German law carried
         out by the court which made the reference for a preliminary ruling, according to which there was a gradual harmonisation in
         German law of the regime put in place for registered life partnerships with that applicable to marriage, it made it clear
         that registered life partnership is to be treated as equivalent to marriage as regards the widow’s or widower’s pension.
      
Thus, the comparison of the situations must be based on an analysis focusing on the rights and obligations of the spouses
         and registered life partners as they result from the applicable domestic provisions, which are relevant taking account of
         the purpose and the conditions for granting the benefit at issue in the main proceedings, and must not consist in examining
         whether national law generally and comprehensively treats registered life partnership as legally equivalent to marriage.
      
In that regard, it is apparent from the information in the order for reference that, from 2001, the year when the LPartG entered
         into force, the Federal Republic of Germany adapted its legal system to allow persons of the same sex to live in a union of
         mutual support and assistance which is formally constituted for life. Having chosen not to permit those persons to enter into
         marriage, which remains reserved solely to persons of different gender, that Member State created for persons of the same
         gender a separate regime, the registered life partnership, the regime of which has been gradually made equivalent to that
         of marriage.
      
In this context, the referring court observes that the amendment of the LPartG by the Law of December contributed
         to the gradual harmonisation of the regime of registered life partnership with that of marriage. According to that court,
         there is no significant legal difference between those two types of status of persons as understood in German law. The main
         remaining difference is the fact that marriage presupposes that the spouses are of different gender, whereas registered life
         partnership presupposes that the partners are of the same gender.
      
Unlike the benefit at issue in Maruko, which was a survivor’s pension, the benefit at issue in the present case in the main proceedings is the supplementary retirement
         pension paid by the Freie und Hansestadt Hamburg to one of its former employees. In addition, it is not disputed that the
         application of the rules of the Land of Hamburg at issue in the main proceedings presupposes not only that the pensioner is
         married, but also that he is not permanently separated from his spouse. It aims to provide, on retirement, a replacement income
         which is deemed to benefit the recipient, but also, indirectly, the persons who live with him.
      
In that regard, it is apparent from the information in the order for reference that, although the Law of December did indeed strengthen, on a number of specific points such as the entitlement to a survivor’s pension, the alignment of the
         legal status of registered life partnership to that of marriage, the fact remains that, in its original version, the LPartG
         already provided, in Paragraphs and 5, that life partners have duties towards each other, to support and care for one another
         and to contribute adequately to the common needs of the partnership by their work and from their property, as is the case
         between spouses during their life together.
      
It follows that, since the entry into force of the LPartG, those obligations are incumbent both on life partners and on married
         spouses.
      
As regards, second, the criterion of less favourable treatment on the ground of sexual orientation, it is apparent from the
         documents before the Court that Mr Römer’s supplementary retirement pension would have been increased, under the last sentence
         of Paragraph 8(10) of the First RGG, if, in October 2001, he had married instead of entering into a registered life partnership
         with a man.
      
However, as the Advocate General observed in point of his Opinion, that more favourable treatment would not have been linked
         to the income of the parties to the union, to the existence of children or to other factors such as those relating to the
         spouse’s financial needs.
      
Furthermore, it appears that, during his working life, the contributions payable by Mr Römer in relation to the benefit at
         issue in the main proceedings were not in any way based on his marital status, since he was required to contribute to the
         pension costs by paying a contribution equal to that of his married colleagues.
      
Accordingly, the answer to Questions and is that Article in conjunction with Articles and 3(1)(c) of Directive 2000/preclude a provision of national law such as Paragraph 10(6) of the First RGG, under which a pensioner who has entered into
         a registered life partnership receives a supplementary retirement pension lower than that granted to a married, not permanently
         separated, pensioner, if
      
–        in the Member State concerned, marriage is reserved to persons of different gender and exists alongside a registered life
         partnership such as that provided for by the LPartG, which is reserved to persons of the same gender, and
      
–        there is direct discrimination on the ground of sexual orientation because, under national law, that life partner is in a
         legal and factual situation comparable to that of a married person as regards that pension. It is for the referring court
         to assess the comparability, focusing on the respective rights and obligations of spouses and persons in a registered life
         partnership, as they are governed within the corresponding institutions, which are relevant taking account of the purpose
         of and the conditions for the grant of the benefit in question.
      
 Question By that question, the referring court asks first whether, if the Court of Justice should accept that the disadvantage suffered
         by a pensioner such as the applicant in the main proceedings constitutes a breach of European Union law, the party concerned
         could require treatment equal to that of married, not permanently separated, pensioners, even in respect of a period prior
         to the amendment of Paragraph 10(6) of the First RGG in order to make it compatible with that law, since the Freie und Hansestadt
         Hamburg is not a private-law employer but a local public authority which is both an employer and a legislator as regards that
         provision.
      
In accordance with settled case-law, a national court which is called upon, within the exercise of its jurisdiction, to apply
         provisions of European Union law is under a duty to give full effect to those provisions, if necessary refusing of its own
         motion to apply any conflicting provision of national legislation, even if adopted subsequently, and it is not necessary for
         the court to request or await the prior setting aside of such provision by legislative or other constitutional means (Case
         C‑314/Filipiak [2009] ECR I‑11049, paragraph and the case-law cited). 
      
In addition, where the necessary conditions for the provisions of a directive to be relied on by individuals before the national
         courts against the State are satisfied, they may do so regardless of the capacity in which the State is acting, whether as
         employer or as public authority (Joined Cases C‑250/and C‑268/Georgiev [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 70).
      
Accordingly, if a provision such as Paragraph 10(6) of the First RGG constituted discrimination within the meaning of Article
         of Directive 2000/78, the right to equal treatment could be claimed by an individual against a local authority, and it would
         not be necessary to wait for that provision to be made consistent with European Union law by the national legislature, taking
         account of the primacy of that law (see, to that effect, Case C‑341/Petersen [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 81, and Georgiev, paragraph 73).
      
Secondly, the referring court asks from which date equal treatment should be ensured. In that regard, it should be observed,
         first of all, that, if there were discrimination within the meaning of Directive 2000/78, the applicant in the main proceedings
         would not be entitled under that directive, before the expiry of the period allowed to Member States to transpose it, to the
         same rights as married pensioners in respect of the supplementary pension at issue in the main proceedings.
      
As regards that period, although, as stated in particular in Case C‑144/Mangold [2005] ECR I‑9981, paragraph 13, the Federal Republic of Germany requested, under the second paragraph of Article of Directive
         2000/78, an additional period of three years from December in order to transpose the Directive, that possibility, as
         is clear from that provision, concerned only age and disability discrimination. Accordingly, the period prescribed for the
         transposition of the provisions of Directive 2000/concerning discrimination on the ground of sexual orientation expired,
         for the Federal Republic of Germany as for the other Member States, on December 2003.
      
Lastly, as regards the period between the registration of the life partnership of the applicant in the main proceedings, on
         October 2001, and the expiry of the period for transposition of Directive 2000/78, it should be recalled that the Council
         of the European Union adopted Directive 2000/on the basis of Article EC, and the Court has held that the Directive does
         not itself lay down the principle of equal treatment in the field of employment and occupation, which derives from various
         international instruments and from the constitutional traditions common to the Member States, but has the sole purpose of
         laying down, in that field, a general framework for combating discrimination on various grounds (see Mangold, paragraph 74, and Case C‑555/Kücükdeveci [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 20), including sexual orientation.
      
Nonetheless, for the principle of non-discrimination on the ground of sexual orientation to apply in a case such as that at
         issue in the main proceedings, that case must fall within the scope of European Union law (see Kücükdeveci, paragraph 23).
      
However, neither Article EC nor Directive 2000/enables a situation such as that at issue in the main proceedings to
         be brought within the scope of European Union law in respect of the period prior to the time-limit for transposing that directive
         (see, by analogy, Case C‑427/Bartsch [2008] ECR I‑7245, paragraphs and 18, and Kücükdeveci, paragraph 25). 
      
Article EC, which permitted the Council, within the limits of the powers conferred upon it by the EC Treaty, to take appropriate
         action to combat discrimination based on sexual orientation, could not, as such, bring within the scope of European Union
         law, for the purposes of prohibiting any discrimination of that nature, situations which, as in the main proceedings, did
         not fall within the framework of the measures adopted on the basis of that article, specifically, as regards Directive 2000/78,
         before the time-limit prescribed therein for its transposition (see, by analogy, Bartsch, paragraph 18).
      
Moreover, Paragraph 10(6) of the First RGG is not a measure implementing Directive 2000/or other provisions of European
         Union law, with the result that it is only from the expiry of the period for transposition of the Directive that it had the
         effect of bringing within the scope of European Union law the national legislation at issue in the main proceedings, which
         concerns a matter governed by that directive, namely the conditions of pay within the meaning of Article TFEU (see, by
         analogy, Bartsch, paragraphs 17, and 25).
      
In view of the foregoing considerations, the answer to Question is that, should Paragraph 10(6) of the First RGG constitute
         discrimination within the meaning of Article of Directive 2000/78, the right to equal treatment could be claimed by an individual
         such as the applicant in the main proceedings at the earliest after the expiry of the period for transposing the Directive,
         namely from December 2003, and it would not be necessary to wait for that provision to be made consistent with European
         Union law by the national legislature.
      
 Questions and In view of the answers to Questions and 5, there is no need to answer Question 4.
      
As regards Question 6, it is sufficient to state that the dispute in the main proceedings relates to entitlement to a supplementary
         retirement pension paid from November 2001, on which the limitation of the effects in time of the judgment in Case C‑262/Barber [1990] ECR I‑to the period after May cannot have any bearing, notwithstanding the fact that the contributions
         underpinning the entitlement had been paid before the date of that judgment. Furthermore, neither the Federal Republic of
         Germany nor the Freie und Hansestadt Hamburg suggested any limitation in time of the effects of the present judgment and no
         evidence submitted to the Court indicates that they should be so limited.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the referring court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Council Directive 2000/78/EC of November establishing a general framework for equal treatment in employment and occupation
            is to be interpreted as meaning that supplementary retirement pensions such as those paid to former employees of the Freie
            und Hansestadt Hamburg and their survivors on the basis of the Law of the Land of Hamburg on supplementary retirement and
            survivors’ pensions for employees of the Freie und Hansestadt Hamburg (Erstes Ruhegeldgesetz der Freien und Hansestadt Hamburg),
            as amended on May 1995, which constitute pay within the meaning of Article TFEU, do not fall outside the material scope
            of the Directive either on account of Article 3(3) thereof or on account of recital in the preamble thereto.
2.      Article in conjunction with Articles and 3(1)(c) of Directive 2000/preclude a provision of national law such as Paragraph
            10(6) of that Law of the Land of Hamburg, under which a pensioner who has entered into a registered life partnership receives
            a supplementary retirement pension lower than that granted to a married, not permanently separated, pensioner, if
–        in the Member State concerned, marriage is reserved to persons of different gender and exists alongside a registered life
            partnership such as that provided for by the Law on registered life partnerships (Gesetz über die Eingetragene Lebenspartnerschaft)
            of February 2001, which is reserved to persons of the same gender, and 
–        there is direct discrimination on the ground of sexual orientation because, under national law, that life partner is in a
            legal and factual situation comparable to that of a married person as regards that pension. It is for the referring court
            to assess the comparability, focusing on the respective rights and obligations of spouses and persons in a registered life
            partnership, as governed within the corresponding institutions, which are relevant taking account of the purpose of and the
            conditions for the grant of the benefit in question.
3.      Should Paragraph 10(6) of the Law of the Land of Hamburg on supplementary retirement and survivors’ pensions for employees
            of the Freie und Hansestadt Hamburg, as amended on May 1995, constitute discrimination within the meaning of Article of Directive 2000/78, the right to equal treatment could be claimed by an individual such as the applicant in the main proceedings
            at the earliest after the expiry of the period for transposing the Directive, namely from December 2003, and it would not
            be necessary to wait for that provision to be made consistent with European Union law by the national legislature.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 