
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-285/Isabel BurbaudvMinistère de l'Emploi et de la Solidarité(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Cour administrative d'appel de Douai)
         
«(Recognition of diplomas – Hospital managers in the public service – Directive 89/48/EEC – Definition of diploma – Entrance examination – Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC))»
Opinion of Advocate General Stix-Hackl delivered on September Opinion of Advocate General Stix-Hackl delivered on February Judgment of the Court, September Summary of the Judgment
1..
Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Workers – Recognition of higher-education diplomas awarded on completion of professional education and training of at least three years'
                     duration – Scope of Directive 89/– Employment in the public service – Included  
                  (EC Treaty, Art. 48(4) (now, after amendment, Art. 39(4) EC); Council Directive 89/48) 
2..
Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Workers – Recognition of higher-education diplomas awarded on completion of professional education and training of at least three years'
                     duration – Scope of Directive 89/– Definition of regulated profession – National legal classifications not relevant  
                  (Council Directive 89/48) 
3..
Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Workers – Recognition of higher-education diplomas awarded on completion of professional education and training of at least three years'
                     duration – Directive 89/– Definition of diploma – Passing the final examination of a national public health college of a Member State – Included – Equivalence of such a diploma and a diploma obtained in another Member State – Assessment to be made by the national court   
                  (Council Directive 89/48, Art. 3, first para., point (a)) 
4..
Freedom of movement for persons – Workers – Access to hospital public service conditional, for persons holding a diploma obtained in a Member State and equivalent to
                     that required in the host Member State, on passing an entrance examination for a national public health college – Not permissible   
                  (EC Treaty, Art. (now, after amendment, Art. EC) 
1.
 Employment in the public service falls in principle within the scope of Directive 89/on a general system for the recognition
         of higher-education diplomas awarded on completion of professional education and training of at least three years' duration,
         except where it is covered by Article 48(4) of the Treaty (now, after amendment, Article 39(4) EC) or by a separate directive
         establishing arrangements for the mutual recognition of diplomas by Member States.  see para. 2.
 The fact that under national law a particular post in the public service is governed by special public service rules is not
         relevant for the purposes of determining whether that post is a regulated profession within the meaning of Directive 89/on a general system for the recognition of higher-education diplomas awarded on completion of professional education and training
         of at least three years' duration. The definition of a regulated profession is a matter of Community law, whereas the national
         legal classifications of worker, employee and public servant or, moreover, of employment governed by public law or by private
         law can be varied freely by national legislatures and cannot therefore provide an appropriate criterion for interpretation.
          see paras 42-3.
 Confirmation of passing the final examination of the national public health college of a Member State, which leads to permanent
         appointment to the hospital public service of that Member State, must be regarded as a diploma within the meaning of Directive
         89/on a general system for the recognition of higher-education diplomas awarded on completion of professional education
         and training of at least three years' duration. It is for the national court to determine, for the purposes of applying point
         (a) of the first paragraph of Article of that directive, whether a qualification obtained in another Member State by a national
         of a Member State wishing to pursue a regulated profession in the host Member State can be regarded as a diploma within the
         meaning of that provision and, if so, to determine the extent to which the training courses whose successful completion leads
         to the award of those diplomas are similar with regard to both their duration and the matters covered. If it is apparent from
         that court's examination that both qualifications constitute diplomas within the meaning of that directive and that those
         diplomas are awarded on the completion of equivalent education or training, the directive precludes the authorities of the
         host Member State from making access by that national of a Member State to the profession of manager in the hospital public
         service subject to the condition that he complete the training given by the national public health college and pass the final
         examination at the end of that training. see para. 58, operative part 4.
 Any national measure which, although applicable without discrimination on grounds of nationality, is liable to hamper or to
         render less attractive the exercise by a national of a Member State of the freedom of movement of workers, is an obstacle
         to that fundamental freedom guaranteed by the Treaty. The requirement of passing an examination in order to take up employment
         in the public service cannot in itself be regarded as an obstacle in that sense. Inasmuch as all new jobs are, in principle,
         subject to the recruitment procedure provided for those jobs, the requirement of passing a recruitment competition in order
         to take up employment in the public service of a Member State cannot in itself be liable to dissuade candidates who have already
         sat a similar competition in another Member State from exercising their right to freedom of movement as workers. However, where a national of a Member State holds a diploma obtained in one Member State which is equivalent to the diploma
         required in another Member State in order to take up employment in the hospital public service, Community law precludes the
         authorities of the second Member State from making that national's access to the employment in question subject to his passing
         the entrance examination of that Member State's public health college, where passing that examination is a precondition for
         being admitted to the training course at that college which is, in turn, a precondition for access to the employment concerned.
         see paras 95-97, 101, 112, operative part JUDGMENT OF THE COURTSeptember (1)
((Recognition of diplomas – Hospital managers in the public service – Directive 89/48/EEC – Definition of diploma – Entrance examination – Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC)))
 In Case C-285/01, 
             REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Cour administrative d'appel de Douai (France) for a preliminary ruling
            in the proceedings pending before that court between
            
Isabel Burbaud
and
Ministère de l'Emploi et de la Solidarité,
 on the interpretation of Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) and of Council Directive 89/48/EEC
            of December on a general system for the recognition of higher-education diplomas awarded on completion of professional
            education and training of at least three years' duration (OJ L 19, p. 16),
THE COURT,,
 composed of: G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias, President, J.-P. Puissochet, M. Wathelet, R. Schintgen and C.W.A. Timmermans (Rapporteur) (Presidents of Chambers), C. Gulmann, D.A.O. Edward, A. La Pergola, P. Jann, V. Skouris, F. Macken, N. Colneric, S. von Bahr, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues and A. Rosas, Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: C. Stix-Hackl, Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator, subsequently H. von Holstein, Deputy Registrar, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
 the French Government, by C. Bergeot-Nunes and G. de Bergues, acting as Agents; 
               
─
 the Italian Government, by U. Leanza, acting as Agent, and M. Massella Ducci Tieri, avvocato dello Stato; 
               
─
 the Swedish Government, by A. Kruse, acting as Agent; 
               
─
 the Commission of the European Communities, by M. Patakia, acting as Agent, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of Ms Burbaud, of the French Government, represented by C. Bergeot-Nunes and G. de Bergues,
               and of the Commission, represented by M. Patakia and D. Martin, acting as Agent, at the hearing on June 2002,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2002,having regard to the order of November reopening the oral procedure,after hearing the oral observations of Ms Burbaud, of the French Government, represented by G. de Bergues and R. Abraham,
               acting as Agent, of the Swedish Government, represented by A. Kruse, and of the Commission, represented by M. Patakia and
               D. Martin, at the hearing on January 2003,after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on February 2003,
            
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By decision of July 2001, received at the Court on July 2001, the Cour administrative d'appel de Douai (Administrative
         Court of Appeal, Douai) referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC two questions on the interpretation
         of Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) and Council Directive 89/48/EEC of December on
         a general system for the recognition of higher-education diplomas awarded on completion of professional education and training
         of at least three years' duration (OJ L 19, p. 16;  
         the Directive). 
         
            
 Those questions were raised in proceedings between Ms Burbaud and the Ministère de l'Emploi et de la Solidarité (Ministry
         of Employment and Solidarity) concerning Ms Burbaud's application for admission to the corps of hospital managers in the French
         public service on the basis of qualifications that she had obtained in Portugal. 
         
Legal background
 Community legislation
         
            
 The Directive was adopted on the basis of,  
         inter alia, Article EEC (after amendment, Article of the EC Treaty, which is now, after amendment, Article EC). According to
         the 12th recital in its preamble,  
         the general system for the recognition of higher-education diplomas is entirely without prejudice to the application of Article
         48(4) ... of the Treaty. 
         
            
 Article 1(a) to (d) of the Directive provides: For the purposes of this Directive the following definitions shall apply:
         
(a)
 diploma: any diploma, certificate or other evidence of formal qualifications or any set of such diplomas, certificates or
         other evidence: 
         
─
 which has been awarded by a competent authority in a Member State, designated in accordance with its own laws, regulations
                  or administrative provisions; 
               
 which has been awarded by a competent authority in a Member State, designated in accordance with its own laws, regulations
         or administrative provisions; 
         
─
 which shows that the holder has successfully completed a post-secondary course of at least three years' duration, or of an
                  equivalent duration part-time, at a university or establishment of higher education or another establishment of similar level
                  and, where appropriate, that he has successfully completed the professional training required in addition to the post-secondary
                  course, and 
               
 which shows that the holder has successfully completed a post-secondary course of at least three years' duration, or of an
         equivalent duration part-time, at a university or establishment of higher education or another establishment of similar level
         and, where appropriate, that he has successfully completed the professional training required in addition to the post-secondary
         course, and 
         
─
 which shows that the holder has the professional qualifications required for the taking up or pursuit of a regulated profession
                  in that Member State, provided that the education and training attested by the diploma, certificate or other evidence of formal qualifications were
                  received mainly in the Community, or the holder thereof has three years' professional experience certified by the Member State
                  which recognised a third-country diploma, certificate or other evidence of formal qualifications. The following shall be treated in the same way as a diploma, within the meaning of the first subparagraph: any diploma, certificate
                  or other evidence of formal qualifications or any set of such diplomas, certificates or other evidence awarded by a competent
                  authority in a Member State if it is awarded on the successful completion of education and training received in the Community
                  and recognised by a competent authority in that Member State as being of an equivalent level and if it confers the same rights
                  in respect of the taking up and pursuit of a regulated profession in that Member State; 
               
 which shows that the holder has the professional qualifications required for the taking up or pursuit of a regulated profession
         in that Member State, provided that the education and training attested by the diploma, certificate or other evidence of formal qualifications were
         received mainly in the Community, or the holder thereof has three years' professional experience certified by the Member State
         which recognised a third-country diploma, certificate or other evidence of formal qualifications. The following shall be treated in the same way as a diploma, within the meaning of the first subparagraph: any diploma, certificate
         or other evidence of formal qualifications or any set of such diplomas, certificates or other evidence awarded by a competent
         authority in a Member State if it is awarded on the successful completion of education and training received in the Community
         and recognised by a competent authority in that Member State as being of an equivalent level and if it confers the same rights
         in respect of the taking up and pursuit of a regulated profession in that Member State; 
         
...
         
(c)
 a regulated profession: the regulated professional activity or range of activities which constitute this profession in a Member
         State; 
         
(d)
 regulated professional activity: a professional activity, in so far as the taking up or pursuit of such activity or one of
         its modes of pursuit in a Member State is subject, directly or indirectly by virtue of laws, regulations or administrative
         provisions, to the possession of a diploma. ... ...
         
            
 Article of the Directive states: This Directive shall apply to any national of a Member State wishing to pursue a regulated profession in a host Member State
         in a self-employed capacity or as an employed person.This Directive shall not apply to professions which are the subject of a separate Directive establishing arrangements for
         the mutual recognition of diplomas by Member States.
         
            
 Point (a) of the first paragraph of Article of the Directive provides: Where, in a host Member State, the taking up or pursuit of a regulated profession is subject to possession of a diploma, the
         competent authority may not, on the grounds of inadequate qualifications, refuse to authorise a national of a Member State
         to take up or pursue that profession on the same conditions as apply to its own nationals:
         
(a)
 if the applicant holds the diploma required in another Member State for the taking up or pursuit of the profession in question
         in its territory, such diploma having been awarded in a Member State; ...
         
            
 Article of the Directive provides: 1. Notwithstanding Article 3, the host Member State may also require the applicant:
         
(a)
 to provide evidence of professional experience, where the duration of the education and training adduced in support of his
         application, as laid down in Article 3(a) and (b), is at least one year less than that required in the host Member State.
         ... ... 
         
(b)
 to complete an adaptation period not exceeding three years or take an aptitude test: 
         
─
 where the matters covered by the education and training he has received as laid down in Article 3(a) and (b), differ substantially
                  from those covered by the diploma required in the host Member State, or 
               
 where the matters covered by the education and training he has received as laid down in Article 3(a) and (b), differ substantially
         from those covered by the diploma required in the host Member State, or 
         
...
 Should the host Member State make use of this possibility, it must give the applicant the right to choose between an adaptation
         period and an aptitude test....2. However, the host Member State may not apply the provisions of paragraph 1(a) and (b) cumulatively.
          National legislation
         
            
 Article of Loi no 86-33, du janvier 1986, portant dispositions statutaires relatives à la fonction publique hospitalière
         (Law No 86-of January laying down special rules for the hospital public service) (JORF of January 1986, p. 535)
         provides: Public servants are recruited by way of competitions organised in accordance with one or both of the following procedures:...
         
            
 The first paragraph of Article of Law No 86-states: Public servants appointed under the conditions laid down in Article ... are declared permanently appointed to the public
         service at the end of a  
         stage [probationary training period] whose duration is fixed by the relevant special rules.
         
            
 Article of Décret no 88-163, du février 1988, portant statut particulier des grades et emplois des personnels de direction
         des établissements mentionnés à l'article (1, et 3) de la loi no 86-du janvier portant dispositions statutaires
         relatives à la fonction publique hospitalière (Decree No 88-of February laying down special rules on the grades
         and posts of management staff in the establishments referred to in Article 2(1), (2) and (3) of Law No 86-of January
         laying down special rules for the hospital public service (JORF of February 1988, p. 2390) states: Management trainees ... who have followed a theoretical and practical training course with a duration of between and months organised by the École nationale de la santé publique [National School of Public Health], in place of the  
         stage [probationary training period] provided for in Article of the Law of January 1986, cited above, and have passed the
         final examination of that course are to be granted access to posts....
         
            
 Decree No 88-was repealed and replaced by Décret no 2000-232, du mars 2000, portant statut particulier des grades et
         emplois des personnels de direction des établissements mentionnés à l'article (1, et 3) de la loi no 86-du janvier
         modifiée portant dispositions statutaires relatives à la fonction publique hospitalière (Decree No 2000-of March
         laying down special rules on the grades and posts of management staff in the establishments referred to in Article 2(1),
         (2) and (3) of Law No 86-of January 1986, as amended, laying down special rules for the hospital public service) (JORF
         of March 2000, p. 3970), of which Article 4-I essentially reproduces the provisions of Article 5, repealed, of Decree No
         88-163, and of which Article 5, second paragraph, states: Candidates admitted to a competition who have completed training in a Member State of the European Union or a State within
         the European Economic Area other than France, which is of an equivalent level to the training course referred to in Article
         4, above, may, following an opinion of the committee also referred to in Article 4, be exempted from all or part of the training
         course by the Minister responsible for health.
         
            
 Article of Décret no 93-703, du mars 1993, relatif à l'École nationale de la santé publique (Decree No 93-of March
         concerning the National School of Public Health) (JORF of March 1993) states: The School awards diplomas as determined by regulations of the Ministers concerned on successful completion of the training
         which it provides in accordance with Article 2, or participates in the award of such diplomas.
         
            
 The first paragraph of Article of Décret no 97-487, du mai 1997, fixant les dispositions communes applicables aux agents
         stagiaires de la fonction publique hospitalière (Decree No 97-of May laying down the common provisions applicable
         to trainee public servants in the hospital public service) (JORF of May 1997, p. 7461) provides: This decree applies to persons which have completed one of the recruitment procedures set out in the provisions of the abovementioned
         Law of January and who are entitled to permanent appointment to the public service after completion of the probationary
         or training period required under the special rules applicable to the corps to which they have been recruited.
         The facts in the main proceedings and the questions referred
            
 In 1981, Ms Burbaud, who was at that time a Portuguese national, obtained a degree in law from the University of Lisbon (Portugal).
         In 1983, she was awarded the qualification of hospital administrator by the National School of Public Health, Lisbon (
         the NSPH). From September to November she worked as a hospital administrator in the Portuguese public service. She
         later completed a French doctorate in law, in the course of leave for training purposes, and acquired French nationality.
         
         
            
 On July 1993, Ms Burbaud applied to the French Minister responsible for health for admission to the hospital managers' corps
         of the French public service, relying on the qualifications that she had obtained in Portugal. 
         
            
 By decision of August 1993, the Minister rejected her application, essentially on the ground that to be admitted to that
         corps it was first necessary to pass the entrance examination of the École nationale de la santé publique (National School
         of Public Health;  
         the ENSP) in Rennes (France). 
         
            
 Ms Burbaud brought an action before the Tribunal administratif de Lille (Administrative Court, Lille) (France) for annulment
         of that decision. By judgment of July 1997, that court dismissed her application. Ms Burbaud appealed against that judgment
         to the national court which has made this reference, seeking to have the judgment set aside and the decision of August
         annulled. 
         
            
 In those circumstances, the Cour administrative d'appel de Douai decided to stay proceedings and refer the following questions
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling: 
         
(1)
 Is a training course in a practical training school for public servants, such as the ENSP, leading to permanent appointment
         to the public service, to be treated in the same way as a diploma within the meaning of Council Directive 89/48/EEC of December and, if so, how was the equivalence of the diplomas from the National School of Public Health, Lisbon, and the
         National School of Public Health, Rennes, to be assessed? 
         
(2)
 If the answer to the first question is in the affirmative, may the competent authority make admission to the public service
         of public servants from another Member State who rely on an equivalent diploma subject to conditions, and in particular subject
         to passing the School's entrance examination, even for those who have sat a similar competition in their country of origin?
         
The questions referred for a preliminary ruling The first question
         
            
 By its first question, the national court is asking essentially whether confirmation of passing the final examination of the
         ENSP course, which leads to permanent appointment to the French hospital public service, must be regarded as a  
         diploma within the meaning of the Directive and, if so, how the equivalence between that diploma and a qualification obtained in
         another Member State by a Member State national, such as the one awarded by the NSPH to the applicant in the main proceedings,
         is to be assessed. 
          Observations submitted to the Court
         
            
 Ms Burbaud submits that in both France and Portugal the profession of hospital administrator is a regulated profession within
         the meaning of the Directive. For France, that follows from Article of Decree No 88-163. The qualifications awarded by the
         ENSP and the NSPH must be regarded as diplomas within the meaning of the Directive. Moreover, those qualifications are equivalent.
         The French authorities are accordingly obliged to recognise the qualification awarded to Ms Burbaud by the NSPH. 
         
            
 The French Government acknowledges that Article 48(4) of the Treaty, which provides for a derogation from the other provisions
         of that article for  
         employment in the public service, is not applicable to the case in the main proceedings because Ms Burbaud has acquired French nationality and because, in
         the light of the Court's case-law, the post that she is seeking does not come within the definition of employment in the public
         service within the meaning of that paragraph. 
         
            
 That Government observes however that the employment at issue in the main proceedings falls within the French public service.
          Given the particularities of employment in the public service, the status of persons so employed, and the specific features
         of its organisation, the Directive does not apply to such employment. 
         
            
 In that regard, the French Government first of all submits that it is necessary to bear in mind the specific features of the
         French  
         écoles d'administrations (training colleges for public servants). Training at the ENSP, which is provided after recruitment by competition into the
         corps of hospital managers, is classified as a  
         stage (probationary training period) in French law, namely in Article of Law No 86-and Article of Decree No 97-487. That
         training corresponds to a period of apprenticeship in which candidates for the position of hospital manager receive practical
         training in the tasks that they will be required to perform. After their recruitment and for the entire duration of the  
         stage, they are members of the public service, with the status of paid  
         agents stagiares (trainee public servants). The end of the  
         stage is marked by their permanent appointment to the hospital public service. 
         
            
 Relying on those considerations, the French Government submits that, notwithstanding the fact that it is referred to as a
         diploma in Article of Decree No 93-703, the document awarded on passing the final examination of the ENSP course does not
         fall within the ambit of Article of the Directive.  It does not meet any of the criteria set out in that provision since
         its sole purpose is to  
         symbolise the permanent appointment of the trainee public servants to the corps of hospital managers. The diploma cannot attest to
         the successful completion of an academic education or training since the trainees on the course have already been recruited
         into the public service. Moreover, at the hearing on June 2002, the French Government stated that the ENSP does not award
         any  
         diploma in the sense of an official document. That is the case for only one other type of employment in the hospital public service
         in addition to the one at issue in the main proceedings and can be explained by the purpose of training at the ENSP, namely
         the permanent appointment of the trainee public servant. 
         
            
 The French Government further submits that the special rules governing public servants, which apply to people who have taken
         up employment in the public service, and, in particular, the higher-ranking interest of the public service and the consequences
         that flow from it do not allow that status to be equated to a regulated profession within the meaning of that directive. 
         
            
 Finally, the French Government claims that the second paragraph of Article of Decree No 2000-is intended to facilitate
         the integration of Member State nationals into the corps of public hospital managers, to which they have been admitted by
         way of a competition. 
         
            
 In those circumstances, the French Government maintains that, on a proper construction of the Directive, the general system
         of recognition of diplomas that it establishes is not applicable,  
         inter alia, to training courses at the ENSP that lead to permanent appointment to the hospital public service. 
         
            
 The Italian Government submits that the French system for recruiting management staff to the hospital public service, as described
         in the order for reference, appears to be intended to serve a dual function. It serves, first, to train candidates for the
         position of hospital manager and, second, to allow for selection from those candidates, in order to admit a limited number
         of participants. 
         
            
 According to that Government, those two functions are clearly separate in the French system, and while the first appears to
         fall within the ambit of the Directive, the second definitely does not come within its scope. 
         
            
 The Italian Government concludes by stating, first, that a diploma obtained in one Member State can be treated as equivalent
         to a qualification awarded by an institution in another Member State where it plays a role in professional training and, second,
         that the equivalence between the two qualifications must be assessed on the basis of the principles and the provisions of
         the Directive. 
         
            
 The Swedish Government takes the view that the profession of hospital administrator at issue in the main proceedings is a
         regulated professional activity within the meaning of Article 1(d) of the Directive, since access to that profession is subject
         to the successful completion of training at the ENSP. The certificate of competence issued at the end of that training constitutes
         a diploma within the meaning of the Directive. According to that Government, that analysis is not in any way affected by the
         fact that the completion of such training also guarantees an offer of employment. 
         
            
 That Government submits that the Portuguese and French training courses in question are  
         per se comparable. In any event, it is for the national court, not the Court of Justice, to determine whether they are equivalent
         in the case in the main proceedings. 
         
            
 The Commission submits that the Directive provides essentially that where a profession is regulated in a Member State and
         the requisite diploma is awarded on completion of post-secondary education of at least three years' duration, the competent
         authorities of that Member State have an obligation to examine requests for recognition of diplomas from other Member States
         in accordance with the rules of the Directive if the diploma whose recognition is sought is awarded on completion of post-secondary
         education of at least three years' duration. 
         
            
 It submits that the diploma of hospital administrator in the French public service, at issue in the main proceedings, does
         indeed constitute a diploma within the meaning of Article 1(a) of the Directive. 
         
            
 The Commission also points out that the qualification held by the applicant in the main proceedings is also awarded on completion
         of post-secondary education of at least three years' duration. 
         
            
 According to the Commission, it follows that under Article of the Directive the French authorities were obliged to recognise
         Ms Burbaud's qualification in the case at issue, since it grants her access to the same profession in the Member State where
         she obtained it. 
         
            
 The Commission adds, however, that if there are differences between the training undergone by the applicant in the main proceedings
         and that required in France, the French authorities are entitled to require her, in the particular circumstances provided
         for in the Directive, to provide evidence of professional experience in accordance with Article 4(1)(a) of the Directive,
         or to complete an adaption period or an aptitude test within the meaning of Article 4(1)(b) of the Directive. 
          Reply of the Court
         
            
 First of all, the Court must examine the French Government's argument that public service employment which is governed by
         special public service rules, such as the position of manager in the hospital public service which is at issue here, does
         not come within the scope of the Directive since such employment cannot be regarded as a  
         profession within the meaning of Article of the Directive. 
         
            
 The Directive does not allow for such a broad exemption from its field of application. It follows from the legal basis of
         the Directive, from the 12th recital in its preamble, and from the second paragraph of Article of the Directive that employment
         in the public service falls in principle within the scope of the Directive, except where it is covered by Article 48(4) of
         the Treaty or by a separate directive establishing arrangements for the mutual recognition of diplomas by Member States. 
         
            
 As the French Government accepts, employment as a manager in the hospital public service is not covered by the exemption set
         out in Article 48(4) of the Treaty. Such employment does not involve direct or indirect participation in the exercise of public
         authority or in duties whose object is the protection of the general interests of the State or of other public authorities
         (see, in particular, Case C-290/Commission v  
         Greece [1996] ECR I-3285, paragraph 34). Moreover, there is no separate directive, within the meaning of the second paragraph of
         Article of the Directive, which is applicable to such employment. 
         
            
 Furthermore, the Court has already held that public bodies are required to comply with the provisions of the Directive (see
         Case C-234/Fernández de Bobadilla [1999] ECR I-4773, paragraphs and 27) 
         
            
 In addition, the fact that under national law a particular post in the public service is governed by special public service
         rules is not relevant for the purposes of determining whether that post is a regulated profession within the meaning of the
         Directive. 
         
            
 The definition of a regulated profession is a matter of Community law (see  
         Fernández de Bobadilla, cited above, paragraph 14), whereas the national legal classifications of worker, employee and public servant or, moreover,
         of employment governed by public law or by private law can be varied freely by national legislatures and cannot therefore
         provide an appropriate criterion for interpretation (see, by analogy, as regards Article 48(4) of the Treaty, Case 152/Sotgiu [1974] ECR 153, paragraph 5). 
         
            
 Second, the Court must consider whether the profession of manager in the French hospital public service at issue in the main
         proceedings can be regarded as a regulated profession within the meaning of the Directive and, accordingly, whether that directive
         applies, pursuant to Article thereof, where a Member State national wishes to pursue that profession. 
         
            
 The effect of Article 1(c) and (d) of the Directive is that where the conditions for taking up or pursuing a professional
         activity are directly or indirectly governed by laws, regulations or administrative provisions requiring possession of a diploma,
         that activity constitutes a regulated profession. 
         
            
 Article of Decree No 88-provides that access to employment as a manager in the French hospital public service is reserved
         to persons who have completed the ENSP course and have passed the final examination. 
         
            
 It is therefore necessary to ascertain whether the requirement to which that provision subjects access to employment as a
         manager in the French hospital public service can be regarded as a requirement relating to the possession of a diploma within
         the meaning of Article 1(a) of the Directive. 
         
            
 In that regard, it is common ground that confirmation of passing the final examination of the ENSP course is evidence of completion
         of education and training of at least three years' duration, at the end of which the candidate holds the necessary qualifications
         to pursue the profession of manager in the hospital public service. 
         
            
 First, it is clear from the case-file that the training concerned constitutes post-secondary education of at least three years'
         duration and that it is composed of both education leading to the academic qualification which is necessary for participation
         in the ENSP's entrance examination and a course at the ENSP lasting from to months which follows that examination and
         concludes with the final examination of the course. 
         
            
 Second, according to the information in the case-file, the aim of that final examination is to determine, on the basis of
         a written test, a dissertation, an evaluation report for the  
         stage and the work completed in seminars, and a continuous assessment, whether the person concerned has the necessary theoretical
         and practical knowledge to work in hospital management. The French rules also require a minimum total score as well as a minimum
         score for each part of the examination. 
         
            
 The French Government submits, however, that success in the final examination of the ENSP course leads to the permanent appointment
         of the trainee public servant to the hospital public service and is not evidenced by a diploma or any other document. Accordingly,
         that training does not lead to a diploma within the meaning of the Directive. 
         
            
 In that regard, it need only be noted that confirmation of passing the final examination of the ENSP course may be regarded
         as a diploma within the meaning of Article 1(a) of the Directive in view of its essential function, namely to confirm that
         the person concerned has successfully completed a post-secondary course of at least three years' duration which confers the
         professional qualifications required for the taking up of a regulated profession. That conclusion is not affected by the fact
         that the diploma does not take the form of a formal document. 
         
            
 The fact that, after passing the entrance examination for the ENSP, the students are members of the public service for the
         duration of their training and that passing the final examination also results in their permanent appointment as public servants
         does not prevent confirmation of passing the final examination from constituting a diploma within the meaning of the Directive.
         
         
            
 As regards that part of the first question which relates to the equivalence of the ENSP diploma and a qualification such as
         the one awarded by the NSPH and held by Ms Burbaud, the Court notes that for the purposes of applying point (a) of the first
         paragraph of Article of the Directive, it is for the national court to determine whether the qualification held by Ms Burbaud
         can be regarded as a diploma within the meaning of that provision and, if so, to determine the extent to which the two training
         courses at issue in the main proceedings are similar with regard to their duration and the matters which they cover. 
         
            
 If the national court finds that the qualification held by Ms Burbaud constitutes a diploma within the meaning of the Directive
         but that there are differences between the duration of the two training courses at issue or between the matters which they
         cover, the French authorities will be entitled to require the applicant in the main proceedings to comply with the measures
         provided for in Article 4(1) of the Directive. 
         
            
 In that case, the first indent of the first paragraph of point (b) of Article 4(1) of the Directive would appear to be relevant.
         That provision essentially states that if the matters covered by the relevant training courses differ substantially, the host
         Member State may require the individual concerned to complete an adaptation period or take an aptitude test, the individual
         being entitled to choose between those two options. 
         
            
 However, if the national court finds that both qualifications constitute diplomas within the meaning of the Directive and
         that those diplomas are awarded on the completion of equivalent education or training, it follows from point (a) of the first
         paragraph of Article of the Directive that the French authorities cannot make Ms Burbaud's admission to the profession of
         manager in the French hospital public service subject to the condition that she complete the ENSP course and pass the final
         examination at the end of that training. 
         
            
 In the light of all the foregoing considerations, the answer to the first question must be that confirmation of passing the
         final examination of the ENSP course, which leads to permanent appointment to the French hospital public service, must be
         regarded as a  
         diploma within the meaning of the Directive. It is for the national court to determine, for the purposes of applying point (a) of
         the first paragraph of Article of the Directive, whether a qualification obtained in another Member State by a national
         of a Member State wishing to pursue a regulated profession in the host Member State can be regarded as a diploma within the
         meaning of that provision and, if so, to determine the extent to which the training courses whose successful completion leads
         to the award of those diplomas are similar with regard to both their duration and the matters covered. If it is apparent from
         that court's examination that both qualifications constitute diplomas within the meaning of the Directive and that those diplomas
         are awarded on the completion of equivalent education or training, the Directive precludes the authorities of the host Member
         State from making access by that national of a Member State to the profession of manager in the hospital public service subject
         to the condition that he complete the ENSP course and pass the final examination at the end of that training. 
          The second question
         
            
 By its second question, the national court is essentially asking whether, where a national of a Member State holds a diploma
         obtained in a Member State which is equivalent to the diploma required in another Member State in order to take up employment
         in the hospital public service, Community law precludes the authorities of the second Member State from making that national's
         access to the employment in question subject to his passing a competition such as the ENSP entrance examination. 
          Observations submitted to the Court
         
            
 Ms Burbaud submits that requiring a national of a Member State who already has the necessary qualifications as a result of
         training in another Member State to pass the ENSP entrance examination constitutes (i) an infringement of point (a) of the
         first paragraph of Article of the Directive, (ii) direct or indirect discrimination prohibited by Community law, and (iii)
         an obstacle to the freedom of movement of workers which cannot be justified by an overriding reason in the general interest.
         
         
            
 The French Government submits that the ENSP entrance examination is a form of recruitment and success in the examination does
         not ever confirm that the individual concerned has successfully completed a secondary course of studies. Moreover, the aim
         of the entrance examination is to ensure that the principle of equal treatment is observed in the selection of candidates
         applying for the same position. It is considered to be the fairest and most objective way of implementing the principle of
         equal access to employment in the public service. 
         
            
 Consequently, that examination cannot be regarded as leading to a diploma within the meaning of Article of the Directive
         and, therefore, a Member State is not obliged to recognise equivalence between such examinations organised by it and the competitions
         set by the other Member States. 
         
            
 The French Government adds that the Member States remain competent to determine the recruitment procedures for, and the rules
         governing the operation of, their public service. That competence is to be exercised in accordance with Article of the EC
         Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC), which lays down a principle of non-discrimination, and Article 48(2) of the
         Treaty which provides that the free movement of workers  
         shall entail the abolition of any discrimination based on nationality between workers of the Member States as regards employment,
         remuneration and other conditions of work and employment. 
         
            
 The French Government submits that requiring all candidates who wish to take up employment in the public service of a Member
         State to take the same competition, regardless of their nationality, is in strict accordance with the principle of equal treatment.
         Moreover, that opinion was also expressed by the Commission in a reasoned opinion sent to the French Republic on March
         under Article EC. 
         
            
 In reply to a question put by the Court, the French Government explained at the hearings that the ENSP entrance examination
         is a form of recruitment to the public service. Since passing a competition or undergoing another form of recruitment is always
         a precondition for access to employment, that examination does not constitute an obstacle to the freedom of movement of workers.
         
         
            
 In the alternative, the French Government submits that if the Court were nevertheless to find that that examination constitutes
         such an obstacle, it would in any event be justified by an overriding reason in the general interest, namely the need to select
         the best candidates in the most objective conditions possible. Moreover, the examination is carried out in a manner which
         is non-discriminatory, appropriate to achieving the objective pursued, and proportionate to that objective. 
         
            
 As regards, in particular, the last of those conditions, the French Government submits that the fact that Ms Burbaud has already
         passed a competition for admission to the hospital public service in Portugal does not imply that it is disproportionate to
         require her to pass the ENSP entrance examination. Recruitment by one employer cannot exempt someone applying for a position
         offered by another employer from participating in the selection procedure determined by that latter employer. In addition,
         requiring Ms Burbaud to pass the ENSP entrance examination does not deprive her of the benefit of her qualifications, since
         they can be taken into account after she has passed that examination, by a total or partial exemption from the ENSP course.
         
         
            
 The Italian Government takes the view that the second question concerns neither the freedom of movement of workers in the
         Community within the meaning of Article of the Treaty, nor the recognition of higher-education diplomas awarded on completion
         of professional education and training within the meaning of the Directive but, rather, the equivalence between procedures
         for selecting individuals to carry out management functions in the public service. 
         
            
 According to the Italian Government, that matter appears to fall within the competence and discretion of each Member State,
         which should be free to choose the procedure best suited to its own system and requirements. That discretion should clearly
         not be regarded as unfettered since it is subject to certain limits, such as those resulting from the prohibition on discrimination
         between workers. 
         
            
 The Italian Government submits that, where those limits are not exceeded, possession of a qualification granting the right
         to hold a managerial post in the public service of a Member State does not seem to be a necessary and sufficient condition
         for a right to hold a comparable post in all the other Member States. Moreover, that Government contends that it is inconceivable
         that a worker who has engaged in a professional activity in one Member State, as a member of the public service, should bypass,
         for that reason alone, the public selection procedures laid down for the exercise of the same, or a comparable, profession
         in another Member State. 
         
            
 The Swedish Government submits that it is contrary to the Treaty provisions relating to the freedom of movement of workers
         to apply a recruitment system which requires workers who are fully qualified to take an entrance examination designed for
         the selection of persons who have not yet obtained the necessary level of qualification to pursue the profession concerned.
         
         
            
 That Government submits that, according to the case-law of the Court, if it is found that a recruitment system obstructs the
         freedom of movement of workers, that system comes within the scope of Article of the Treaty, even if it is applied in the
         same way to nationals of the Member State concerned and those of other Member States. Rules which obstruct the freedom of
         movement of workers are permissible only if they pursue a legitimate objective compatible with the Treaty and are justified
         by overriding reasons in the general interest. Moreover, those rules must be applied in such a way as to ensure achievement
         of the aim in question, and must not go beyond what is necessary for that purpose. 
         
            
 According to the Swedish Government, a competition designed to recruit individuals to the public service must not be designed
         in such a way as to discriminate unjustifiably against migrant workers in favour of national workers or to cause an unjustified
         obstacle to the freedom of movement of workers. That Government takes the view that, as far as it is possible to judge from
         the information provided in the order for reference, the examination at issue in the main proceedings infringes those principles.
         
         
            
 In the system at issue in the main proceedings, a hospital administrator who has been trained in a Member State other than
         France is reduced to having to pass an entrance examination intended to select persons for admission to a course of study
         intended precisely to train such hospital administrators. 
         
            
 Such an examination is not designed in such a way as to take account of professional experience in the field concerned or
         of the skills which are acquired during training and are necessary for pursuit of that profession in France. The persons whom
         the entrance examination is intended to select clearly cannot be expected to have acquired that experience and those skills.
         
         
            
 The Swedish Government submits that an entrance examination of that kind which does not assess professional experience places
         more qualified workers at a disadvantage by not giving them credit for that experience. A fully qualified worker with appropriate
         professional experience will certainly be less inclined to apply for a job if he knows in advance that, when his application
         is evaluated, no account will be taken of his higher level of skills. The fact that skills which can be assessed objectively
         and which are clearly relevant to the employment concerned are not taken into account in recruitment must in principle be
         regarded as an obstacle to the freedom of movement of workers. 
         
            
 Furthermore, the class of workers who are most qualified and whose experience is not taken into account by the ENSP entrance
         examination is necessarily primarily composed of migrant workers and not of persons who have received their training in France
         or who have worked there. 
         
            
 According to the Swedish Government, the case-file does not disclose any overriding reasons in the general interest capable
         of justifying such an obstacle. 
         
            
 In its written observations, the Commission submitted that recognition of a diploma gives the holder of that diploma the right
         to pursue a given profession on the national territory but does not guarantee that he will be employed. Once the diploma has
         been recognised, its holder is subject to the rules governing the labour market and,  
         a fortiori, to the recruitment procedures applied on the market. 
         
            
 The Commission therefore maintained that the French authorities are entitled to make admission to the public service of nationals
         from other Member States who hold a diploma equivalent to the diploma required in France conditional upon passing a competition,
         such as the ENSP entrance examination, even if they have passed a similar competition in their Member State of origin. 
         
            
 However, at the hearings, the Commission altered its opinion as follows. As well as constituting a form of recruitment, the
         ENSP entrance examination governs access to the training provided by that institution. That examination does not take account
         of qualifications of nationals of Member States which have been obtained in other Member States, such as those held by Ms
         Burbaud. It therefore infringes the Directive with regard to already qualified persons. 
         
            
 If it were not possible to classify the type of employment at issue in the main proceedings as a regulated profession within
         the meaning of the Directive, the obligation to pass the ENSP entrance examination in a case such as the one at issue in the
         main proceedings would constitute an obstacle to the freedom of movement of workers inasmuch as passing that examination would
         not grant direct access to employment but to compulsory training of more than two years' duration. 
         
            
 According to the Commission, while it may be true that the obstacle presented by the requirement to pass an entrance examination
         may be justified by the overriding reason in the general interest relied on by the French Government, namely selection of
         the best candidates in the most objective conditions possible, the requirement of proportionality, as defined in the case-law
         of the Court, has not been observed in the case at issue in the main proceedings. 
         
            
 Requiring Ms Burbaud to take an examination, the purpose of which is, in particular, to govern access to a course of training
         from which she should certainly be exempted, and which does not take account of her qualifications, is not proportionate to
         the objective pursued. 
          Reply of the Court
         
            
 It is clear from the case-file and the relevant French rules that the ENSP entrance examination has a dual purpose. 
         
            
 On the one hand, success in that examination grants access to the training provided by the ENSP, which is a practical training
         college for the French public service. The aim of the examination is to confirm the qualifications which the candidates are
         supposed to possess as holders of university diplomas, but which do not relate specifically to hospital management. 
         
            
 On the other hand, candidates who pass that examination are recruited to the public service as paid trainees on a  
         stage. It is therefore also a form of selection and recruitment chosen by the legislature for the purpose of granting access to
         employment in the public service. 
         
            
 While it is true that the individual is not definitively recruited until his permanent appointment to the public service after
         passing the final examination of the ENSP course, it is common ground that that examination is not a second selection process.
         It is clear from the case-file that the purpose of the ENSP entrance examination is to recruit a specific number of candidates,
         determined on the basis of forecasts as to the number of positions available in the hospital public service at the time of
         leaving the ENSP. That is also confirmed by the fact that it is very rare to fail the final examination of the course. 
         
            
 The ENSP entrance examination thus plays an essential role in the selection and recruitment procedure for the French hospital
         public service. The recruitment and selection aspect of the examination is not secondary to its role in granting access to
         the relevant training. 
         
            
 In that regard, the Court recalls that the specific subject of the second question was Ms Burbaud's claim to admission to
         the French public service, which she bases on the supposed equivalence of her qualifications and those obtained at the end
         of the ENSP training courses and on her success, in Portugal, in a competition purported to be similar to the ENSP entrance
         examination. 
         
            
 The Directive does not concern the choice of selection and recruitment procedures for filling positions and it cannot be relied
         on as the basis for a right actually to be recruited. The Directive does no more than require the recognition of qualifications
         obtained in one Member State in order to allow their holder to apply for a job in another Member State, in accordance with
         the selection and recruitment procedures which govern access to regulated professions in that Member State. 
         
            
 Accordingly, recognition of the equivalence of Ms Burbaud's diploma would mean, as is clear from the reply to the first question,
         that she must be exempted from the ENSP training and the final examination of that course, but it cannot of itself justify
         an exemption from the requirement to pass the ENSP entrance examination, since, as is clear from paragraphs to of this
         judgment, that examination plays an essential role in the selection and recruitment procedure for the hospital public service.
         
         
            
 It also follows that the fact, in so far as it is indeed confirmed by the national court, that Ms Burbaud has already passed
         a similar recruitment competition in her Member State of origin is not in itself relevant to the answer which must be given
         to the second question in the light of the Directive. 
         
            
 Having regard to the wording of the second question and to the reference to Article of the Treaty in the grounds of the
         order for reference, and in order to give a useful answer to the national court, the answer to that question should however
         be supplemented by an analysis of the Treaty provisions relating to the freedom of movement of workers. 
         
            
 According to settled case-law, any national measure which, although applicable without discrimination on grounds of nationality,
         is liable to hamper or to render less attractive the exercise by a national of a Member State of the freedom of movement of
         workers, is an obstacle to that fundamental freedom guaranteed by the Treaty (see, to that effect, Case C-19/Kraus [1993] ECR I-1663, paragraph 32). 
         
            
 The requirement of passing an examination in order to take up employment in the public service cannot in itself be regarded
         as an obstacle within the meaning of that case-law. 
         
            
 Inasmuch as all new jobs are, in principle, subject to the recruitment procedure provided for those jobs, the requirement
         of passing a recruitment competition in order to take up employment in the public service of a Member State cannot in itself
         be liable to dissuade candidates who have already sat a similar competition in another Member State from exercising their
         right to freedom of movement as workers. 
         
            
 Therefore, the fact, referred to by the national court, that Ms Burbaud has already passed a similar recruitment competition
         in her Member State of origin, in so far as that is indeed confirmed, is not in itself relevant to the answer which must be
         given to the second question in the light of the Treaty provisions relating to the freedom of movement of workers. 
         
            
 However, the specific features of the ENSP entrance examination do not allow for account to be taken of specific qualifications
         in the field of hospital management since, in the logic of the French recruitment system at issue in the main proceedings,
         the candidate is clearly not yet supposed to have such qualifications. The examination is intended to select between candidates
         who, by definition, are not yet trained to carry out that managerial role. 
         
            
 To require nationals of Member States who are already qualified in the field of hospital management in another Member State
         to pass such an examination is to deprive them of the possibility of having their specific qualifications in the field taken
         into account, thereby placing them at a disadvantage which is liable to dissuade them from exercising their rights, as workers,
         to freedom of movement for the purpose of seeking employment in that field in France. 
         
            
 In addition, such a requirement is clearly an obstacle affecting access to the employment concerned, since passing the examination
         is a precondition for being admitted to the ENSP's training course which is, in turn, a precondition for access to the employment
         concerned (see paragraph of this judgment). 
         
            
 It must be considered, however, whether that obstacle to freedom of movement of workers may be justified in the light of the
         provisions of the Treaty. 
         
            
 In relation to the question whether there is an overriding reason in the general interest capable of justifying the obstacle
         in question, the French Government submits that the objective of the ENSP entrance examination is to select the best candidates
         in the most objective conditions possible. 
         
            
 While such an objective is indeed an overriding reason in the general interest capable of justifying the obstacle concerned,
         according to the case-law of the Court it is a further condition that, among other things, the restriction which that obstacle
         places on the freedom of movement of workers does not go beyond what is necessary to achieve the objective pursued (see, in
         particular, Case C-294/Gräbner [2002] ECR I-6515, paragraph 39, and the case-law cited therein). 
         
            
 Requiring nationals of Member States who are already qualified to pass the ENSP entrance examination, which is intended to
         recruit candidates who are not yet qualified, is not a measure necessary to achieve the objective of selecting the best candidates
         in the most objective conditions possible. 
         
            
 By that requirement, such nationals would be obliged to pass an examination whose purpose is,  
         inter alia, to grant access to a course of training from which they should, however, be exempted on the basis of qualifications obtained
         in another Member State. It follows that, in those circumstances, requiring those nationals to pass that examination has the
         effect of downgrading them, which is not necessary to achieve the objective pursued. 
         
            
 Moreover, the French legislation provides, within the bounds of specific maximum percentages, for a scheme known as  
         du tour extérieur (
         the external route) which allows certain public servants to be exempted from the ENSP entrance examination on the grounds of,  
         inter alia, their experience in the public service. Those public servants must complete a  
         stage of one year during which they are obliged to follow certain courses at the ENSP. At the end of the  
         stage, and if they are considered suitably capable, they are permanently appointed to the public service. 
         
            
 Admittedly, that scheme could not apply to Community nationals such as Ms Burbaud without adjustments, particularly as to
         the subject-matter of the
         stage, since such nationals have specific qualifications in the field of hospital management. The scheme also presupposes that
         the candidate has already sat an earlier competition for admission to the French public service, which is not the case in
         a situation such as the one at issue in the main proceedings. 
         
            
 The existence of such a scheme shows, however, that it is possible to conceive of methods of recruitment, in the form of a
         competition or a different form, which are less restrictive than the ENSP entrance examination in order, in particular, to
         permit nationals of Member States such as Ms Burbaud to have their specific qualifications taken into account. 
         
            
 Consequently, requiring the candidate to take the ENSP entrance examination in a case such as the one at issue in the main
         proceedings must be regarded as going beyond what is necessary to achieve the objective of selecting the best candidates in
         the most objective conditions possible and cannot therefore be justified in the light of the Treaty provisions. 
         
            
 It is true that it is not for the Court to express a position on the design of another recruitment procedure which, in cases
         such as the one at issue in the main proceedings, would be proportionate to the stated objective. Such a procedure would,
         however, have to ensure, in particular, that after their recruitment, nationals of Member States qualified in other Member
         States are appropriately ranked on the list which determines the order in which the individuals concerned are entitled to
         choose their posting and which, for students trained at the ENSP, is drawn up on the basis of their results in the final examination.
         
         
            
 In the light of all the foregoing considerations, the answer to the second question must be that where a national of a Member
         State holds a diploma obtained in one Member State which is equivalent to the diploma required in another Member State in
         order to take up employment in the hospital public service, Community law precludes the authorities of the second Member State
         from making that national's access to the employment in question subject to his passing a competition such as the ENSP entrance
         examination. 
         
Costs
            
 The costs incurred by the French, Italian and Swedish Governments and by the Commission, which have submitted observations
         to the Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action
         pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT,
 in answer to the questions referred to it by the Cour administrative d'appel de Douai by decision of July 2001, hereby
         rules: 
         
1.
 Confirmation of passing the final examination of the École nationale de la santé publique, which leads to permanent appointment
               to the French hospital public service, must be regarded as a  
               diploma within the meaning of Council Directive 89/48/EEC of December on a general system for the recognition of higher-education
               diplomas awarded on completion of professional education and training of at least three years' duration. It is for the national
               court to determine, for the purposes of applying point (a) of the first paragraph of Article of that directive, whether
               a qualification obtained in another Member State by a national of a Member State wishing to pursue a regulated profession
               in the host Member State can be regarded as a diploma within the meaning of that provision and, if so, to determine the extent
               to which the training courses whose successful completion leads to the award of those diplomas are similar with regard to
               both their duration and the matters covered. If it is apparent from that court's examination that both qualifications constitute
               diplomas within the meaning of that directive and that those diplomas are awarded on the completion of equivalent education
               or training, the directive precludes the authorities of the host Member State from making access by that national of a Member
               State to the profession of manager in the hospital public service subject to the condition that he complete the training given
               by the École nationale de la santé publique and pass the final examination at the end of that training. 
2.
 Where a national of a Member State holds a diploma obtained in one Member State which is equivalent to the diploma required
               in another Member State in order to take up employment in the hospital public service, Community law precludes the authorities
               of the second Member State from making that national's access to the employment in question subject to his passing a competition
               such as the entrance examination of the École nationale de la santé publique.
Rodríguez Iglesias
Puissochet 
Wathelet 
Schintgen
Timmermans 
Gulmann 
Edward
La Pergola 
Jann 
Skouris
Macken 
Colneric 
von Bahr
Cunha Rodrigues 
Rosas 
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on September 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: French.
Top  
 