
Case C-134/Hauptzollamt Bremen
v
J.E. Tyson Parketthandel GmbH hanse j.
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Bundesfinanzhof)
(Regulation (EC) No 2193/– Additional customs duties on imports of certain products originating in the United States of America – Temporal scope – Article 4(2) – Products exported after the entry into force of that regulation for which it can be demonstrated that they were already on
         their way to the Community when those duties were first applied – Whether subject to duty)
      
Summary of the Judgment
Common commercial policy – Protection against illicit commercial practices – Additional customs duties on imports of certain
            products originating in the United States of America – Regulation No 2193/(Council Regulation No 2193/2003, Recital and Arts 2(1), 4(2) and 5)
Article 4(2) of Regulation No 2193/establishing additional customs duties on imports of certain products originating
         in the United States of America must be interpreted in a manner consistent with its wording, namely that products for which
         it can be demonstrated that they are already on their way to the European Community on the date of entry into force of that
         regulation, namely December 2003, and whose destination cannot be changed, are not to be subject to the additional duty.
         Article 4(2), the wording of which is unambiguous, is consistent with the system established by Regulation No 2193/2003. Traders
         must be able to rely on the fact that products they have exported from the United States to the Community prior to the date
         of publication and of entry into force of that regulation will not be subject to the additional customs duties imposed by
         that regulation.
      
By contrast, that expectation is not legitimate with regard to products which were exported after that date in so far as traders
         could not, as of that date, have been unaware that additional customs duties would be applicable under the provisions of that
         regulation. Consequently, recital in the preamble to that regulation, which provides that products for which it can be proved
         that they have been exported from the United States to the Community prior to the date of first application of the additional
         customs duties, namely March 2004, should not be subject to those duties, cannot be relied on to interpret Article 4(2)
         of that regulation in a manner clearly contrary to the wording of that provision.
      
(see paras 15, 18-20, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
April (1)
      
(Regulation (EC) No 2193/– Additional customs duties on imports of certain products originating in the United States of America – Temporal scope – Article 4(2) – Products exported after the entry into force of that regulation for which it can be demonstrated that they were already on
         their way to the Community when those duties were first applied – Whether subject to duty)
      
In Case C‑134/08,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Bundesfinanzhof (Germany), made by decision of March 2008,
         received at the Court on April 2008, in the proceedings
      
Hauptzollamt Bremen,
v
J. E. Tyson Parketthandel GmbH hanse j.,
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
composed of M. Ilešič, President of the Chamber, A. Borg Barthet (Rapporteur) and E. Levits, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Mazák,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
having regard to the observations submitted on behalf of the Commission of the European Communities by S. Schønberg and C. Hermes,
         acting as Agents,
      
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 4(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 2193/of December establishing additional customs duties on imports of certain products originating in the United States
         of America (OJ L 328, p. 3).
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings between the Hauptzollamt Bremen (Principal Customs Office, Bremen) (‘the
         Hauptzollamt’) and J.E. Tyson Parketthandel GmbH hanse j. (‘Tyson Parketthandel’) regarding the levy of an additional customs
         duty on a consignment of floorboards from the United States.
      
 Community legal context
Recitals 3, and in the preamble to Regulation No 2193/state:
      
‘(3)      It is considered that, initially, the imposition in stages of additional import duties of up to a 17% ad valorem on imports of selected products originating in the United States of America is an appropriate countermeasure, in view of
         the failure of the United States of America to implement the DSB [the World Trade Organisation (WTO) Dispute Settlement Body]
         recommendations. After the abovementioned level of additional duties is reached, the Commission should present a proposal
         to the Council for further action in the light of developments.
      
…
(5)       Products for which an import licence with an exemption from, or a reduction of, duty has been issued prior to the date of
         entry into force of this regulation should not be subject to these additional customs duties.
      
(6)       Products for which it can be proved that they have been exported from the United States of America to the Community prior
         to the date of first application of the additional customs duties should not be subject to these additional customs duties.’
      
The first indent of Article 2(1) of Regulation No 2193/provides:
      
‘An ad valorem duty additional to the customs duty applicable under Regulation (EEC) No 2913/shall be imposed on the products originating
         in the United States of America listed in the Annex to this regulation, as follows:
      
–        5% from March to March 2004.’
Article 4(1) and (2) of that regulation provides:
      
‘1. Products listed in the Annex for which an import licence with an exemption from or a reduction of duty has been issued
         prior to the date of entry into force of this regulation shall not be subject to the additional duty.
      
2. Products listed in the Annex for which it can be demonstrated that they are already on their way to the Community on the
         date of entry into force of this regulation, and whose destination cannot be changed, shall not be subject to the additional
         duty.’
      
Article of Regulation No 2193/provides:
      
‘This regulation shall enter into force on the day of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union.’
      
The Regulation was published in the Official Journal of the European Union on December 2003.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
On March 2004, Tyson Parketthandel declared for release for free circulation a consignment of cherry-wood floorboards in
         subheading of the Combined Nomenclature constituting Annex I to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/of July
         on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff (OJ L 256, p. 1), as amended by Commission
         Regulation (EC) No 1789/of September (OJ L 281, p. 1), a consignment from the United States which had been
         loaded for shipping in that country on February 2004.
      
By a tax notice of the same date, the Hauptzollament determined import duties, that is to say an additional customs duty and
         value added tax on importation, against Tyson Parketthandel. The additional customs duty was charged as an ad valorem duty at a rate of 5% in accordance with the first indent of Article 2(1) of Regulation No 2193/2003.
      
Tyson Parketthandel filed an objection against that tax notice in so far as it related to the additional customs duty only
         and that objection was rejected.
      
Tyson Parketthandel brought an action against the decision rejecting its objection before the Finanzgericht Bremen (Finance
         Court, Bremen), which set aside the tax notice determining the import duties imposed on that company to the extent that an
         additional customs duty had been determined and taken into account when determining the value added tax on importation. The
         Finanzgericht Bremen held that the transitional provision in Article 4(2) of Regulation No 2193/was to be interpreted,
         taking into account the wording of recital in the preamble to that regulation, as meaning that no additional customs duty
         was to be charged on products which were already on their way to the Community prior to the date of first application of the
         provisions on additional customs duties, that is to say prior to March 2004, and whose destination could not be changed.
      
In the appeal on a point of law (‘Revision’) which it lodged against that judgment of the Finanzgericht Bremen, the Hauptzollamt
         claims that Article 4(2) of Regulation No 2193/must not be interpreted in a manner contrary to its wording, which is
         unambiguous.
      
In its order for reference, the Bundesfinanzhof (Federal Finance Court) states that the clear and unambiguous wording of Article
         4(2) of Regulation No 2193/and a comparison of the German language version with the English and French language versions
         of that provision suggest that the provision should be applied in accordance with its wording. Nevertheless, in view of recital
         in the preamble to Regulation No 2193/2003, the national court is uncertain as to whether the wording of Article 4(2) of
         that regulation actually corresponds to the intention of the Community legislature.
      
Taking the view that the resolution of the dispute before it depends on the interpretation of Article 4(2) of Regulation No
         2193/2003, the Bundesfinanzhof decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following question to the Court for a preliminary
         ruling:
      
‘Is Article 4(2) of … Regulation … No 2193/… to be interpreted, contrary to its wording, as meaning that products for
         which it can be demonstrated that they are on their way to the Community on the date of first application of the additional
         duties and whose destination cannot be changed are not affected by the additional duty?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
The national court’s doubts as regards the interpretation to be given to that provision arise from the fact that the wording
         of recital in the preamble to Regulation No 2193/suggests that products for which it can be proved that they have been
         exported from the United States to the Community prior to the date of first application of the additional customs duties –
         that is to say, under Article 2(1) of that regulation, before March – should not be subject to those duties. Consequently,
         such wording gives rise to a certain ambiguity between the intention therein expressed by the Community legislature and the
         clear wording of Article 4(2) under which products for which it can be demonstrated that they are already on their way to
         the Community on the date of entry into force of that regulation, that is to say, under Article thereof, on December
         2003, are not to be subject to those duties.
      
In that regard, it must be borne in mind, first, that the preamble to a Community act has no binding legal force and cannot
         be validly relied on either as a ground for derogating from the actual provisions of the act in question or for interpreting
         those provisions in a manner clearly contrary to their wording (see, inter alia, Case C-136/Deutsches Milch-Kontor [2005] ECR I‑10095, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Secondly, neither the travaux préparatoires for Regulation No 2193/nor a comparison of the various language versions thereof show that the wording of Article 4(2)
         of that regulation contains a drafting error.
      
Lastly, it must be pointed out that Article 4(2), the wording of which is, moreover, unambiguous, is consistent with the system
         established by Regulation No 2193/2003. As the Commission observed, traders must be able to rely on the fact that products
         they have exported from the United States to the Community prior to the date of publication and of entry into force of that
         regulation will not be subject to the additional customs duties imposed by that regulation. By contrast, that expectation
         is not legitimate with regard to products which were exported after that date in so far as traders could not, as of that date,
         have been unaware that additional customs duties would be applicable under the provisions of that regulation.
      
It follows from the foregoing that recital in the preamble to Regulation No 2193/cannot be relied on to interpret Article
         4(2) in a manner clearly contrary to the wording of that provision.
      
Consequently, the answer to the question referred is that Article 4(2) of Regulation No 2193/must be interpreted in a
         manner consistent with its wording, namely that products for which it can be demonstrated that they are already on their way
         to the Community on the date of entry into force of that regulation, and whose destination cannot be changed, are not to be
         subject to the additional duty.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fifth Chamber) hereby rules:
Article 4(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 2193/of December establishing additional customs duties on imports
            of certain products originating in the United States of America must be interpreted in a manner consistent with its wording,
            namely that products for which it can be demonstrated that they are already on their way to the European Community on the
            date of entry into force of that regulation, and whose destination cannot be changed, are not to be subject to the additional
            duty.
[Signatures]
Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 