
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-445/Republic of AustriavCouncil of the European Union 
«(System of ecopoints for heavy goods vehicles transiting through Austria – Amendment by Regulation (EC) No 2012/– Illegality)»
Opinion of Advocate General Mischo delivered on February Judgment of the Court, September Summary of the Judgment
1..
Actions for annulment – Plea calling into question the conduct of an institution other than the defendant institution – Whether admissible – Procedural status of an institution implicated in that way – Mere option to intervene(Art. EC)
2..
Accession of new Member States to the Communities – Protocols and annexes to acts of accession – Subject to the legal rules governing provisions of primary law
3..
Transport – Road transport – Special rules for the traffic of goods by road through Austria – System of ecopoints for heavy goods vehicles – Reduction in the number of ecopoints in the event of that the threshold for journeys is exceeded – Staggering of the reduction over several years – Invalid(Protocol No to the Act of Accession, Art. 11(2)(c), and point of Annex 5; Council Regulation No 2012/2000, Arts
                     and 2(1) and (4))
4..
Transport – Road transport – Special rules for the traffic of goods by road through Austria – System of ecopoints for heavy goods vehicles – Reduction in the number of ecopoints in the event of that the threshold for journeys is exceeded – Proportional distribution between the Member States according to their contribution to exceeding the threshold – Whether permissible(Protocol No to the Act of Accession, Arts 11(6) and 16)
5..
Transport – Road transport – Special rules for the traffic of goods by road through Austria – System of ecopoints for heavy goods vehicles – Reduction in the number of ecopoints in the event that the threshold for journeys is exceeded – Method of calculation laid down by Regulation No 2012/– Whether valid – Method of calculation based on the average use of ecopoints – Not permissible(Protocol No to the Act of Accession, points and of Annex 5; Council Regulation No 2012/2000)
1.
 Actions for annulment may be brought only against the institution which adopted the contested measure. Nevertheless, the circumstances
         affecting the legality of that measure may be relied upon in support of such an action even if they relate to the conduct
         of an institution other than the defendant institution. An institution whose conduct is called into question in that way cannot
         be involved as a main party to the proceedings but may intervene in them in support of one of the main parties. see paras 32-2.
 The protocols and annexes to an act of accession constitute provisions of primary law which, unless that act provides otherwise,
         may not be suspended, amended or repealed otherwise than in accordance with the procedures established for review of the original
         Treaties. see para. 3.
 Articles and Article 2(1) and (4) of Regulation No 2012/amending Annex to Protocol No to the Act of Accession
         and Regulation No 3298/with regard to the system of ecopoints for heavy goods vehicles transiting through Austria are invalid
         in so far as they aim to spread over several years the reduction in ecopoints to be made as a result of the overstepping of
         the threshold for journeys provided for in Article 11(2)(c) of that protocol.  Even if the Council, when faced with a situation in which reliable statistics have been transmitted late by the responsible
         national authorities, is justified in spreading the reduction in ecopoints to a date beyond the end of the year after that
         in which it has been found that the threshold has been exceeded, where application of that reduction solely to the remaining
         months of that subsequent year would have the disproportionate effect of stopping practically all transit traffic of goods
         by road through Austria, spreading the reduction over several years is incompatible with point of Annex to that protocol.
         In referring to `the following year' in order to establish the number of ecopoints in the event of a reduction, that provision
         clearly indicates a time scale of one year. In accordance with that indication, it is open to the Council to apply the reduction
         in ecopoints over a period of one year with a postponed commencement date in order to take account of the delays attributable
         to the late transmission of reliable statistics. see paras 60, 63, 71, 74-77, 4.
 Within the framework of the system of ecopoints for heavy goods vehicles transiting through Austria laid down by Protocol
         No to the Act of Accession on road, rail and combined transport in Austria, the distribution of ecopoints between the
         Member States falls within the competence of the Commission and, where necessary, the Council under Articles 11(6) and of that protocol. In the absence of any guidance in the Protocol relating to the method to be used in sharing the reduction
         of ecopoints between the Member States the Community institutions have a wide discretion.  In that respect, when deciding to share such a reduction between the Member States in proportion to their contribution to
         the overstepping of the prescribed threshold for journeys, the Council does not exceed that margin of discretion. see paras 80-5.
 The method used to calculate the reduction in ecopoints in Regulation No 2012/amending Annex to Protocol No to the
         Act of Accession and Regulation No 3298/with regard to the system of ecopoints for heavy goods vehicles transiting
         through Austria is in conformity with both the letter and the spirit of that protocol. Points and of Annex to that protocol
         refer to the average NOx emission value of heavy goods vehicles and not to a fictive calculation based on a number of ecopoints.
         A method of calculation which in practice entails the division of the total number of ecopoints used by the total number of
         registered journeys, where the total number of ecopoints used takes no account of journeys for which the haulier should have
         used ecopoints but did not (
         illegal journeys), whereas those  
         illegal journeys are included in the total number of journeys made, does not comply with points and of Annex 5. see paras 91-93, 96-JUDGMENT OF THE COURTSeptember (1)
((System of ecopoints for heavy goods vehicles transiting through Austria – Amendment by Regulation (EC) No 2012/– Illegality))
 In Case C-445/00, 
            
Republic of Austria, represented by H. Dossi, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant, 
v
Council of the European Union, represented by A. Lopes Sabino and G. Houttuin, acting as Agents,
            
defendant,  supported byFederal Republic of Germany, represented by W.-D. Plessing, acting as Agent, assisted by J. Sedemund, Rechtsanwalt,byItalian Republic, represented by U. Leanza, acting as Agent, assisted by M. Fiorilli, avvocato dello Stato, with an address for service in
            Luxembourg,and byCommission of the European Communities, represented initially by C. Schmidt and M. Wolfcarius, and, subsequently, C. Schmidt and W. Wils, acting as Agents, with
            an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
 interveners, 
 APPLICATION for annulment of Council Regulation (EC) No 2012/of September amending Annex to Protocol No to
            the Act of Accession and Regulation (EC) No 3298/with regard to the system of ecopoints for heavy goods vehicles transiting
            through Austria (OJ L 241, p. 18),
            
THE COURT,,
 composed of: G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias, President, J.-P. Puissochet, M. Wathelet and R. Schintgen (Presidents of Chambers), C. Gulmann, D.A.O. Edward, A. La Pergola, P. Jann, V. Skouris, F. Macken, N. Colneric, S. von Bahr and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur), Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: J. Mischo, Registrar: M.-F. Contet, Administrator, 
            
having regard to the Report for the Hearing, after hearing oral argument from the parties at the hearing on November 2002,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on February 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By application lodged at the Court Registry on December 2000, the Republic of Austria brought an action under the first
         paragraph of Article EC for annulment of Council Regulation (EC) No 2012/of September amending Annex to
         Protocol No to the Act of Accession and Regulation (EC) No 3298/with regard to the system of ecopoints for heavy
         goods vehicles transiting through Austria (OJ L 241, p. 18,  
         the contested Regulation). 
         
Facts and legal background
            
 Protocol No on road, rail and combined transport in Austria (
         the Protocol) to the Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Republic of Austria, the Republic of Finland and the Kingdom of
         Sweden and the adjustments to the Treaties on which the European Union is founded (OJ C 241, p. 21, and OJ L 1,
         p. 1,  
         the Act of Accession) establishes in Part III, which concerns road transport, special rules for the traffic of goods by road through Austria.
         
         
            
 Those rules have their origin in the Agreement between the European Economic Community and the Republic of Austria on the
         transit of goods by road and rail, signed in Oporto on May 1992, approved on behalf of the Community by Council Decision
         92/577/EEC of November (OJ L 373, p. 4). 
         
            
 The main points of those rules are contained in Article 11(2) of the Protocol, which is worded as follows: Until January 1998, the following provisions shall apply:
         
(a)
 The total of NO
         x emissions from heavy goods vehicles crossing Austria in transit shall be reduced by 60% in the period between January and December 2003, according to the table in Annex 4. 
         
(b)
 The reductions in total NO
         x emissions from heavy goods vehicles shall be administered according to an ecopoints system. Under that system any heavy goods
         vehicle crossing Austria in transit shall require a number of ecopoints equivalent to its NO
         x emissions (authorised under the Conformity of Production (COP) value or type-approval value). The method of calculation and
         administration of such points is described in Annex 5. 
         
(c)
 If the number of transit journeys in any year exceeds the reference figure established for by more than 8%, the Commission,
         acting in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 16, shall adopt appropriate measures in accordance with paragraph of Annex 5. 
         
(d)
... 
         
(e)
 The ecopoints shall be distributed by the Commission among Member States in accordance with provisions to be established in
         accordance with paragraph 6.
         
            
 Article 11(3) to (6) of the Protocol provides: 
         
3.
 Before January 1998, the Council, on the basis of a report by the Commission, shall review the operation of provisions concerning
         transit of goods by road through Austria. The review shall take place in conformity with basic principles of Community law,
         such as the proper functioning of the internal market, in particular the free movement of goods and freedom to provide services,
         protection of the environment in the interest of the Community as a whole, and traffic safety. Unless the Council, acting
         unanimously on a proposal from the Commission and after consulting the European Parliament, decides otherwise, the transitional
         period shall be extended to January 2001, during which the provisions of paragraph shall apply. 
         
4.
 Before January 2001, the Commission, in cooperation with the European Environment Agency, shall make a scientific study
         of the degree to which the objective concerning reduction of pollution set out in paragraph 2(a) has been achieved. If the
         Commission concludes that this objective has been achieved on a sustainable basis, the provisions of paragraph shall cease
         to apply on January 2001. If the Commission concludes that this objective has not been achieved on a sustainable basis the
         Council, acting in accordance with Article of the EC Treaty, may adopt measures, within a Community framework, which ensure
         equivalent protection of the environment, in particular a 60% reduction of pollution. If the Council does not adopt such measures,
         the transitional period shall be automatically extended for a final period of three years, during which the provisions of
         paragraph shall apply. 
         
5.
 At the end of the transitional period, the  
         acquis communautaire in its entirety shall be applied. 
         
6.
 The Commission, acting in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 16, shall adopt detailed measures concerning
         the procedures relating to the ecopoints system, the distribution of ecopoints and technical questions concerning the application
         of this Article, which shall enter into force on the date of accession of Austria. 
         ...
         
            
 Under Article of the Protocol: 
         
1.
 The Commission shall be assisted by a Committee composed of the representatives of the Member States and chaired by the representative
         of the Commission. 
         
2.
 When reference is made to the procedure laid down in this Article, the representative of the Commission shall submit to the
         Committee a draft of the measures to be taken. The Committee shall deliver its opinion on the draft within a time limit which
         the Chairman may lay down according to the urgency of the matter. The opinion shall be delivered by the majority laid down
         in Article 148(2) of the EC Treaty in the case of decisions which the Council is required to adopt on a proposal from the
         Commission. The votes of the representatives of the Member States within the Committee shall be weighted in the manner set
         out in that Article. The Chairman shall not vote. 
         
3.
 The Commission shall adopt the measures envisaged if they are in accordance with the opinion of the Committee. If the measures envisaged are not in accordance with the opinion of the Committee, or if no opinion is delivered, the Commission
         shall without delay submit to the Council a proposal relating to the measures to be taken. The Council shall act by a qualified
         majority. 
         
4.
 If, on the expiry of a period of three months from the date of referral to the Council, the Council has not acted, the proposed
         measures shall be adopted by the Commission.
         
            
 Annex to the Protocol, which is entitled  
         Calculation and administration of ecopoints referred to in Article 11(2)(b) of the Protocol, provides, in point 3: If Article 11(2)(c) applies, the number of ecopoints for the following year shall be established as follows:The quarterly average NO
         x emission values for lorries in the current year, calculated in accordance with paragraph above, will be extrapolated to
         produce the average NO
         x emission value anticipated for the following year. The forecast value, multiplied by 0.and by the number of ecopoints
         for set out in Annex 4, will be the number of ecopoints for the year in question.
         
            
 In accordance with Article 11(6) of the Protocol, the Commission adopted Regulation (EC) No 3298/of December laying
         down detailed measures concerning the system of Rights of Transit (Ecopoints) for heavy goods vehicles transiting through
         Austria, established by Article of Protocol No to the Act of Accession of Austria, Finland and Sweden (OJ L 341,
         p. 20), which was amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1524/of July (OJ L 190, p. 13) and Commission Regulation
         (EC) No 609/of March (OJ L 73, p. 9), (
         Regulation No 3298/94). 
         
            
 Article 6(2) of Regulation No 3298/provides: The printed ecopoints which are intended for affixing to ecocards shall be made available each year to Member States in two
         instalments, the first before October of the preceding year, and the second before March of the relevant year.In the circumstances envisaged in Article 11(2)(c) of Protocol No 9, the number of ecopoints shall be reduced for that year
         using the method laid down in point of Annex to the Protocol.
         
            
 Regulation No 3298/amends Annex to the Protocol and fixes the total number of ecopoints as follows: 
         
Year 
Percentage of ecopoints 
Ecopoints allocated for EU ─ (base) 
100% 
71.7% 
65.0% 
59.1% 
54.8% 
51.9% 
49.8% 
48.5% 
44.8% 
40.0% 
Regulation No 3298/also fixes, in Annex D, the distribution scale of ecopoints between Member States.
         
            
 The number of transit journeys made through Austria in was 900, and the threshold to which Article 11(2)(c) of
         the Protocol refers is equivalent to transit journeys. 
         
            
 The ecopoint statistics showed journeys during 1999, which represented a 14.57% increase over the figure for 1991.
         
         
            
 Acting in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article of the Protocol, the Commission, on May 2000, submitted
         a proposal for a Commission Regulation to the committee provided for in Article of the Protocol (
         the Ecopoints Committee). The Commission pointed out that, according to the calculation method laid down in point of Annex to the Protocol, the
         number of ecopoints for the year was to be reduced by about 20% (that is, ecopoints). It stated that the consequence
         of that reduction would be that, during the last quarter of the year 2000, there would be practically no ecopoints available,
         so that all transit of lorries through Austria would be prohibited. Therefore, pointing out that the applicable provisions
         of the Protocol had to be interpreted in the light of the fundamental freedoms, the Commission proposed to share the reduction
         in the number of ecopoints over the final four years, from to 2003, covered by the transitional rules. 30% of the reduction
         was to take effect in 2000, 30% in 2001, 30% in and the remaining 10% in 2003. 
         
            
 Taking the view that the Protocol provided no guidelines concerning the sharing of the reduction between the Member States,
         the Commission also proposed that the burden of the reduction should be borne by the Member States whose hauliers had contributed
         to the threshold prescribed in Article 11(2)(c) of the Protocol being exceeded during 1999. 
         
            
 Since its proposal was not approved by a qualified majority of the Ecopoints Committee, on June 2000, the Commission submitted
         to the Council an identical proposal for a Council Regulation (COM(2000) final). 
         
            
 On September 2000, in the light of the developments in the case within the Council, the Commission authorised the responsible
         Commissioner, Loyola de Palacio, to take the following initiative:  
         should the Council adopt, by qualified majority, a decision in line with the compromise currently proposed by the President,
         to amend the Commission's proposal accordingly. 
         
            
 On September 2000, the French Presidency submitted to the Council a compromise proposal which, while retaining the Commission's
         original proposal to stagger the reduction in ecopoints until 2003, adopted a new calculation method which gave a reduction
         figure of ecopoints. The responsible Commissioner then amended the initial proposal in line with the French compromise
         proposal. This allowed the Council to adopt by a qualified majority the Commission's amended proposal, which became the contested
         Regulation. The Republic of Austria voted against it. 
         
            
 The fifth to seventh recitals in the preamble to the contested Regulation are worded as follows: 
         
(5)
 Protocol No must be applied in accordance with the fundamental freedoms established by the Treaty. It is therefore imperative
         to take measures which are capable of ensuring the free movement of goods and the full functioning of the internal market.
         
         
(6)
 To impose the whole reduction of ecopoints solely in would have the disproportionate effect of stopping, to all intents
         and purposes, transit traffic through Austria. As a result, the reduction in the total number of ecopoints should be spread
         over the years to 2003. 
         
(7)
 Proportionality of the reduction of ecopoints also requires that those Member States who contributed most to the 8% threshold
         being exceeded should have their allocations of ecopoints cut to ensure that the total reduction is met. This calls for a
         revision of the distribution key of ecopoints to the Member States.
         
            
 Article of the contested Regulation amends Annex to the Protocol as follows so as to fix the new annual ecopoint quotas:
         
         
Year
Percentage of ecopoints
Ecopoints for EU ─ 48.5%
47.2%
43.5%
39.6%
Article 2(1) of the contested Regulation replaces the second subparagraph of Article 6(2) of Regulation No 3298/with the
         following provision: In the circumstances provided for in Article 11(2)(c) of Protocol No 9, the number of ecopoints shall be reduced. The reduction
         shall be calculated using the method laid down in point of Annex to Protocol No 9. The reduction of ecopoints thus calculated
         shall be spread over several years.
         
            
 Finally, Article 2(4) of the contested Regulation amends Annex D to Regulation No 3298/so as to effect a new distribution
         of the ecopoints between the Member States. 
         
            
 On December 2000, the Commission, pursuant to Article 11(4) of the Protocol, adopted a Report to the Council on the Transit
         of Goods by Road through Austria (COM(2000) final). 
         
            
 Since the Commission, in its report, did not reach the conclusion that the objective of reducing pollution by 60% had been
         achieved on a sustainable basis, and since the Council had not adopted the measures referred to in the third sentence of Article 11(4)
         of the Protocol, the transitional period was automatically extended for a final period of three years from January to December 2003, during which the provisions of Article 11(2) of the Protocol, and, in particular, point (c), apply. 
         Procedure
            
 The Republic of Austria lodged its application at the Court Registry on December 2000. 
         
            
 By orders of the President of the Court of January and April 2001, the Federal Republic of Germany, the Commission of
         the European Communities and the Italian Republic were granted leave to intervene in support of the form of order sought by
         the Council. 
         
            
 By a separate document lodged at the Court Registry on December 2000, the Republic of Austria filed an application under
         Articles EC and EC for suspension of operation of the contested Regulation and for adoption of interim measures. 
         
            
 By order of February in Case C-445/R  
         Austria v  
         Council [2001] ECR I-1461, the President of the Court ordered that operation of Article 2(1) of the contested Regulation be suspended
         until judgment in the main proceedings, dismissed the remainder of the application and reserved the costs. 
         
            
 At the Commission's request, the Court, by order of October in Case C-445/Austria v  
         Council [2002] ECR I-9151, ordered that the opinion of the Commission's legal service of April 2000, which had been submitted
         by the Republic of Austria in an annex to its application, be withdrawn from the case-file and reserved the costs. 
         Forms of order sought
            
 The Republic of Austria claims that the Court should: 
         
─
 annul the contested Regulation; 
          annul the contested Regulation; 
         
─
 in the alternative, annul Article and Article 2(1) and (4) of the contested Regulation; 
          in the alternative, annul Article and Article 2(1) and (4) of the contested Regulation; 
         
─
 order the Council to pay the costs. 
          order the Council to pay the costs. 
         
            
 The Council, supported by the Federal Republic of Germany, the Italian Republic and the Commission, contends that the Court
         should: 
         
─
 reject as inadmissible all the heads of complaint raised against the Commission, the applicant not having brought an action
            against it; 
          reject as inadmissible all the heads of complaint raised against the Commission, the applicant not having brought an action
         against it; 
         
─
 dismiss the action as unfounded; 
          dismiss the action as unfounded; 
         
─
 in the alternative, should the Court uphold the action and annul the contested Regulation, order that all of its effects shall
            be maintained; 
          in the alternative, should the Court uphold the action and annul the contested Regulation, order that all of its effects shall
         be maintained; 
         
─
 order the applicant to pay the costs. 
          order the applicant to pay the costs. 
         
Admissibility
            
 The Council submits that, of the pleas relied on in support of the action, the heads of complaint raised against the Commission
         are inadmissible because no action has been brought against the Commission and the judgment to be given in the present case
         will not be enforceable against an institution which is not a party to the proceedings. 
         
            
 The Court notes that actions for annulment under Article EC must be brought against the institution which adopted the
         contested measure and such actions are inadmissible in so far as they are directed against another institution (see, to that
         effect, Case 150/Nashua Corporation and Others v  
         Council and Commission [1987] ECR 4421). 
         
            
 Since annulment of a Council regulation is sought, the present action may therefore be brought only against that institution.
         Nevertheless, the circumstances affecting the legality of a contested measure may be relied upon in support of such an action
         even if they relate to the conduct of an institution other than the defendant institution. 
         
            
 An institution whose conduct is called into question in that way cannot be involved as a main party to the proceedings but
         may intervene in them in support of one of the main parties, as the Commission has done in this case. 
         
            
 Consequently, the objection of inadmissibility raised by the Council must be rejected. 
         Substance
            
 The Austrian Government bases its action on six pleas in law. The first plea, which is the principal plea, alleges that essential
         procedural requirements were infringed when the contested Regulation was adopted. The following pleas are raised in the alternative.
         The second plea alleges infringement of the Treaty or the Protocol, in that the Commission's proposal was amended after it
         had been submitted to the Council. The third plea alleges failure to state reasons for the contested Regulation. The fourth
         plea alleges that the contested Regulation infringes the Treaty or the Protocol. The fifth plea alleges infringement of legal
         provisions and failure to state reasons when applying the method of calculation referred to in point of Annex to the Protocol.
         Finally, the sixth plea alleges that there is no legal basis for the contested Regulation. 
          The first plea: infringement of essential procedural requirements when the contested Regulation was adopted
         
            
 By its first plea, the Austrian Government claims that essential procedural requirements were infringed when the contested
         Regulation was adopted. It asserts, in particular, that the Commission's decision to amend its initial proposal for a regulation
         in order to endorse the compromise submitted by the Presidency of the Council was not a collegiate decision. The Austrian
         Government adds that to authorise the relevant Commissioner to amend, if necessary, a Commission proposal so as to adopt a
         new formulation commanding a qualified majority in the Council constitutes a failure to observe the Commission's Rules of
         Procedure, which limit authorisations to the adoption of clearly defined management and administration measures. 
         
            
 The parties are agreed that, on September 2000, that is to say, the day before adoption of the contested Regulation, the
         Commission authorised the responsible Member of the Commission to amend the proposal for a regulation submitted to the Council
         if the Council were prepared to adopt by qualified majority a decision in line with the compromise proposed by the French
         Presidency, which it was. 
         
            
 On September 2000, the French Presidency submitted to the Council a compromise proposal which, while retaining the Commission's
         original proposal to stagger the reduction in ecopoints until 2003, adopted a new calculation method which gave a reduction
         figure of ecopoints. The responsible Commissioner then amended the initial proposal in line with the French Presidency's
         compromise proposal. This allowed the Council to adopt by a qualified majority the Commission's amended proposal. 
         
            
 Under Article of the Commission's Rules of Procedure, in the version in force at the material time, the Commission may
          
         instruct one or more of its Members, with the agreement of the President, to adopt the definitive text ... of any proposal
         to be presented to the other institutions the substance of which has already been determined in discussion. 
         
            
 It is clear from the documents submitted to the Court that the authorisation in question was granted by the Commission acting
         as a collegiate body after having been informed of the content of the compromise which was to be proposed. It follows that
         the responsible Commissioner was duly authorised to amend the proposal for a regulation in question to that effect. 
         
            
 Therefore, no essential procedural requirements were infringed when the contested Regulation was adopted. 
         
            
 It follows that the first plea must be rejected as unfounded. 
          Second plea: infringement of the Treaty or the Protocol in that the Commission's proposal was amended after it had been submitted
         to the Council
         
            
 By its second plea, the Austrian Government claims that, under the procedure laid down in Article of the Protocol, the
         Commission did not have the authority to amend,  
         a posteriori and substantially, the proposal it had submitted to the Council. 
         
            
 In that regard, it is sufficient to observe that, under Article 250(2) EC,  
         [a]s long as the Council has not acted, the Commission may alter its proposal at any time during the procedures leading to
         the adoption of a Community act. 
         
            
 It was therefore open to the Commission to amend its proposal as it did in this case. 
         
            
 Consequently, the second plea must be rejected as unfounded. 
          Third plea: failure to state reasons in the contested Regulation
         
            
 By its third plea, the Austrian Government submits that, as regards the calculation of the reduction in the number of ecopoints,
         the sharing of the reduction between the Member States, the spreading of that reduction over four years, and the introduction
         of a general rule to spread the reduction in the number of ecopoints over several years if the threshold number established
         in Article 11(2)(c) of the Protocol is exceeded, the contested Regulation fails to satisfy the requirement to state reasons.
         
         
            
 The Court observes that it is settled case-law that the statement of reasons required by Article EC must be appropriate
         to the act at issue and must disclose in a clear and unequivocal fashion the reasoning followed by the institution which adopted
         the measure in question in such a way as to enable the persons concerned to ascertain the reasons for the measure and to enable
         the competent Community Court to exercise its power of review. The requirements to be satisfied by the statement of reasons
         depend on the circumstances of each case, in particular the content of the measure in question, the nature of the reasons
         given and the interest which the addressees of the measure, or other parties to whom it is of direct and individual concern,
         may have in obtaining explanations. It is not necessary for the reasoning to go into all the relevant facts and points of
         law, since the question whether the statement of reasons meets the requirements of Article EC must be assessed with regard
         not only to its wording but also to its context and to all the legal rules governing the matter in question (see,  
         inter alia, Case C-367/P  
         Commission   v  
         Sytraval and Brink's France  [1998] ECR I-1719, paragraph 63, and Case C-76/P  
         Petrotub and Republica v  
         Council [2003] ECR I-79, paragraph 81). 
         
            
 First, the recitals of the contested Regulation indicate with sufficient clarity the principal reasons for the positions adopted
         as regards the calculation of the reduction in the number of ecopoints, the sharing of the reduction between the Member States
         and the spreading of that reduction over several years. Second, the parties are agreed that the Republic of Austria was fully
         informed of the reasons for the contested Regulation, in particular as a result of its participation in the Ecopoints Committee.
         
         
            
 It follows that, having regard to both its content and its context, the reasons given in the contested Regulation satisfy
         the requisite legal standard. 
         
            
 For those reasons, the third plea must be rejected as unfounded. 
          First limb of the fourth plea and the sixth plea: spreading of the reduction in ecopoints over several years
         
            
 By the first limb of its fourth plea, which is, essentially, restated in the sixth plea, the Austrian Government maintains
         that the contested Regulation infringes the EC Treaty and the Protocol in two respects. 
         
            
 First, according to the Austrian Government, the wording of the relevant provisions in the Protocol is unequivocal and clear
         and leaves no room for interpretation: since the threshold established in Article 11(2)(c) of the Protocol had been exceeded
         in 1999, the reduction in the number of ecopoints for the year had to be determined using the calculation method provided
         for in point of Annex to the Protocol. However, Article of the contested Regulation does not provide for application
         in of the whole of the reduction in ecopoints made on account of the threshold number of journeys having been exceeded
         in but spreads that reduction over four years from to 2003. Since the Protocol is anchored in primary law, its formal
         amendment by the contested Regulation, which is a piece of secondary legislation, without an express power of the Council
         under primary law, is manifestly illegal. 
         
            
 The Austrian Government regards as unacceptable the reasons given by the Council in the recitals to the contested Regulation
         concerning the disproportionate effect of applying the entire reduction in ecopoints solely to and the claim that the
         Protocol must be applied in accordance with the fundamental freedoms laid down by the Treaty, the method of interpretation
         used by the Council being, in its view, contrary to the clear wording of the Protocol. 
         
            
 Second, the Austrian Government submits that Article 2(1) of the contested Regulation, which amends the second subparagraph of
         Article 6(2) of Regulation No 3298/94, also alters the primary-law objectives, inasmuch as it provides generally for an extraordinary
         reduction in the number of ecopoints to be  
         spread over several years. The conversion of the method of spreading the reduction in ecopoints into a general rule for every case to which Article 11(2)(c)
         of the Protocol applies has no legal basis in the Protocol and is manifestly contrary to the regime established therein. 
         
            
 It is appropriate, first of all, to examine the second of those heads of complaint, namely that there was a definitive introduction
         of a principle that the reduction in ecopoints be spread over several years. 
         
            
 In that connection, the Commission argues that Article 2(1) of the contested Regulation amends the rule on the distribution
         of ecopoints only in respect of and does not contain any general rule applying to the future. According to the Commission,
         if that article were really to contain such a general rule, it would indeed be illegal. 
         
            
 The Court finds that, in view of the categoric wording of Article 2(1) of the contested Regulation, this argument cannot be
         upheld. Article 2(1) does not lay down any temporal limitation or make any reference whatsoever to the special circumstances
         which prevailed in 2000. That article must be read as being intended to effect a permanent and definitive change in the ecopoints
         system. 
         
            
 However, point of Annex to the Protocol provides that, in the event of a reduction, the number of ecopoints is to be established
          
         for the following year. 
         
            
 It follows that Article 2(1) of the contested Regulation amends the second subparagraph of Article 6(2) of Regulation No 3298/in a way which is inconsistent with point of Annex to the Protocol. 
         
            
 The protocols and annexes to an act of accession constitute provisions of primary law which, unless that act provides otherwise,
         may not be suspended, amended or repealed otherwise than in accordance with the procedures established for review of the original
         Treaties (see, to that effect, Joined Cases 31/and 35/LAISA and CPC España v  
         Council [1988] ECR 2285, paragraph 12). 
         
            
 It follows that Article 2(1) of the contested Regulation is invalid in so far as, contrary to the provisions of the Protocol,
         it introduces definitively a principle that the reduction in ecopoints be spread over several years. 
         
            
 Article 2(1) must therefore be annulled. 
         
            
 As regards the head of complaint relating to the spreading over the years to of the reduction in ecopoints made
         on account of the transit journey threshold provided for in Article 11(2)(c) of the Protocol having been exceeded in 1999,
         the Italian Republic and the Council submit essentially that the threshold was exceeded as a result of the conduct of the
         Republic of Austria itself in so far as it failed to take adequate measures to develop the existing railways in Austria with
         a view to reducing goods traffic by road, as it was required to do under the Protocol. The Austrian Government disputes those
         claims and submits that the arrangements for combined rail and road transport in Austria operate adequately. 
         
            
 The Court recognises that the Protocol relates not only to the transport of goods by road but also to transport by rail and
         combined transport. Articles and of and Annex to the Protocol impose obligations on, among others, the Republic of Austria
         to develop and utilise railway capacity. If that capacity were developed as required, it would be capable of relieving the
         transalpine routes of the burden of some of the transport of goods by heavy vehicles. 
         
            
 However, it should be noted that the Protocol does not provide for any mechanism whereby the provisions on ecopoints in that
         protocol are to become inapplicable in the event that the Republic of Austria fails to fulfil its obligations to develop railway
         capacity. In the absence of such mechanisms in the Protocol itself, it is not a matter for the Court, in the present annulment
         proceedings, to adopt a position on compliance by the Republic of Austria with those obligations. 
         
            
 With respect to the fact that the number of journeys by road authorised for was exceeded, it is clear from the information
         provided to the Court that, although the Austrian authorities supplied some statistics to the Community authorities in March
         2000, they were inaccurate and only in September was it possible to determine definitive statistics. 
         
            
 As a result of the delays inherent in the legislative procedure, which were due, in particular, to the Ecopoints Committee
         procedure provided for in Article of the Protocol, only the last quarter of remained within which to make the reductions
         resulting from the threshold being exceeded in 1999. 
         
            
 The Protocol, in particular Article 11(2)(c) and Annex 5, contains no provision specifically governing the situation created
         by the late transmission of reliable statistics by the Austrian authorities. 
         
            
 On the other hand, Articles 11(2)(c) and of the Protocol authorise the Commission and, if necessary, the Council to adopt
          
         appropriate measures in accordance with point of Annex 5. Those provisions confer a discretion on the Community institutions to take appropriate
         measures when faced with a situation in which reliable statistics have been transmitted late by the responsible national authorities.
         
         
            
 In that context, the Council may take into account the fact that the ecopoints system constitutes a derogation from the general
         rules of Community law which applies only during a transitional period. 
         
            
 First, it is clear from Article 11(3) to (5) of the Protocol that the special rules for the traffic of goods by road through
         Austria laid down in the Protocol are to be applied in accordance with the fundamental principles of Community law, such as
         the proper functioning of the internal market, the free movement of goods and the freedom to provide services. Second, those
         rules were intended to apply initially until January and could be renewed, after review, for two additional periods
         ending on December at the latest. The Protocol provides that, at the end of that transitional period, the  
         acquis communautaire is to be applied in its entirety. 
         
            
 The parties, including the Republic of Austria, are agreed that to apply the whole reduction of ecopoints to be made as a
         result of the threshold having been exceeded in solely to the remaining months of would have had the disproportionate
         effect of stopping practically all transit traffic of goods by road through Austria. Such an effect would have been contrary
         to the fundamental principles of Community law, in particular the free movement of goods and completion of the internal market.
         
         
            
 In those circumstances, the Council was justified in spreading the reduction in ecopoints to a date beyond the end of 2000.
         
         
            
 However, as the Austrian Government observed, spreading the reduction over four years from to was incompatible with
         the Protocol. No provision in the Protocol provides for spreading the reduction over several years. On the other hand, point
         of Annex to the Protocol, in referring to  
         the following year, clearly indicates a time scale of one year. In accordance with that indication, it would have been open to the Council to
         apply the reduction in ecopoints over a period of one year with a postponed commencement date in order to take account of
         the delays attributable to the late transmission of reliable statistics. In the present case, it would have been acceptable
         to spread the reduction over the remaining months of and the whole of 2001. 
         
            
 It follows that Article of the contested Regulation is contrary to the Protocol inasmuch as it spreads over the period to the reduction in ecopoints to be made as a result of the finding that the threshold for journeys had been exceeded
         in 1999. 
          The second limb of the fourth plea: distribution of ecopoints between the Member States
         
            
 By the second limb of its fourth plea, the Austrian Government submits that the new distribution of ecopoints between the
         Member States provided for in Article 2(4) of the contested Regulation is incompatible with Community law. It maintains that,
         in the absence of any guidance in the Protocol relating to the distribution method, distribution should be effected taking
         account of general legal principles, in particular the principle of solidarity, and also the  
         polluter pays principle and the principle of proportionality. 
         
            
 It should be observed that the distribution of ecopoints between the Member States was not fixed by the Protocol but by an
         act of secondary legislation, namely Regulation No 3298/94, and, more specifically, Annex D to that regulation, which was
         amended by Article 2(4) of the contested Regulation. 
         
            
 Under Articles 11(6) and of the Protocol, the distribution of ecopoints between the Member States falls within the competence
         of the Commission and, where necessary, the Council. 
         
            
 The Protocol does not, however, give any guidance as to what method is to be used in sharing the reduction of ecopoints between
         the Member States. 
         
            
 The Community institutions thus have a wide discretion in that regard. 
         
            
 It is clear from, in particular, the seventh recital to the contested Regulation that the Council exercised its discretion
         when deciding to share the reduction in ecopoints between the Member States in proportion to their contribution to the overstepping
         of the prescribed threshold for journeys. 
         
            
 In adopting such an approach, the Council did not exceed its margin of discretion. 
         
            
 However, inasmuch as Article 2(4) of the contested Regulation seeks to share the reduction in ecopoints provided for in Article
         of that regulation between the Member States over a period of four years, it is vitiated by the same illegality as Article
         1. 
          Fifth plea: infringement of legal provisions and failure to state adequate reasons when applying the method of calculation
         provided for in point of Annex to the Protocol
         
            
 According to the Austrian Government, the method used in the contested Regulation to calculate the reduction in ecopoints
         is incompatible with the general objectives of the Protocol and thus infringes the Protocol and misapplies the calculation
         method laid down in point of Annex 5. That calculation method resulted in a lesser reduction than that provided for in the
         Protocol. The Austrian Government states that the ecopoint statistics which it provided in respect of included not only
         the journeys made through Austria with deduction of ecopoints but also  
         illegal transit journeys which were made without deduction of ecopoints and for which an NO
         x emission value of zero was recorded. For the purposes of calculating the reduction in ecopoints, the Council took into account
         only the actual average level of NO
         x emissions per heavy goods vehicle, thus omitting to take into consideration  
         illegal journeys. 
         
            
 The contested Regulation is, the Austrian Government submits, also vitiated by a failure to state reasons since it contains
         no specific information concerning the calculation method which forms the basis of the reduction in ecopoints imposed in Article
         1. 
         
            
 The Court observes that, in the event that the threshold for journeys laid down in Article 11(2)(c) of the Protocol is exceeded,
         the reduction in the number of ecopoints for the following year is to be determined in accordance with the method of calculation
         laid down in point of Annex to the Protocol, which states: The quarterly average NO
         x emission values for lorries in the current year, calculated in accordance with paragraph above, will be extrapolated to
         produce the average NO
         x emission value anticipated for the following year. The forecast value, multiplied by 0.and by the number of ecopoints
         for set out in Annex 4, will be the number of ecopoints for the year in question.
         
            
 In this method of calculation, the only variable is the average NO
         x emission value laid down for the year following the current year. This variable is of decisive importance in determining
         the reduction in the number of ecopoints. It consists of an average extrapolated on the basis of the quarterly average  NO
         x emission values established in the current year, which, in the present case, is 1999. 
         
            
 With respect to establishing the quarterly average  NO
         x emission values during the current year, point of Annex to the Protocol provides: The Commission, acting in accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 16, shall at three month intervals calculate
         the number of journeys and the average  NO
         x value of the heavy goods vehicles detailed for each nationality.
         
            
 According to the information provided by the Commission, which is not challenged by the other parties, the average  NO
         x emission value is calculated on the basis of the presumption that the number of ecopoints used for each transit journey is
         equal to the  NO
         x emission value of the heavy goods vehicle making that journey; consequently, the average  NO
         x emission value is replaced in the calculation by the average use of ecopoints. It appears therefore that, in practice, the
         calculation of the average  NO
         x emission values of heavy goods vehicles provided for in point of Annex to the Protocol entails the simple division of
         the total number of ecopoints used by the total number of registered journeys. 
         
            
 In this case, it is undisputed that the Republic of Austria provided the Commission with statistics for which included
         all of the journeys made in its territory, including those for which the haulier should have used ecopoints but did not (
         illegal journeys). It follows that, in those statistics, the total number of ecopoints used was divided not by the number of journeys
         made using ecopoints but by a number equal to the sum of those journeys and journeys made without ecopoints being deducted
         even though they ought to have been. 
         
            
 In this calculation, the total number of ecopoints used takes no account of  
         illegal journeys since, by definition, every  
         illegal journey uses zero ecopoints. However, in that same calculation,  
         illegal journeys were included in the total number of journeys made. The inevitable result of including  
         illegal journeys in the divisor (namely the total number of journeys made) without also including them in the dividend (namely the
         total number of ecopoints used) was to distort the calculation so as to produce a lower result. The statistics, which
         were calculated in this way and extrapolated for the following year in accordance with point of Annex to the Protocol,
         forecast an average  NO
         x emission value for of 6.159. 
         
            
 However, it would be wrong to claim that, because a heavy goods vehicle did not use any ecopoints while making a journey through
         Austria, it produced no  NO
         x emissions during that journey. 
         
            
 The calculations provided for in points and of Annex to the Protocol are based on  NO
         x emissions and not on the use of ecopoints. It is only as a fiction that ecopoints are used in the calculations instead of
          NO
         x emissions. 
         
            
 It follows that the calculation method described in paragraphs and of this judgment and favoured by the Austrian authorities
         is inconsistent with the provisions in force and gives an inaccurate result. According to the information submitted to the
         Court, that error was detected in August and, following a technical meeting in Vienna, the Commission revised the statistics
         concerning the average quarterly  NO
         x emission values for and the extrapolation of those values for the following year in accordance with point of Annex
         to the Protocol. That revision resulted in an average  NO
         x emission value for of 6.9975. The result of including that figure in the calculation provided for in point of Annex
         was a lesser reduction in ecopoints than that initially envisaged and the Council applied that reduction in the contested
         Regulation. 
         
            
 In doing so, the Council acted in conformity with both the letter and the spirit of the Protocol. Points and of Annex
         refer to the average  NO
         x emission value of heavy goods vehicles and not to a fictive calculation based on a number of ecopoints. 
         
            
 The arguments put forward by the Republic of Austria with regard to the application of the calculation method laid down in
         point of Annex to the Protocol must therefore be rejected. 
         
            
 With respect to the head of complaint concerning failure to state reasons, it is settled case-law that it is not necessary
         for details of all relevant factual and legal aspects to be given in the statement of reasons, in so far as the question whether
         the statement of reasons for a measure meets the requirements of Article EC must be assessed with regard not only to its
         wording but also to its context and to all the legal rules governing the matter in question. This is  
         a fortiori the case where the Member States have been closely associated with the process of drafting the contested measure and are
         thus aware of the reasons underlying that measure (see Case C-301/Netherlands v  
         Council [2001] ECR I-8853, paragraph and the case-law cited there). 
         
            
 It is undisputed in this case that it was the Republic of Austria which provided the statistics on which the calculations
         at issue were based, that those statistics were discussed during a special meeting held in Vienna with the Austrian authorities
         and that, both within the Ecopoints Committee and within the Council, the Austrian Government was informed at all stages of
         the amendments which led to the adoption of the figures which it is calling into question. 
         
            
 The arguments of the Austrian Government with regard to failure to state reasons are therefore unfounded. Consequently, the
         fifth plea must be rejected in its entirety. 
         Maintenance of the effects of the contested Regulation
            
 The Council claims that, in the event of annulment of the contested Regulation, the Court should order that all of the legal
         effects of that regulation be maintained until a new measure is adopted, in particular because of the need for legal certainty.
         The Austrian Government and the Commission concurred with this claim at the hearing of oral argument. 
         
            
 It is clear from paragraph of this judgment that Article of the contested Regulation is contrary to the Protocol inasmuch
         as it spreads over the years to the reduction in ecopoints to be made as a result of the threshold for journeys
         having been exceeded in 1999. 
         
            
 However, in accordance with the second paragraph of Article EC, the effects of Article of the contested Regulation must
         be declared to be definitive. 
         
            
 It is clear from paragraph of this judgment that Article 2(4) of the contested Regulation is vitiated by the same illegality
         as Article inasmuch as it seeks to share the reduction in ecopoints provided for in Article between the Member States
         over a period of four years. 
         
            
 As was the case with Article of the contested Regulation, the effects of Article 2(4) must be declared to be definitive.
         
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party's pleadings. However, under Article 69(3) of those Rules, the Court may order that the
         costs be shared or that the parties bear their own costs where each party succeeds on some and fails on other heads. In this
         case, since the parties have each been partially unsuccessful, each must be ordered to bear its own costs, including those
         of the interlocutory proceedings and of the procedure relating to the withdrawal of a document from the case-file. 
         
            
 Under the second subparagraph of Article 69(4) of the Rules of Procedure, the Federal Republic of Germany, the Italian Republic
         and the Commission, which intervened in these proceedings, are to bear their own costs. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT
 hereby: 
         
1.
 Annuls Article 2(1) of Council Regulation (EC) No 2012/of September amending Annex to Protocol No to the
            Act of Accession and Regulation (EC) No 3298/with regard to the system of ecopoints for heavy goods vehicles transiting
            through Austria; 
            
2.
 Annuls Article and Article 2(4) of that regulation but declares that their effects are to be regarded as definitive; 
            
3.
 Dismisses the remainder of the action; 
            
4.
 Orders each party to bear its own costs, including those of the interlocutory proceedings and of the procedure relating to
            the withdrawal of a document from the case-file; 
            
5.
 Orders the Federal Republic of Germany, the Italian Republic and the Commission of the European Communities to bear their
            own costs. 
            
Rodríguez Iglesias
Puissochet 
Wathelet
Schintgen 
Gulmann 
Edward
La Pergola 
Jann 
Skouris
Macken 
Colneric 
von Bahr
Cunha Rodrigues 
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on September 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: German.
Top  
 