
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
December (*)
      
(Free movement of capital – Taxation – Income tax – National legislation concerning the taxation of profits made from the sale of shareholdings (shares) in limited companies)
In Case C-436/06,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, from the Finanzgericht Hamburg (Germany), made by decision of September 2006, received at the Court on October 2006, in the proceedings
      
Per Grønfeldt
Tatiana Grønfeldt
v
Finanzamt Hamburg – Am Tierpark,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, L. Bay Larsen, K. Schiemann, P. Kūris and C. Toader,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on September 2007,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Mr and Mrs Grønfeldt, by A. Mutscher, tax advisor,
–        the Finanzamt Hamburg – Am Tierpark, by B. Fiedler, advisor,
–        the German Government, by M. Lumma and C. Blaschke, acting as Agents,
–        the Greek Government, by K. Georgiadis, O. Patsopoulou and I. Pouli, acting as Agents,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by R. Lyal and G. Wilms, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article EC. 
      
The reference was made in the context of proceedings between Mr and Mrs Grønfeldt and the Finanzamt Hamburg – Am Tierpark
         (‘the Finanzamt’) concerning the taxation in Germany of profits made from the sale of shares in two limited companies governed
         by Danish law. 
      
 National legal context
As is apparent from the order for reference, Paragraph of the Law on income tax (Einkommensteuergesetz), in the version
         resulting from the law of March (BGBl. I, p. 402), profits made on the sale of shares in a limited company were
         included, inter alia, under the term ‘business income’ if the seller had held, either directly or indirectly, a substantial
         share of the company’s capital, that is to say at least 10%, within the last five years.
      
Under Paragraph of the Law on income tax, as amended by the Law on tax reduction 2001/(Steuersenkungsgesetz 2001/2002),
         of October (BGBl. I, p. 1433; ‘the new version of the EStG’), the term ‘business income’ also encompassed profit
         made on the sale of shares in a limited company if the seller had held, either directly or indirectly, at least a 1% share
         of the company’s capital within the last five years.
      
It is apparent from the provisions for the implementation of Paragraph of the new version of the EStG, namely Paragraphs
         52(1) of the new version of the EStG and 52(34)(a) of the Law on income tax, as amended by the Law aligning tax laws with
         the Euro (Steuer‑Euroglättungsgesetz) of December (BGBl. I, p. 1790), that where, in the case of the sale of
         shares in companies which are not subject to unlimited corporation tax, and thus in particular of shareholdings in a foreign
         limited company, the new version of Paragraph of the EStG was applicable from the financial year 2001, irrespective of
         further conditions. For shareholdings in companies subject to unlimited corporation tax, which is the rule for companies governed
         by German law, the new version of Paragraph of the EStG was applicable only from the tax year and profits from sales
         made during were thus taxable only if the seller had held a shareholding of at least 10% of the company capital.
      
 The main proceedings and the question referred 
The order for reference indicates that Mr Grønfeldt held a shareholding in the capital of two companies governed by Danish
         law, namely Navision Software A/S and WISEhouse Denmark A/S, in the amount of 2.1% and 2.5% respectively. 
      
In he sold a large part of those shareholdings. In so doing, he made a profit on the sale of the shares which he held
         in Navision Software A/S and a small loss on the shares held in WISEhouse Denmark A/S.
      
In the income tax notice of April 2003, the Finanzamt, after balancing the profit and loss made from the sale of those
         shares, took into account a sale profit of DEM 287, in accordance with the new version of Paragraph of the EStG.
         The subsequent administrative appeal brought by Mr and Mrs Grønfeldt against that assessment was unsuccessful. 
      
Mr and Mrs Grønfeldt thus challenged that assessment before the national court. 
      
In their view, taxing the profits made from the sale of the shares held in a foreign limited company when the share of the
         capital of that company amounts to at least 1%, and taxing those made from the sale of shares held in a German limited company
         when the share of the company capital amounts to 10%, constitutes a difference in treatment which infringes, inter alia, the
         principle of the free movement of capital under Article EC. 
      
The national court endorses the doubts raised by the Bundesfinanzhof (Federal Finance Court) (Germany) in order VIII B 107/of February on the compatibility of Paragraph of the new version of the EStG with the principle of the free movement
         of capital.
      
Taking the view that the resolution of the dispute before it requires an interpretation of Community law, the Finanzgericht
         (Finance Court) Hamburg (Germany) decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following question to the Court for a preliminary
         ruling:
      
‘Is it compatible with Article [EC], on the free movement of capital, that the profits from a sale of shares in a foreign
         limited company in were subject to tax if the seller held, either directly or indirectly, a share of at least 1% of the
         company’s capital within the previous five years, whereas the profits from the sale of shares in a (national) limited company
         subject to unlimited corporation tax in were, in otherwise comparable circumstances, subject to tax only in the case
         of a substantial shareholding of at least 10%?’
      
 The question referred
As is apparent from the order for reference, in 2001, the profits from sales of shares in foreign limited companies were taxable
         as soon as the shareholding in the company capital amounted to 1%. For that same year, on the contrary, and in identical circumstances
         furthermore, the profits from sales of shares in limited companies governed by national law were taxable only when that shareholding
         amounted to 10%. 
      
Such a difference in treatment on the basis of the place of investment of the capital has the effect of discouraging a shareholder
         from investing his capital in a company established in another State and also has a restrictive effect on companies established
         in other States in that it constitutes an obstacle to their raising capital in Germany (see, to that effect, Case C‑446/Test Claimants in the FII Group Litigation [2006] ECR I‑11753, paragraph 166).
      
It is insignificant, in that regard, that the difference in treatment existed only for a limited period of time. That fact
         alone does not preclude the difference in treatment from having significant effects – as indeed shown in the facts in the
         main proceedings – or, therefore, from giving rise to a genuine obstacle to the free movement of capital. 
      
In order for such a difference in treatment to be compatible with the provisions of the EC Treaty on the free movement of
         capital, it must concern situations which are not objectively comparable or be justified by an overriding reason of public
         interest (Test Claimants in the FII Group Litigation, paragraph 167).
      
According to the Finanzamt and the German Government, the difference in treatment at issue in the main proceedings is part
         of a provisional system, for the setting‑up of which a Member State should be granted a certain amount of leeway, seeking,
         in the long term, to bring the German corporate tax system into line with Community law and to remove any possible discrimination.
         More specifically, so that an identical tax burden is applicable to investments made in Germany and those made abroad, in
         the German corporate tax system the full deduction procedure was replaced by the 50% income‑reduction procedure. 
      
As regards the full deduction procedure, according to the German Government, a limited company was taxed, as a rule, at a
         rate of 40%. The profits which it distributed to its shareholders were taxed at a rate of only 30%. The shareholder had to
         pay income tax again on the profits distributed on the basis of his personal tax rate. He was, however, able to deduct from
         his personal tax debt the total amount of the corporation tax already paid in Germany by the limited company. Double taxation
         was thereby avoided. 
      
By contrast, as regards the 50% income‑reduction procedure, according to the German Government, limited companies are now
         taxed on their profits for financial years beginning after December only at the uniform rate of 25%, regardless of
         whether they distribute the profits made or not to their shareholders. A shareholder who receives a dividend can no longer
         deduct corporation tax. However, he henceforth has to declare only half of the dividends as capital income, the other half
         being tax exempt. That system applies in parallel to the taxation of dividends and profits from share sales. 
      
The German Government also contends that, in the context of the 50% income‑reduction procedure, the full taxation of the profits
         of a limited company is possible, contrary to the case of the full deduction procedure, in which the full taxation takes place
         already at the company level, only by combining the taxation of profits at the company level and the taxation of half of the
         dividends at the shareholder level. 
      
That combination, which ensures, in the view of the German Government, complete taxation, would be disrupted if the percentage
         of the shareholding of the company capital, which gives rise to tax liability in the case of share sales, were to remain fixed
         at 10%, without amendment. In that case, a shareholder with a shareholding of at least 10% could actually sell it free of
         tax, in a case where the company has been retaining non‑distributed profits for several years. 
      
The Finanzamt and the German Government point out, in addition, that it is, in principle, as from that the new system
         linked to the 50% income‑reduction procedure came into force for companies which distribute profits. However, at the shareholder
         level, the full deduction procedure was still applicable in if the dividend income arose from ordinary profit distributions
         from a resident company for the year 2000. By contrast, for beneficiaries of foreign dividends, the 50% income‑reduction procedure
         was applied without a transitional phase, as those beneficiaries had not benefited, under the previously applicable law, from
         the full deduction procedure. 
      
In that regard, in relation to the question whether a difference in treatment, such as that at issue in the main proceedings,
         concerns situations which are objectively comparable, it is necessary to compare the situation in which a shareholder with
         shares in a non‑resident company found himself in with that in which a shareholder with shares in a resident company
         found himself in that same year. Thus, contrary to the German Government’s contentions, a comparison between the situation
         in which a shareholder with shares in a non‑resident company found himself prior to and the – allegedly more favourable
         – situation in which he found himself as from that year is not relevant. 
      
Given that the 50% income‑reduction procedure was introduced precisely, in the words of the German Government itself, to remove
         any possible discrimination between investments in resident companies and investments in non‑resident companies, it appears
         quite clear that the shareholders of those two categories of company, in relation to the application of a taxation threshold
         in a situation such as the one in the case in the main proceedings, are in an objectively comparable situation. 
      
It is therefore necessary to examine whether a difference in treatment, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, is
         justified by an overriding reason of public interest. 
      
As regards, first, the argument concerning the need to ensure full taxation, it should be that that argument is similar to
         an argument based on the coherence of the tax system. 
      
As also pointed out by the aforementioned Bundesfinanzhof in its order VIII B 107/04, to which the national court makes reference,
         a difference in treatment, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, does not appear to be justified by the need to ensure
         the coherence of the tax system, since no direct link has been established, for a shareholder, such as Mr Grønfeldt, between
         the tax advantage concerned and the offsetting of that advantage by a particular tax levy (see, to that effect, Case C‑319/Manninen [2004] ECR I‑7477, paragraph 42, and Case C‑292/Meilicke and Others [2007] ECR I‑1835, paragraph 26).
      
In addition, it is true that the argument concerning full taxation makes it possible to understand the reason why the new
         system linked to the 50% income‑reduction procedure was not introduced until for shareholders with shares in a resident
         company. Since that type of company was still subject in to tax on profits under the old procedure of full deduction,
         ‘full taxation’, as envisaged by the German Government, therefore did take place in relation to dividends paid in 2001. However,
         that same argument cannot be considered to be relevant to explain the way in which a shareholder with shares in a non‑resident
         company was taxed in 2001. In such a case, the ‘full taxation’, as envisaged by the German Government, cannot be achieved
         in any case since the profits of the non-resident company are taxed in another Member State. 
      
That interpretation is not affected by the fact, referred to by the German Government, that the shareholder concerned could
         sell his shareholding after the company had retained the non‑distributed profits for several years. Whether the profits are
         retained or not, it is impossible, in the case of a shareholder, such as Mr Grønfeldt, to end up with ‘full taxation’, as
         envisaged by the German Government. 
      
It is thus not apparent from the documents before the Court that the decision in to adopt the criteria of a shareholding
         of 1% of the capital of a non‑resident company rather than 10% of that same shareholding, for setting the threshold for taxation
         of profits made by a shareholder, was necessary to ensure that ‘full taxation’. 
      
It follows from the foregoing that a difference in treatment, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, cannot be regarded
         as being justified by the need to ensure the coherence of the tax system. 
      
As regards, second, the argument that a Member State seeking, in the long term, to bring the national corporate tax system
         into line with Community law and to remove any possible discrimination should be granted a certain margin of discretion for
         the setting‑up of a provisional system, it should be pointed out that that margin of discretion must always be limited by
         the respect of the fundamental freedoms including, in relation to the case in the main proceedings in particular, the free
         movement of capital.
      
Even if a provisional system, such the one at issue in the main proceedings, may, in respect of the taxation of profits from
         the sale of shares in resident companies, be understood as a legitimate concern to ensure a smooth transition from the old
         to the new system, such a factor does not, by itself, justify a difference in treatment such as that at issue in the main
         proceedings, to the detriment of the taxation of the profits made from sales of shares in non-resident companies. 
      
It is thus apparent from the documents before the Court that a difference in treatment, such as that at issue in the main
         proceedings, does not appear to be justified by an overriding reason of public interest.
      
Consequently, the answer to the question referred must be that Article EC is to be interpreted as precluding the legislation
         of a Member State, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, by which the profits from a sale of shares in in a
         limited company established in another Member State are immediately taxable where the seller had held, either directly or
         indirectly, a share of at least 1% of the company’s capital within the previous five years, whereas the profits from the sale
         of shares in 2001, in the same circumstances, in a limited company established in that first Member State subject to unlimited
         corporation tax were subject to tax only in the case of a substantial shareholding of at least 10%.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
Article EC is to be interpreted as precluding the legislation of a Member State, such as that at issue in the main proceedings,
            by which the profits from a sale of shares in in a limited company established in another Member State are immediately
            taxable where the seller had held, either directly or indirectly, a share of at least 1% of the company’s capital within the
            previous five years, whereas the profits from the sale of shares in 2001, in the same circumstances, in a limited company
            established in that first Member State subject to unlimited corporation tax were subject to tax only in the case of a substantial
            shareholding of at least 10%.  
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 