
Case C-282/État belge – SPF Finances
v
Truck Center SA
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Cour d’appel de Liège)
(Freedom of establishment – Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) and Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC) – Free movement of capital – Articles 73b and 73d of the EC Treaty (now Articles EC and EC respectively) – Taxation of legal persons – Income from capital and movable property – Retention of tax at source – Withholding tax – Charging of withholding tax on interest paid to non-resident companies – No charging of withholding tax on interest paid to resident companies – Double taxation convention – Restriction – None)
Summary of the Judgment
Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Free movement of capital – Tax legislation – Corporation tax
(EC Treaty, Art. (now, after amendment, Art. EC), Art. (now Art. EC), Arts 73b and 73d (now, respectively, Arts
            EC and EC)
Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC), Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC), Articles
         73b and 73d of the EC Treaty (now, respectively, Articles EC and EC) must be interpreted as not precluding tax legislation
         of a Member State which provides for the retention of tax at source on interest paid by a company resident in that Member
         State to a recipient company resident in another Member State, while exempting from that retention interest paid to a recipient
         company resident in the first Member State, the income of which is taxed in that Member State by way of corporation tax. 
      
The difference in treatment between companies receiving income from capital, established by such tax legislation, consisting
         in the application of different taxation arrangements to companies established in the Member State at issue and to those established
         in another Member State, relates to situations which are not objectively comparable. Firstly, when both the company paying
         the interest and the company receiving that interest are resident in the Member State concerned, the position of that State
         is different to that in which it finds itself when a company resident in the Member State concerned pays interest to a non-resident
         company, because, in the first case, the Member State acts in its capacity as the State of residence of the companies concerned,
         while, in the second case, it acts in its capacity as the State in which the interest originates. Secondly, the payment of
         interest by one resident company to another resident company and the payment of interest by a resident company to a non-resident
         company give rise to two distinct charges which rest on separate legal bases. Thus, on the one hand, the interest paid by
         one resident company to another resident company is taxed by the Member State concerned because it remains subject to corporation
         tax in the hands of the latter company and on the same footing as that company’s other income. On the other hand, the retention
         at source of the withholding tax on interest paid by a resident company to a non-resident company is carried out pursuant
         to the competence, by virtue of a double taxation convention, that that Member State and the other Member State have mutually
         reserved for themselves in the allocation of their powers of taxation. Those different procedures for charging tax thus constitute
         a corollary to the fact that resident and non-resident recipient companies are subject to different charges. Finally, those
         different taxation arrangements reflect the difference in the situations in which those companies find themselves with regard
         to recovery of the tax, resident companies being directly subject to the supervision of the tax authorities of the Member
         State in question, which is not the case with regard to non-resident recipient companies inasmuch as, in their case, recovery
         of the tax requires the assistance of the tax authorities of the other Member State.
      
Moreover, the difference in treatment resulting from such tax legislation does not necessarily procure an advantage for resident
         recipient companies because, firstly, those companies are obliged to make advance payments of corporation tax and, secondly,
         the amount of withholding tax deducted from the interest paid to a non-resident company is significantly lower that the corporation
         tax charged on the income of resident companies which receive interest.
      
In those circumstances, that difference in treatment does not constitute a restriction of the freedom of establishment within
         the terms of Article of the Treaty, nor a restriction on the movement of capital within the meaning of Article 73b of the
         Treaty.
      
(see paras 41-52, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
December (*)
      
(Freedom of establishment – Article of the EC Treaty (now, following amendment, Article EC) and Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC)
         – Free movement of capital – Articles 73b and 73d of the EC Treaty (now Articles EC and EC respectively) – Taxation of legal persons – Income from capital and movable property – Retention of tax at source – Withholding tax – Charging of withholding tax on interest paid to non-resident companies – No charging of withholding tax on interest paid to resident companies – Double taxation convention – Restriction – None)
      
In Case C‑282/07,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC by the Cour d’appel de Liège (Belgium), made by decision of June
         2007, received at the Court on June 2007, in the proceedings
      
État belge – SPF Finances
v
Truck Center SA,
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, Presidents of the Chamber, T. von Danwitz, R. Silva de Lapuerta (Rapporteur), G. Arestis and J. Malenovský,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: K. Sztranc-Sławiczek, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on May 2008,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Truck Center SA, by X. Thiebaut and X. Pace, avocats,
–        the Belgian Government, by C. Pochet and J.-C. Halleux, acting as Agents,
–        the French Government, by J.-C. Gracia, acting as Agent,
–        the Netherlands Government, by C.M. Wissels and Y. de Vries, acting as Agents,
–        the Portuguese Government, by L.I. Fernandes and V.B. Guimarães, acting as Agents,
–        the United Kingdom Government, by T. Harris, acting as Agent, assisted by K. Bacon, Barrister,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by J.-P. Keppenne and R. Lyal, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2008,
gives the following
Judgment
The reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles 73b and 73d of the EC Treaty (now Articles
         EC and EC respectively).
      
The reference has been made in the course of proceedings between the Belgian State and Truck Center SA (formerly Truck Restaurant
         Habay; ‘Truck Center’), which is established in Belgium, concerning the taxation of interest due, during to 1996, by
         that company on the repayment of a loan granted by SA Wickler Finances (‘Wickler Finances’), established in Luxembourg.
      
 Legal context
According to the referring court, the provisions of the national legislation applicable to the main proceedings are as follows.
         
      
Article of the Code des impôts sur les revenus (Income Tax Code 1992; ‘the CIR 1992’) provides: 
      
‘The King may, under the conditions and within the limits which he shall specify, refrain, wholly or partly, from charging
         withholding tax on income from capital, movable property and miscellaneous income, provided that it is income of parties whose
         identity can be established … . ’
      
Article of the CIR reads as follows:
      
‘Allocation or payment of income, in cash or in kind, shall result in the withholding tax becoming due. The placing of income
         in an account opened in favour of the beneficiary shall in particular be considered to be an allocation, even if that account
         cannot be drawn on, provided that that situation results from an express or tacit agreement with the beneficiary. …’
      
Articles to of the Royal Decree of August implementing the Income Tax Code (‘the Royal Decree’) deal
         with the complete or partial waiver of the charging of withholding tax (tax deducted at source on income from movable property).
      
Article 105(3)(b) of the Royal Decree provides that, for the application of those articles, the term ‘professional investors’
         means resident companies.
      
Under Article 107(2)(9)(c) of the Royal Decree, the charging of withholding tax is to be waived completely on income from
         debt-claims and loans, the beneficiaries of which are identified as professional investors.
      
The Convention between Belgium and Luxembourg for the prevention of double taxation and for the settlement of other matters
         in the field of taxation of income and capital, and the final protocol relating thereto, signed in Luxembourg on September
         (‘the Belgium-Luxembourg Convention’), lay down the rules governing the allocation of powers of taxation as between the
         Kingdom of Belgium and the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg.
      
Article of that Convention provides:
      
‘Article Interest
(1)      Interest originating in one Contracting State and allocated to a resident of the other Contracting State shall be taxable
         in that other State.
      
(2)      However, that interest may be taxed in the Contracting State in which it originates and in accordance with the legislation
         of that State, but the tax so payable may not exceed 15% of that interest. 
      
(3)      By derogation from paragraph (2), interest may not be taxed in the Contracting State in which it originates where it is allocated
         to an undertaking from the other Contracting State. 
      
The previous paragraph shall not apply in the case of:
1. interest from bonds and other loan stock, with the exception of negotiable instruments representing commercial debts;
2. interest allocated by a company resident in one Contracting State to a company resident in the other Contracting State
         which holds, directly or indirectly, at least 25% of the shares or shares carrying voting rights in the first company.’
      
Article of the Convention states:
      
‘(1)      So far as concerns Luxembourg residents, double taxation shall be avoided in the following manner:
…
tax charged in Belgium in accordance with this Convention:
…
(b)      on interest subject to the rules laid down in Article 11(2) shall be set off against the tax on that same income which is
         charged in Luxembourg. The amount thus set off may not, however, exceed either the fraction of the tax which corresponds proportionately
         to that income received from Belgium or an amount corresponding to the tax which is deducted at source in Luxembourg on equivalent
         income allocated to Belgian residents. That tax charged in Belgium can be set off against income taxable in Luxembourg to
         the extent only that it exceeds the tax which is deducted at source in Luxembourg on equivalent income allocated to Belgian
         residents.
      
…’
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling 
On February 1992, Wickler Finances, which held 48% of the share capital of Truck Center, granted to the latter company
         a loan in the amount of BEF 000.
      
For the years to 1996, the interest on that loan was entered in the accounts but not paid, and no withholding tax was
         retained.
      
On December 1997, notification was sent to Truck Center of automatic assessment to withholding tax at the rates of 13.39%
         for and and 15% for 1996.
      
On December 1998, Truck Center lodged a complaint before the competent regional director for taxes against that automatic
         assessment.
      
By decision of December 2004, the regional director maintained the principle of applying withholding tax to the interest.
      
On March 2005, Truck Center brought proceedings before the Tribunal de première instance d’Arlon (Court of First Instance,
         Arlon).
      
By decision of May 2006, the Tribunal de première instance d’Arlon ruled in favour of Truck Center, on the ground that
         the Belgian legislation was contrary to Article EC in so far as it limited the benefit of the waiver in respect of withholding
         tax exclusively to companies resident in the Kingdom of Belgium.
      
On July 2006, the Belgian State appealed against that decision to the Cour d’appel de Liège (Court of Appeal, Liège).
      
It was in those circumstances that the Cour d’appel de Liège decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following question
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Do Articles 105(3)(b) and 107(2)(9) of the Royal Decree implementing the CIR adopted pursuant to Article of the
         CIR 1992, read in conjunction with Article of the Belgium-Luxembourg Double Taxation Convention … , infringe Article … of the Treaty … , in that, by limiting the waiver in respect of withholding tax provided for in Article 107(2)(9) exclusively
         to interest allocated to resident companies, they have, in particular, first, the effect of discouraging resident companies
         from borrowing capital from companies established in another Member State and, second, they constitute for companies established
         in another Member State an obstacle to investing capital, by way of loans, in companies having their seat in Belgium?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
By its question, the referring court asks, in essence, whether Articles 73b and 73d of the Treaty preclude legislation of
         a Member State which provides for the retention of tax at source on interest paid by a company resident in that Member State
         to a recipient company resident in another Member State, while exempting from that retention interest paid to a recipient
         company resident in the first Member State.
      
It should be noted at the outset that, in the absence of any unifying or harmonising measures at Community level, in particular
         under the second indent of Article EC, the Member States retain the power to define, by treaty or unilaterally, the criteria
         for allocating their powers of taxation, particularly with a view to eliminating double taxation (see Case C‑336/Gilly [1998] ECR I‑2793, paragraphs and 30; Case C‑307/Saint-Gobain [1999] ECR I‑6161, paragraph 57; Case C‑376/D. [2005] ECR I‑5821, paragraph 52; Case C‑265/Bouanich [2006] ECR I‑923, paragraph 49; Case C‑470/N [2006] ECR I‑7409, paragraph 44; Case C‑374/Test Claimants in Class IV of the ACT Group Litigation [2006] ECR I‑11673, paragraph 52; and Case C‑170/Denkavit Internationaal and Denkavit France [2006] ECR I‑11949, paragraph 43).
      
However, the fact remains that, as far as the exercise of the power of taxation so allocated is concerned, the Member States
         may not disregard Community rules (see Saint-Gobain, paragraph 58, and Denkavit Internationaal and Denkavit France, paragraph 44). In particular, such an allocation of fiscal jurisdiction does not permit Member States to introduce discriminatory
         measures which are contrary to the Community rules (Bouanich, paragraph 50, and Denkavit Internationaal and Denkavit France, paragraph 44).
      
In those circumstances, it is necessary to establish whether legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings falls
         within the scope of Article 73b of the Treaty concerning the free movement of capital or within the scope of Article of
         the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) and Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC) concerning the freedom
         of establishment.
      
It should be noted in this regard that, in accordance with settled case-law, national provisions which apply to holdings by
         nationals of the Member State concerned in the capital of a company established in another Member State, giving them definite
         influence on the company’s decisions and allowing them to determine its activities, come within the scope of the provisions
         of the Treaty on freedom of establishment (Case C‑196/Cadbury Schweppes and Cadbury Schweppes Overseas [2006] ECR I‑7995, paragraph 31; Case C‑524/Test Claimants in the Thin Cap Group Litigation [2007] ECR I‑2107, paragraph 27; and Case C‑298/Columbus Container Services [2007] ECR I‑10451, paragraph 29).
      
In the present case, the application of point of the second subparagraph of Article 11(3) of the Belgium-Luxembourg Convention
         depends on the size of the shareholding which the company receiving the interest holds in the capital of the company paying
         that interest.
      
Under that provision, interest allocated by a company resident in one Contracting State to a company resident in the other
         Contracting State which holds, directly or indirectly, at least 25% of the shares or shares carrying voting rights in the
         first company may be taxed in the Contracting State in which it originates.
      
In addition, according to the order for reference, Wickler Finances held 48% of the capital of Truck Center.
      
In principle, a holding of that magnitude is of such a nature as to confer on Wickler Finances definite influence over the
         decisions and activities of Truck Center.
      
As a consequence, that legislation must be examined in the light of Articles and of the Treaty.
      
Freedom of establishment, which Article of the Treaty grants to Community nationals and which includes the right to take
         up and pursue activities as self-employed persons and to set up and manage undertakings, under the conditions laid down for
         its own nationals by the law of the Member State where such establishment is effected, entails, in accordance with Article
         of the Treaty, for companies or firms formed in accordance with the law of a Member State and having their registered office,
         central administration or principal place of business within the European Community, the right to exercise their activity
         in the Member State concerned through a subsidiary, branch or agency (see Case C‑264/ICI [1998] ECR I‑4695, paragraph 20; Saint-Gobain, paragraph 35; Cadbury Schweppes and Cadbury Schweppes Overseas, paragraph 41; Test Claimants in Class IV of the ACT Group Litigation, paragraph 42; and Denkavit Internationaal and Denkavit France, paragraph 20).
      
In the case of companies, it should be borne in mind that their registered office for the purposes of Article of the Treaty
         serves, in the same way as nationality in the case of individuals, as the connecting factor with the legal system of a Member
         State. Acceptance of the proposition that the Member State of residence may freely apply different treatment merely by reason
         of the fact that the registered office of a company is situated in another Member State would deprive Article of the Treaty
         of all meaning. Freedom of establishment thus aims to guarantee the benefit of national treatment in the host Member State,
         by prohibiting any discrimination based on the place in which companies have their seat (see Test Claimants in Class IV of the ACT Group Litigation, paragraph 43; Denkavit Internationaal and Denkavit France, paragraph 22; and Case C‑284/Burda [2008] ECR I-0000, paragraph 77).
      
Furthermore, it is settled case-law that all measures which prohibit, impede or render less attractive the exercise of freedom
         of establishment must be regarded as constituting such restrictions (see Case C‑55/Gebhard [1995] ECR I‑4165, paragraph 37; Case C‑442/CaixaBank France [2004] ECR I‑8961, paragraph 11; and Columbus Container Services, paragraph 34).
      
In the present case, the effect of the legislation at issue in the main proceedings is that the procedure for the charging
         of the tax varies depending on the place where the company receiving the interest has its registered office.
      
Under that legislation, withholding tax is charged on interest paid to a non-resident recipient company, whereas it is not
         charged on interest paid to a resident recipient company, which is taxed, where appropriate, by means of the corporation tax
         to which the latter company is subject.
      
In order to determine whether a difference in tax treatment is discriminatory, it is, however, necessary to consider whether,
         having regard to the national measure at issue, the companies concerned are in an objectively comparable situation (Test Claimants in Class IV of the ACT Group Litigation, paragraph 46).
      
According to well-established case-law, discrimination is defined as treating differently situations which are identical,
         or as treating in the same way situations which are different (see Case C‑279/Schumacker [1995] ECR I‑225, paragraph 30; Case C‑80/Wielockx [1995] ECR I‑2493, paragraph 17; and Test Claimants in Class IV of the ACT Group Litigation, paragraph 46).
      
In relation to direct taxes, the situations of residents and non‑residents are, as a rule, not comparable (Schumacker, paragraph 31, and Wielockx, paragraph 18).
      
A difference in the treatment of resident and non-resident taxpayers cannot therefore in itself be categorised as discrimination
         within the meaning of the Treaty (Wielockx, paragraph 19, and Denkavit Internationaal and Denkavit France, paragraph 24).
      
It is for that reason necessary to examine whether that is the position in the case in the main proceedings.
      
In that regard, the difference in treatment between companies receiving income from capital, established by the tax legislation
         at issue in the main proceedings, consisting in the application of different taxation arrangements to companies established
         in Belgium and to those established in another Member State, relates to situations which are not objectively comparable.
      
Firstly, when both the company paying the interest and the company receiving that interest are resident in Belgium, the position
         of the Belgian State is different to that in which it finds itself when a company resident in Belgium pays interest to a non-resident
         company, because, in the first case, the Belgian State acts in its capacity as the State of residence of the companies concerned,
         while, in the second case, it acts in its capacity as the State in which the interest originates.
      
Secondly, the payment of interest by one resident company to another resident company and the payment of interest by a resident
         company to a non-resident company give rise to two distinct charges which rest on separate legal bases.
      
Thus, on the one hand, while it is true that withholding tax is not charged on interest paid by one resident company to another
         resident company, the fact none the less remains that, in accordance with the provisions of the CIR 1992, that interest is
         taxed by the Belgian State because it remains subject to corporation tax in the hands of the latter company and on the same
         footing as that company’s other income.
      
On the other hand, the Belgian State retains at source withholding tax on interest paid by a resident company to a non-resident
         company pursuant to the discretionary power which, by virtue of the Belgium-Luxembourg Convention, the Belgian State and the
         Grand Duchy of Luxembourg have mutually reserved for themselves in the allocation of their powers of taxation.
      
Those different procedures for charging tax thus constitute a corollary to the fact that resident and non-resident recipient
         companies are subject to different charges.
      
Finally, those different taxation arrangements reflect the difference in the situations in which those companies find themselves
         with regard to recovery of the tax.
      
While resident recipient companies are directly subject to the supervision of the Belgian tax authorities, which can ensure
         compulsory recovery of taxes, that is not the case with regard to non-resident recipient companies inasmuch as, in their case,
         recovery of the tax requires the assistance of the tax authorities of the other Member State.
      
Moreover, in addition to the fact that it relates to situations which are not objectively comparable, the difference in treatment
         resulting from the tax legislation at issue in the main proceedings does not necessarily procure an advantage for resident
         recipient companies because, firstly, as was pointed out by the Belgian Government at the hearing, those companies are obliged
         to make advance payments of corporation tax and, secondly, the amount of withholding tax deducted from the interest paid to
         a non-resident company is significantly lower than the corporation tax charged on the income of resident companies which receive
         interest.
      
In those circumstances, that difference in treatment does not constitute a restriction of the freedom of establishment within
         the terms of Article of the Treaty.
      
As to whether there is a restriction of the movement of capital within the terms of Article 73b of the Treaty, suffice it
         to hold that the conclusion arrived at in the preceding paragraph of this judgment applies in equal measure to the Treaty
         provisions relating to the free movement of capital (Case C‑446/Test Claimants in the FII Group Litigation [2006] ECR I‑11753, paragraph 60, and Columbus Container Services, paragraph 56).
      
Consequently, in the light of all the foregoing, the answer to the question referred is that Articles 52, 58, 73b and 73d
         of the Treaty must be interpreted as not precluding tax legislation of a Member State, such as that at issue in the main proceedings,
         which provides for the retention of tax at source on interest paid by a company resident in that Member State to a recipient
         company resident in another Member State, while exempting from that retention interest paid to a recipient company resident
         in the first Member State, the income of which is taxed in that Member State by way of corporation tax.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby rules:
Articles of the EC Treaty (now, following amendment, Article EC), of the EC Treaty (now Article EC), 73b of the
            EC Treaty and 73d of the EC Treaty (now Articles EC and EC respectively) must be interpreted as not precluding tax legislation
            of a Member State, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which provides for the retention of tax at source on interest
            paid by a company resident in that Member State to a recipient company resident in another Member State, while exempting from
            that retention interest paid to a recipient company resident in the first Member State, the income of which is taxed in that
            Member State by way of corporation tax.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 