
ORDER OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)
April (*)
      
[Text rectified by order of May 2016]
(Appeal — Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice — Community trade mark — Three-dimensional trade mark in the shape of a toy figure with protrusion — Invalidity proceedings — Rejection)
In Case C‑452/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, brought on August 2015,
Best-Lock (Europe) Ltd, established in Colne (United Kingdom), represented by J. Becker, Rechtsanwalt,
      
appellant,
the other parties to the proceedings being:
European Union Intellectual Property Office (EUIPO),
defendant at first instance,
Lego Juris A/S, established in Billund (Denmark), 
      
intervener at first instance,
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
composed of A. Arabadjiev, President of the Chamber, S. Rodin (Rapporteur) and E. Regan, Judges,
Advocate General: M. Wathelet,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to give a decision by reasoned order, in accordance with Article of
         the Rules of Procedure of the Court,
      
makes the following
Order
By its appeal, Best-Lock (Europe) Ltd asks the Court to set aside the judgment of the General Court of the European Union
         of June in Best-Lock (Europe) v OHIM — Lego Juris (Shape of a toy figure with protrusion) (T‑396/14, unpublished, EU:T:2015:379) (‘the judgment under appeal’) by which the General Court dismissed its application
         for the annulment of the decision of the Fourth Board of Appeal for the Office of Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade
         Marks and Designs) (OHIM) of March (Case R 1696/2013-4), relating to invalidity proceedings between Best-Lock and
         Lego Juris A/S (‘the decision at issue’). 
      
 Legal framework
Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 207/of February on the Community trade mark (OJ L 78, p. 1), which
         is entitled ‘Absolute grounds for refusal’, provides in paragraph 1(e)(i): 
      
‘The following shall not be registered: 
...
(e)      signs which consist exclusively of: 
(i)      the shape which results from the nature of the goods themselves’.
 Background to the dispute
[As rectified by order of May 2016] The background to the dispute was set out in paragraphs to of the judgment under
         appeal as follows: 
      
‘On April 2000, [Lego Juris] obtained registration of a Community trade mark with EUIPO, pursuant to Council Regulation
         (EC) No 40/of December on the Community trade mark (OJ L 11, p. 1), as amended [replaced by Regulation No 207/2009].
      
The mark in respect of which registration was obtained under No is the three-dimensional trade mark reproduced below:
The goods in respect of which registration was obtained are, inter alia, in Class of the Nice Agreement concerning the
         International Classification of Goods and Services for the Purposes of the Registration of Marks of June 1957, as revised
         and amended, and correspond to the following description: “Games and playthings; decorations for Christmas trees”. 
      
On October 2011, [Best-Lock] filed an application seeking a declaration of invalidity of the contested trade mark in respect
         of the goods referred to in paragraph above on the basis of Article 52(1)(a) of Regulation No 207/2009, read in conjunction
         with Article 7(1)(e)(i) and (ii) of that regulation. 
      
On June 2013, the Cancellation Division rejected the application for a declaration of invalidity. 
On August 2013, [Best-Lock] filed a notice of appeal with OHIM, pursuant to Articles to of Regulation No 207/2009,
         against the Cancellation Division’s decision. 
      
By [the decision at issue], the Fourth Board of Appeal of OHIM dismissed that appeal. …’
 Proceedings before the General Court and the judgment under appeal
By application lodged at the General Court Registry on May 2014, Best-Lock brought an action for annulment of the contested
         decision and for a declaration of invalidity of the contested mark. 
      
In support of its action, Best-Lock raised, in essence, a single plea in law, alleging infringement of Article 52(1)(a) of
         Regulation No 207/2009, read in conjunction with Article 7(1)(e)(i) and (ii) of that regulation.
      
By the judgment under appeal, the General Court rejected that single plea and, therefore, dismissed the action. 
      
 Form of order sought by the appellant
By its appeal, Best-Lock claims that the Court should: 
      
–        set aside the judgment under appeal; 
–        declare the Community mark registered under No invalid in so far as it is within Class of the Nice Agreement. 
 The appeal
Pursuant to Article of the Court’s Rules of Procedure, where an appeal is, in whole or in part, manifestly inadmissible
         or manifestly unfounded, the Court may at any time, acting on a proposal from the Judge-Rapporteur and after hearing the Advocate
         General, decide by reasoned order to dismiss that appeal in whole or in part. 
      
It is appropriate to apply that provision to the present case. 
      
In support of its appeal, Best-Lock relies, essentially, on two grounds of appeal. 
      
 First ground of appeal
By its first ground of appeal, Best-Lock complains, in essence, that the General Court wrongly rejected as inadmissible its
         complaint relating to the ground for invalidity referred to in Article 7(1)(e)(i) of Regulation No 207/2009. 
      
In that respect, it submits that the General Court, in so far as it declared the appellant’s action inadmissible on the ground
         that it had not put forward any arguments in support of its complaint without having notified the appellant that further development
         of its arguments was necessary, infringed the appellant’s right to be heard. In any event, the appellant lodged, at the time
         of submitting the action at first instance, annexes including the written pleadings before the Cancellation Division and the
         Board of Appeal of OHIM. The General Court should have taken those annexes into account, from which it was apparent, inter
         alia, that when the contested mark was registered, the appellant was already using a mini-figure in the shape at issue and
         was selling it, which resulted in a registration that was not in good faith. 
      
It must be held that the General Court was fully entitled not to have taken into account the arguments set out in the annexes
         and the statements in the previous proceedings. 
      
It is settled case-law that it is not for the General Court to seek and identify in the annexes and statements the pleas on
         which it may consider the action to be based (see judgments of June in Dansk Rørindustri and Others v Commission, C‑189/P, C‑202/P, C‑205/P to C‑208/P and C‑213/P, EU:C:2005:408, paragraphs and 100, and of September
         in MasterCard and Others v Commission, C‑382/P, EU:C:2014:2201, paragraph 41). A general reference to other documents, even those annexed to the application,
         cannot make up for the absence of the essential arguments in law which, in accordance with the abovementioned provisions,
         must appear in the application (see, to that effect, judgments of June in Dansk Rørindustri and Others v Commission, C‑189/P, C‑202/P, C‑205/P to C‑208/P and C‑213/P, EU:C:2005:408, paragraphs to 100; of June in
         Versalis v Commission, C‑511/P, EU:C:2013:386, paragraph 115; and of September in MasterCard and Others v Commission, C‑382/P, EU:C:2014:2201, paragraph 40). 
      
Furthermore, no provision of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union or of the Rules of Procedure of the
         General Court required the latter to invite the appellant to supplement its application so that it complies with the requirements
         set out in Article 44(1)(c) of the Rules of Procedure of the General Court. 
      
It follows that the first plea in law must be rejected as being manifestly unfounded. 
      
 Second ground of appeal
By its second ground of appeal, Best-Lock complains that the General Court wrongly denied that all the essential characteristics
         of the shape of the contested mark performed a technical function. The General Court, inter alia, wrongly assumed that the
         trade mark is a figure in human form and that these are the essential characteristics of the trade mark. Each of the figure’s
         shapes fulfils a technical assembly function. The General Court wrongly considered that it was irrelevant whether the particular
         parts of the contested mark’s shape and the characteristics of the model fulfil a technical function. Since all those parts
         fulfil a technical function, it cannot be maintained that the figure as a whole does not fulfil any technical function.
      
In that regard, it should be noted, first of all, that the General Court held, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal,
         that ‘in the present case, having regard to the graphical representation of the contested trade mark and the fact that it
         is in the shape of a figure having a human appearance, it must be held that the head, body, arms and legs which are necessary
         in order for the figure to have that appearance constitute the essential characteristics of the contested trade mark’. 
      
Next, in paragraph of that judgment, the General Court held that ‘none of the evidence permits a finding that those particular
         elements of the shape in question serve any technical function’. 
      
Lastly, in paragraph of that judgment, the General Court was again careful to state in respect of the holes under the feet
         and inside the backs of the legs and the hands of the figure at issue that ‘[their] graphical representation … do[es] not,
         per se and a priori, enable it to be known whether those elements have any technical function and, if so, what that function
         is’. The General Court then held, in the same paragraph, that ‘assuming that … the shape of those elements may have a technical
         function, that of enabling them to be joined to other elements, in particular interlocking building blocks, those elements
         cannot be held, either in view of the overall impression conveyed by the contested trade mark or as a result of the analysis
         of its constituent elements, to be the most important elements of that mark. They do not constitute an essential characteristic
         of the shape in question for the purposes of case-law. Furthermore, there is nothing to show that the essential functional
         characteristics of the shapes of those elements are attributable to the claimed technical result’. 
      
It follows that, in so far as by its second ground of appeal the appellant complains that the General Court considered it
         to be irrelevant whether the individual parts of the shape of the contested mark and the characteristics of the model of that
         mark served a technical function, that ground is based on a misreading of the judgment under appeal. 
      
Furthermore, in so far as the appellant, by the arguments put forward under the second ground of appeal, seeks to dispute
         the General Court’s assessment that the contested mark did not consist exclusively of the product shape necessary to obtain
         a technical result, that amounts in reality to challenging a factual assessment made by the General Court, which is outside
         the jurisdiction of the Court of Justice in an appeal. 
      
Therefore, the second ground of appeal must be rejected as being in part clearly inadmissible and in part clearly unfounded.
         
      
In the light of the foregoing, the present appeal must be dismissed in its entirety as being in part manifestly inadmissible
         and in part manifestly unfounded.
      
 Costs
Under Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, applicable to the procedure on appeal pursuant to Article 184(1)
         of those rules, a decision as to costs is to be given in the order which closes the proceedings. 
      
As the present order has been adopted prior to notification of the appeal to the other parties to the proceedings and, therefore,
         before the latter could have incurred costs, Best-Lock should be ordered to bear its own costs. 
      
On those grounds, the Court (Sixth Chamber) hereby orders:
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
2.      Best-Lock (Europe) Ltd shall pay its own costs. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 