
ORDER OF THE COURT (Tenth Chamber)
July 2016(*)
      
(Appeal — Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice — Community word mark — Word mark KENZO ESTATE — Earlier Community word mark KENZO — Relative ground for refusal — Reputation — Regulation (EC) No 207/— Article 8(5) — Partial rejection of the opposition)
In Case C‑87/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, brought on February 2016,
Kenzo Tsujimoto, residing in Osaka (Japan), represented by A. Wenninger-Lenz, M. Ring and W. von der Osten-Sacken, Rechtsanwälte,
      
appellant,
the other parties to the proceedings being:
Kenzo, established in Paris (France),
      
applicant at first instance,
European Union Intellectual Property Office (EUIPO),
defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Tenth Chamber),
composed of F. Biltgen, President of the Chamber, A. Borg Barthet (Rapporteur) and M. Berger, Judges,
Advocate General: E. Sharpston,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to give a decision by reasoned order, in accordance with Article of
         the Rules of Procedure of the Court,
      
gives the following
Order
By his appeal, Mr Kenzo Tsujimoto asks the Court to set aside the judgment of the General Court of the European Union of December
         in Kenzo v OHIM — Tsujimoto (KENZO ESTATE) (T‑528/13, not published, ‘the judgment under appeal’, EU:T:2015:921), by which the General Court partially annulled the
         decision of the Second Board of Appeal of the European Union Intellectual Property Office (EUIPO) of July (Case R 1363/2012-2),
         relating to opposition proceedings between Kenzo and Mr Tsujimoto.
      
Mr Tsujimoto also asks the Court to give final judgment in the matter.
      
In support of his appeal, Mr Tsujimoto raises a single ground of appeal, alleging infringement of Article 8(5) of Council
         Regulation (EC) No 207/of February on the European Union trade mark (OJ L 78, p. 1).
      
 The appeal
Pursuant to Article of its Rules of Procedure, where the appeal is, in whole or in part, manifestly inadmissible or manifestly
         unfounded, the Court may at any time, acting on a proposal from the Judge-Rapporteur and after hearing the Advocate General,
         decide by reasoned order to dismiss that appeal in whole or in part.
      
On June 2016, the Advocate General took the following position:
      
‘This is an appeal against the judgment of the General Court of December in Kenzo v OHIM — Tsujimoto (KENZO ESTATE), T‑528/13, EU:T:2015:(‘the judgment under appeal’). The General Court there upheld Kenzo’s action for annulment of a
         decision of July of the Second Board of Appeal of the European Union Intellectual Property Office (‘EUIPO’) concerning
         Kenzo’s opposition to Mr Kenzo Tsujimoto’s application for registration of the word sign KENZO ESTATE as a Community trade
         mark with respect to goods and services in Classes 29, 30, 31, 35, and of the Nice Agreement [concerning the International
         Classification of Goods and Services for the Purposes of the Registration of Marks], as revised and amended, in so far as
         that decision rejected the opposition in respect of the registration sought for goods in Classes to 31. That opposition
         was based on the earlier Community word mark KENZO, registered for certain goods in, inter alia, Classes 3, and (‘the
         earlier mark’). In support of its opposition, Kenzo relied on the relative ground in Article 8(5) of Council Regulation (EC)
         No 207/of February on the Community trade mark (OJ L 78, p. 1) (‘Regulation No 207/2009’). On May 2012,
         the Opposition Division rejected the opposition. Whilst the Board of Appeal partly upheld Kenzo’s appeal against that decision,
         it found that goods in Classes to covered by the application for registration are common mass-consumed foodstuffs that
         are bought in any corner shop and thus have only a peripheral relation with the goods covered by the earlier mark. Consequently,
         the Board of Appeal found that Kenzo had failed to justify why the registration applied for would, as regards those goods,
         take unfair advantage of, or be detrimental to, the distinctive character or the reputation of the earlier mark. 
      
2.     Kenzo appealed to the General Court, which annulled that decision of the Second Board of Appeal in so far as it had granted
         Mr Kenzo Tsujimoto’s application for registration in respect of the goods in Classes to 31. The General Court emphasised
         in particular that some of the goods in those classes might be among the goods sold as luxury goods under the earlier mark
         and that there was thus a certain closeness between those goods. The General Court inferred from that closeness and the high
         degree of similarity between the signs at issue that, contrary to what the Board of Appeal found, there was a risk that Mr Kenzo
         Tsujimoto might take advantage of the link which exists between the mark applied for and the earlier mark in order to associate
         his sign with the renown of that earlier mark and take unfair advantage of that mark’s reputation, benefitting from the image
         of luxury and exclusivity which that mark conveys. Furthermore, the General Court held in essence that, given the link between
         the marks at issue, registration of the mark applied for in respect of goods in Classes to 31, which are associated more
         with everyday consumer goods, or even with a bad diet, could damage the image of exclusivity, luxury and high quality associated
         with the earlier mark and therefore be detrimental to the distinctive character and the reputation of that mark.
      
3.     I refer the Court to the judgment under appeal for further details.
4.     In his appeal, Mr Kenzo Tsujimoto (‘the Appellant’) asks the Court to annul the judgment under appeal, to give a final ruling
         on the dispute and to order EUIPO and Kenzo to pay the costs.
      
5.     The Appellant advances a single ground of appeal. He submits in essence that the General Court erred in its application of
         Article 8(5) of Regulation No 207/when it concluded, despite the lack of evidence, that the use of the trade mark applied
         for in connection with goods in Classes to covered by the application for registration would take unfair advantage of,
         and be detrimental to, the distinctive character and the reputation of the earlier mark for cosmetics, perfumery and clothes.
         Contrary to the conclusion reached in the judgment under appeal, all the goods covered by the application for registration
         are daily consumption goods which are very different in nature from the luxury goods covered by the earlier mark. They also
         serve different purposes and are directed at different categories of consumers. The differences between the goods covered
         by the registration applied for and those covered by the earlier mark are therefore such that there is no risk that the relevant
         section of the public will establish a link between the signs in conflict.
      
6.     In my opinion, the single ground of appeal in reality asks the Court to revisit the factual findings and assessment of evidence
         made by the General Court regarding the nature of the goods concerned by the signs in conflict, how the relevant sections
         of the public perceive those goods and the link which the public may make between those signs (see, by analogy, orders of
         May in You-Q v OHIM, C‑294/P, EU:C:2013:300, paragraph and 62, and of September in Arnoldo Mondadori Editore v OHIM, C‑548/P, EU:C:2015:624, paragraphs and 68).
      
7.     However, it follows from Article 256(1) TFEU and the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice
         of the European Union that an appeal to the Court lies on a point of law only. The General Court thus has exclusive jurisdiction
         to find and appraise the relevant facts and to assess the evidence. The appraisal of those facts and the assessment of that
         evidence do not, save where facts or evidence are distorted, constitute a point of law subject, as such, to review by the
         Court of Justice on appeal.
      
8.     The Appellant has not demonstrated or even alleged that the General Court distorted the facts or evidence.
9.     I therefore conclude that the single ground of appeal is manifestly inadmissible and recommend that the Court should dismiss
         the appeal under Article of the Rules of Procedure.
      
10.   Under Article of the Rules of Procedure, which applies to appeals by virtue of Article 184(1) thereof, the order terminating
         a case should also rule on the costs. The present appeal has not been notified to the defendant and the latter has not therefore
         incurred costs in connection with the appeal. The Appellant should bear his own costs.’
      
For the same reasons as those given by the Advocate General, it is necessary to dismiss the appeal as manifestly inadmissible.
      
 Costs
Under Article of the Court’s Rules of Procedure, applicable to the procedure on appeal pursuant to Article 184(1) of those
         rules, a decision as to costs is to be given in the order which closes the proceedings. In the present case, since the present
         order was adopted before the appeal was served on the other parties and therefore before they could have incurred costs, Mr Tsujimoto
         must be ordered to bear his own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Tenth Chamber) hereby orders:
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
2.      Mr Kenzo Tsujimoto is ordered to bear his own costs.
[Signatures]
*Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 