
Case C-210/Ministero dell’Economia e delle Finanze and Agenzia delle Entrate
v
FCE Bank plc
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Corte suprema di cassazione)
(Sixth VAT Directive – Articles and – Fixed establishment – Non-resident company – Legal relationship – Cost-sharing agreement – OECD Convention on double taxation – Meaning of ‘taxable person’ – Supply of services effected for consideration – Administrative practice)
Summary of the Judgment
Tax provisions – Harmonisation of laws – Turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax – Taxable persons 
(Council Directive 77/388, Arts 2(1), and 9(1))
Articles 2(1) and 9(1) of Sixth Directive 77/on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover
         taxes must be interpreted as meaning that a fixed establishment, which is not a legal entity distinct from the company of
         which it forms part, established in another Member State and to which the company supplies services, should not be treated
         as a taxable person by reason of the costs imputed to it in respect of those supplies.
      
(see para. 41, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
March (*)
      
(Sixth VAT Directive – Articles and – Fixed establishment – Non-resident company – Legal relationship – Cost-sharing agreement – OECD Convention on double taxation – Meaning of ‘taxable person’ – Supply of services effected for consideration – Administrative practice)
In Case C-210/04,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, from the Corte Suprema di Cassazione (Italy), made by decision of
         February 2004, received at the Court on May 2004, in the proceedings
      
Ministero dell’Economia e delle Finanze,
Agenzia delle Entrate
v
FCE Bank plc,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, J. Makarczyk, R. Silva de Lapuerta, P. Kūris (Rapporteur) and G. Arestis,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: P. Léger,
Registrar: H. von Holstein, Deputy Registrar,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on June 2005,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        FCE Bank plc, by B. Gangemi, avvocato,
–        the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, assisted by G. De Bellis, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Portuguese Government, by L. Fernandes, Â. Seiça Neves and R. Laires, acting as Agents,
–        the United Kingdom Government, by R. Hill, Barrister, 
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by D. Triantafyllou and M. Velardo, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2005,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles 2(1) and 9(1) of Sixth Council Directive 77/388/EEC
         of May on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes – Common system of value added
         tax: uniform basis of assessment (OJ L 145, p. 1, ‘the Sixth Directive’).
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings between the Ministero dell’Economia e delle Finanze (Ministry of Economic
         Affairs and Finance) and the Rome Agenzia delle Entrate (Revenue Agency) (‘the Agency’), and FCE Bank plc, a bank established
         in the United Kingdom (‘FCE Bank’), concerning the repayment of sums paid in respect of value added tax (‘VAT’) by its subordinate
         entity established in Italy (‘FCE IT’).
      
 Law
 Community law
 The Sixth Directive
Article of the Sixth Directive states:
      
‘The following shall be subject to value added tax:
1. the supply of goods or services effected for consideration within the territory of the country by a taxable person acting
         as such;
      
…’
Article 4(1) of the Sixth Directive provides: 
      
‘“Taxable person” shall mean any person who independently carries out in any place any economic activity specified in paragraph
         2, whatever the purpose or results of that activity.’
      
Article 9(1) of the Sixth Directive states:
      
‘The place where a service is supplied shall be deemed to be the place where the supplier has established his business or
         has a fixed establishment from which the service is supplied or, in the absence of such a place of business or fixed establishment,
         the place where he has his permanent address or usually resides.’
      
 The Eighth Directive 79/1072/EEC
Article of Eighth Council Directive 79/1072/EEC of December on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States
         relating to turnover taxes – Arrangements for the refund of value added tax to taxable persons not established in the territory
         of the country (OJ L 331, p. 11, ‘the Eighth Directive’) provides:
      
‘For the purposes of this Directive, “a taxable person not established in the territory of the country” shall mean a person
         as referred to in Article 4(1) of Directive 77/388/EEC who, during the period referred to in the first and second sentences
         of the first subparagraph of Article 7(1), has had in that country neither the seat of his economic activity, nor a fixed
         establishment from which business transactions are effected, nor, if no such seat or fixed establishment exists, his domicile
         or normal place of residence, and who, during the same period, has supplied no goods or services deemed to have been supplied
         in that country …’
      
 Directive 2000/12/EC
Article of Directive 2000/12/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of March relating to the taking-up
         and pursuit of the business of credit institutions (OJ L 126, p. 1), which concerns the branches of credit institutions
         authorised in another Member State, provides:
      
‘Host Member States may not require authorisation or endowment capital for branches of credit institutions authorised in other
         Member States. …’
      
 OECD Convention
Article 7(2) of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development’s Model Convention with respect to taxes on income
         and on capital (‘the OECD Convention’) provides:
      
‘… [W]here an enterprise of a Contracting State carries on business in the other Contracting State through a permanent establishment
         situated therein, there shall in each Contracting State be attributed to that permanent establishment the profits which it
         might be expected to make if it were a distinct and separate enterprise engaged in the same or similar activities under the
         same or similar conditions and dealing wholly independently with the enterprise of which it is a permanent establishment’.
      
Article 7(3) of that convention provides:
      
‘In determining the profits of a permanent establishment, there shall be allowed as deductions expenses which are incurred
         for the purposes of the permanent establishment, including executive and general administrative expenses so incurred, whether
         in the State in which the permanent establishment is situated or elsewhere.’
      
 National law
Articles 7(2) and (3) of Law No of November ratifying and implementing the convention between the Government of
         the Italian Republic and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland for the avoidance of double taxation and
         the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income, with exchange of notes, signed at Pallanza on October
         (ordinary supplement to the GURI, No of November 1990, p. 107), adopt the corresponding provisions of the OECD
         Convention.
      
Article of the Basic Law on VAT, Presidential Decree No of October (ordinary supplement to the GURI, No of November 1972, p. 2) provides:
      
‘Value added tax shall be imposed on supplies of goods and services effected in the territory of Italy in the exercise of
         an activity, trade or profession and on imports effected by any person.’
      
Article of that decree states:
      
‘The supply of services means supplies for consideration under various contracts, including for the supply of public services,
         transport, agency, shipping, brokerage, deposit, and generally under obligations to do or refrain from doing or permit something
         to be done, whatever the basis thereof.’
      
Article 7(3) of the same law provides that ‘[services] shall be deemed to be supplied in Italy where they are made by persons
         who are domiciled in Italy or who are established there and who have not taken up domicile abroad and also where they are
         made by permanent establishments in Italy of persons domiciled or established abroad’.
      
 The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
FCE IT is a subordinate entity, resident in Italy, of FCE Bank, a company established in the United Kingdom whose objects
         include supplying financial services exempt from VAT.
      
FCE IT received supplies of services from FCE Bank in the form of consultancy, management, staff training, data processing
         and the supply and management of application software. It claimed repayment of the VAT on those supplies for the years to on the basis of invoices which it issued to itself (a process known as ‘self invoicing’).
      
Following an implied refusal of that application by the tax authority, FCE IT brought an action before the Commissione tributaria
         provinciale di Roma (Rome Provincial Tax Court) which upheld its application. The Agency lodged an appeal against that decision
         on the grounds, first, that the application in respect of and was time barred and, second, that the application
         for repayment in respect of and lacked merit.
      
By decision of March/May 2002, the Commissione tributaria regionale di Lazio (Lazio Regional Tax Court) dismissed the
         appeal on the grounds, first, that the limitation period did not apply in respect of a payment made in breach of Community
         law and, second, that transactions, for which no consideration was provided, performed by the parent company for its establishment
         could not constitute a ‘supply of services’ since the objective requirements for VAT liability were not met. The passing on
         of the costs of FCE Bank’s services to FCE IT was an allocation of costs within a company.
      
The Ministero dell’Economia e delle Finanze lodged an appeal in cassation against that decision before the Corte Suprema di
         Cassazione (Supreme Court of Cassation). The ground of appeal is based on the liability to VAT of supplies made by FCE Bank
         plc by virtue of FCE IT’s own independent tax status. Thus, payments made to the parent company must be treated as consideration
         and therefore constitute the taxable amount. 
      
FCE Bank argued conversely that FCE IT has no legal personality and is therefore merely a point of reference for the purposes
         of liability to VAT of the transactions within that company’s objects. Moreover, no VAT is payable in respect of supplies
         between two entities which constitute a single taxable person.
      
It is in those circumstances that the Corte di Cassazione decided to stay the proceedings and refer for a preliminary ruling
         the following questions:
      
‘1.      Must Articles 2(1) and 9(1) of the Sixth Directive be interpreted as meaning that the branch of a company established in another
         State (belonging to the European Union or otherwise), which has the characteristics of a production unit, may be regarded
         as an independent person and thus that a legal relationship between the entities can be said to exist with consequent liability
         for VAT in relation to supplies of services effected by the parent company? Can the “arm’s length” standard laid down in Article
         7(2) and (3) of the OECD Model Convention on double taxation and the Convention of October between Italy and the United
         Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland be used to define that relationship? Can a legal relationship be said to exist
         where there is a cost-sharing agreement concerning the supply of services to the subordinate entity? If so, what conditions
         must be satisfied for such relationship to be considered to exist? Must the notion of legal relationship be dealt with under
         national law or Community law?
      
2.      Can the passing on of the costs of such services to the branch concerned be regarded as consideration for the services supplied
         for the purposes of Article of the Sixth Directive, regardless of the proportion of the costs passed on and the resulting
         profit to the company, and if so to what extent?
      
3.      If the supply of services between the parent company and the branch are regarded in principle as being exempt from VAT because
         the recipient is not independent and consequently a legal relationship between the two entities cannot be said to exist, is
         a national administrative practice which considers that the supply is taxable in such a case contrary to the right of establishment
         laid down in Article EC where the parent company is established in another Member State of the European Union?’
      
 The questions
 The first question
It is established case-law that, in the procedure laid down by Article EC providing for cooperation between national courts
         and the Court of Justice, it is for the latter to provide the referring court with an answer which will be of use to it and
         enable it to determine the case before it (see Case C-334/Krüger [1997] ECR I-4517, paragraph 22, and Case C-88/RoquetteFrères [2000] ECR I-10465, paragraph 18). To that end the Court of Justice may have to reformulate the question referred to it (see
         Krüger, paragraph 23, and Case C-62/Marks & Spencer [2002] ECR I-6325, paragraph 32).
      
It should be noted in this connection that the referring court asks to what extent do supplies of services made by a company
         established in the United Kingdom to its branch in Italy fall within the scope of the Sixth Directive. It follows that it
         is of no use to the referring court to make a ruling on the situation in which the company is established in a non-Member
         State.
      
It should also be noted that it is common ground between the parties that FCE IT, a subordinate entity of FCE Bank, has no
         legal personality of its own and is therefore a branch of FCE Bank.
      
By its first question, the referring court asks essentially whether Articles 2(1) and 9(1) of the Sixth Directive are to be
         interpreted as meaning that a fixed establishment, which is not a legal entity distinct from the company of which it forms
         part, established in another Member State and to which the company supplies services, must be treated as a taxable person
         by reason of the costs imputed to it in respect of those supplies.
      
 Observations of the parties
FCE Bank, the United Kingdom Government and the Commission of the European Communities submit that services provided within
         the same legal entity are not supplies of services subject to VAT.
      
FCE Bank submits that no legal relationship can exist between itself and FCE IT since they form a single taxable person. There
         cannot therefore be a supply of services for consideration between the two establishments established in two separate Member
         States. FCE Bank is not remunerated for the performance of internal transactions which are carried out in the interests of
         the company for uniform accounting, marketing and other purposes.
      
The Commission submits that supplies of services between a parent company established in a Member State and an entity not
         registered as an independent legal entity and which is a fixed establishment in another Member State should not be considered
         as transactions liable to VAT.
      
The Italian Government submits that even if, as a matter of civil law, the parent company and its branch are part of the same
         legal person and that fact might constitute an obstacle to the enforcement of the obligations which are the subject of the
         taxable transaction, that does not preclude them from being separate taxable persons for the purposes of tax law in general
         and for VAT in particular.
      
Given the terms of Article 2(1) of the Sixth Directive, which states that supplies must be effected for consideration if they
         are to be subject to VAT, services can only be exempt from that tax if they are provided for free. It follows that the conditions
         for a legal relationship capable of giving rise to a taxable supply are those arising from the principles laid down by the
         Sixth Directive.
      
Furthermore, according to Article 9(1) of the Sixth Directive and Article of the Eighth Directive, a fixed establishment
         in the host Member State must be treated as an independent taxable person, which precludes any repayment of VAT to the parent
         company.
      
According to the Portuguese Government, notwithstanding its high level of harmonisation, VAT is a national tax of the Member
         States, which are therefore free to treat establishments in their territory as taxable persons. Furthermore, a fixed establishment
         which satisfies the human and technical requirements to carry out taxable supplies is an economic reality and a sufficiently
         independent entity so as to be the subject, by itself, of relations and rights and obligations in respect of VAT.
      
 Findings of the Court
First, it should be noted that Article 2(1) of the Sixth Directive states that supplies of services effected for consideration
         within the territory of the country by a taxable person acting as such are subject to VAT.
      
Second, Article of the Sixth Directive defines ‘taxable person’ as any person who ‘independently’ carries out an economic
         activity. Article 4(4) thereof states that the word ‘independently’ excludes from the tax persons bound to an employer by
         a contract of employment or by any other legal ties creating the relationship of employer and employee as regards working
         conditions, remuneration and the employer’s liability (see Joined Cases C-78/to C-80/Karageorgou and Others [2003] ECR I-13295, paragraph 35).
      
In that regard, according to the case-law of the Court, a provision of services is taxable only if there exists between the
         service provider and the recipient a legal relationship in which there is a reciprocal performance (see Case C-16/Tolsma [1994] ECR I-743, paragraph 14, and Case C-174/Kennemer Golf [2002] ECR I-3293, paragraph 39).
      
To establish whether such a legal relationship exists between a non-resident company and one of its branches so that the supplies
         made may be subject to VAT, it is necessary to determine whether FCE IT carries out an independent economic activity. It is
         necessary in that regard to determine whether a branch such as FCE IT may be regarded as being an independent bank, in particular
         in that it bears the economic risk arising from its business.
      
As Advocate General Léger noted in point of his Opinion, the branch does not itself bear the economic risks associated
         with carrying on the business of a credit institution, such as, for example, a customer defaulting on the repayment of a loan.
         The bank, as a legal person, bears that risk and is therefore the subject of supervision of its financial strength and solvency
         in the Member State of origin.
      
As a branch, FCE IT does not have any endowment capital. Consequently, the risk associated with the economic activity lies
         wholly with the FCE Bank. Consequently, FCE IT is dependent upon that company and, with it, constitutes a single taxable person.
      
That finding is not undermined by Article 9(1) of the Sixth Directive. That provision concerns the determination of the taxable
         person in transactions between a branch and third parties. It is therefore irrelevant for the purposes of the present case
         which concerns transactions between a company resident in a Member State and one of its branches established in another Member
         State.
      
It should be noted that the OECD Convention is irrelevant since it concerns direct taxation whereas VAT is an indirect tax.
      
Lastly, any agreement on the sharing of costs is also irrelevant for present purposes since such an agreement was not negotiated
         between independent parties.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the first question must be that Articles 2(1) and 9(1) of the Sixth Directive
         are to be interpreted as meaning that a fixed establishment, which is not a legal entity distinct from the company of which
         it forms part, established in another Member State and to which the company supplies services, should not be treated as a
         taxable person by reason of the costs imputed to it in respect of those supplies.
      
 The second question 
By its second question the referring court asks whether Article of the Sixth Directive should be interpreted as meaning
         that the passing on of the costs of services supplied to the subordinate entity by the non-resident company constitutes consideration,
         regardless of the amount of the costs passed on and the pursuit of profit. 
      
According to paragraph of the present judgment, the branch in question is not independent of the company. There is therefore
         no need to reply to the second question.
      
 The third question
By its third question, the referring court asks whether a national administrative practice which subjects to VAT a supply
         of services by a parent company to a subordinate entity, situated in another Member State, is contrary to the principle of
         the freedom of establishment laid down by Article EC.
      
 Observations of the parties
FCE Bank, the United Kingdom Government and the Commission claim that the Italian administrative practice infringes the freedom
         of establishment guaranteed by Article EC.
      
FCE Bank submits that the national practice in question has the effect of consolidating the VAT which becomes non-deductible.
         That represents an additional and final cost which an Italian bank which supplies the same services to its branches established
         in Italy does not bear and which cannot be regarded as a proper measure for ensuring the efficacy of fiscal controls.
      
The United Kingdom Government shares the Commission’s view that the Italian administrative practice infringes the principle
         of non-discrimination inherent in the freedom of establishment where the fiscal regime in respect of VAT is more costly for
         the subsidiary of a foreign bank than for that of a national bank – there being no other objective differences between those
         two types of subsidiary. Moreover, to make supplies between a parent company and a subsidiary, domestic or foreign, subject
         to VAT is a restriction of the freedom of establishment in the form of a branch, which cannot be justified by any ‘general’
         interest within the meaning of the case-law (see, to that effect, Case C-19/Kraus [1993] ECR I-1663, paragraph 32, and Case C-55/Gebhard [1995] ECR I-4165, paragraph 37). 
      
The Italian Government made no submission on that point, considering that a fixed establishment is an independent entity liable
         to VAT.
      
The Portuguese Government submits that it follows from the purpose and the rules establishing the common system of VAT that
         the matter does not depend solely on national administrative practices. There is therefore no need to reply to the third question
         on the freedom of establishment set out in Articles EC to EC.
      
 Findings of the Court
As Advocate General Léger pointed out in point of his Opinion, a finding that a national law or practice is incompatible
         with the Sixth Directive dispenses with the need to consider whether the fundamental freedoms laid down by the Treaty, such
         as the freedom of establishment, have been infringed.
      
It has been held in paragraph of the present judgment that the branch of a non-resident company is not independent and
         therefore there is no legal relationship between them. They must be considered as one and the same taxable person within the
         meaning of Article 4(1) of the Sixth Directive. FCE IT is therefore a part of FCE Bank.
      
It follows from the foregoing that the Italian administrative practice is incompatible with the Sixth Directive and it is
         not necessary to rule on the breach of Article EC.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
Articles 2(1) and 9(1) of Sixth Council Directive 77/388/EEC of May on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member
            States relating to turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax: uniform basis of assessment, must be interpreted as
            meaning that a fixed establishment, which is not a legal entity distinct from the company of which it forms part, established
            in another Member State and to which the company supplies services, should not be treated as a taxable person by reason of
            the costs imputed to it in respect of those supplies.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 