
Case C-214/KHS AG
v
Winfried Schulte
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Landesarbeitsgericht Hamm)
(Organisation of working time – Directive 2003/88/EC – Right to paid annual leave – Lapse of right to paid annual leave not taken because of illness on the expiry of a period laid down by national rules)
Summary of the Judgment
Social policy – Protection of the safety and health of workers – Organisation of working time – Right to paid annual leave
(European Parliament and Council Directive 2003/88, Art. 7(1))
Article 7(1) of Directive 2003/concerning certain aspects of the organisation of working time must be interpreted as not
         precluding national provisions or practices, such as collective agreements, which limit, by a carry-over period of months
         on the expiry of which the right to paid annual leave lapses, the accumulation of entitlement to such leave of a worker who
         is unfit for work for several consecutive reference periods.
      
(see para. 44, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
November *(1)
      
(Organisation of working time – Directive 2003/88/EC – Right to paid annual leave – Lapse of right to paid annual leave not taken because of illness on the expiry of a period laid down by national rules)
In Case C‑214/10,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the Landesarbeitsgericht Hamm (Germany), made by decision of
         April 2010, received at the Court on May 2010, in the proceedings
      
KHS AG
v
Winfried Schulte,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, A. Tizzano, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, K. Lenaerts, J.-C. Bonichot and U. Lõhmus, Presidents
         of Chambers, A. Rosas, E. Levits (Rapporteur), A. Ó Caoimh, L. Bay Larsen and A. Arabadjiev, Judges,
      
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: B. Fülöp, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on May 2011,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        KHS AG, by P. Brasse, Rechtsanwalt,
–        Mr Schulte, by H.-J. Teuber, Rechtsanwalt,
–        the German Government, by T. Henze, C. Blaschke and J. Möller, acting as Agents,
–        the Danish Government, by V. Pasternak Jørgensen and S. Juul Jørgensen, acting as Agents,
–        the European Commission, by F. Erlbacher and M. van Beek, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on July 2011,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article of Directive 2003/88/EC of the European Parliament
         and of the Council of November concerning certain aspects of the organisation of working time (OJ L 299, p. 9).
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between KHS AG and Mr Schulte, a former employee, concerning the latter’s request
         for an allowance in lieu of paid annual leave for the years to that he had not taken because he suffered a heart
         attack.
      
 Legal context
 Convention No of the International Labour Organisation
According to Article 9(1) of Convention No of the International Labour Organisation of June concerning Annual
         Holidays with Pay (revised):
      
‘The uninterrupted part of the annual holiday with pay referred to in Article 8, paragraph 2, of this Convention shall be
         granted and taken no later than one year, and the remainder of the annual holiday with pay no later than eighteen months,
         from the end of the year in respect of which the holiday entitlement has arisen.’
      
The ILO Convention has been signed by Member States of the European Union, of which the Federal Republic of Germany is
         one.
      
 European Union legislation
Recital in the preamble to Directive 2003/reads:
      
‘Account should be taken of the principles of the International Labour Organisation with regard to the organisation of working
         time, including those relating to night work.’
      
Article of Directive 2003/provides: 
      
‘Purpose and scope
1.      This Directive lays down minimum safety and health requirements for the organisation of working time.
2.      This Directive applies to:
(a)      minimum periods of … annual leave ...
...’
Article of that directive reads as follows:
      
‘Annual leave
1.      Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that every worker is entitled to paid annual leave of at least four
         weeks in accordance with the conditions for entitlement to, and granting of, such leave laid down by national legislation
         and/or practice.
      
2.      The minimum period of paid annual leave may not be replaced by an allowance in lieu, except where the employment relationship
         is terminated.’
      
Article of Directive 2003/provides that Member States may derogate from certain provisions of that directive. No derogation
         is allowed with regard to Article of the directive. 
      
 National rules
The Federal Law on leave (Bundesurlaubsgesetz) of January 1963, as amended on May (‘the BUrlG’), provides in Paragraph
         1, headed ‘Leave entitlement’:
      
‘Every worker shall be entitled to paid recuperative leave in each calendar year.’ 
Paragraph of the BUrlG, headed ‘Duration of leave’, provides in subparagraph 1:
      
‘Leave shall amount to at least working days each year.’
Paragraph of the BUrlG, headed ‘Timing, carrying-over and allowances in lieu of leave’, provides in subparagraphs and
         4:
      
‘3.      Leave must be authorised and taken in the course of the current calendar year. The carrying-over of leave to the next calendar
         year shall be permitted only if justified on compelling operational grounds or by compelling reasons relating to the worker
         himself. If leave is carried over it must be authorised and taken during the first three months of the following calendar
         year.
      
4.      If, because of the termination of the employment relationship, leave can no longer be granted in whole or in part, an allowance
         shall be paid in lieu.’
      
Article of the BUrlG provides that collective agreements may derogate from certain provisions of that law, including Paragraph
         7(3) thereof, provided that such derogations are not to the detriment of the workers.
      
The Uniform General Collective Agreement for the Metal and Electrical Industry in North Rhine-Westphalia (Einheitlicher Manteltarifvertrag
         für die Metall- und Elektroindustrie Nordrhein-Westfalen) of December (‘the EMTV’) provides in Paragraph 11, headed
         ‘Principles governing the granting of leave’:
      
‘1.      Employees/apprentices have a right to paid leave in the course of each leave year in accordance with the following provisions.
         The leave year shall be the calendar year. 
      
Leave entitlement shall lapse three months after the end of the calendar year, unless the worker unsuccessfully attempted
         to exercise that right or he could not take leave for operational reasons.
      
If leave could not be taken because of illness, entitlement to leave shall lapse months after the end of the period referred
         to in the second subparagraph above.
      
...
3.      Payment in lieu of unused leave shall be allowed only in the event of termination of the employment/apprenticeship relationship.’
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Mr Schulte was employed from April as a locksmith for KHS AG and the company which it succeeded. The EMTV applied to
         his contract of employment. The entitlement to paid annual leave under the EMTV amounted to days per annum.
      
In January Mr Schulte suffered a heart attack which left him seriously disabled and he was declared unfit for work. From
         October he received a pension on the ground of total invalidity. That continued to be the situation until August 2008,
         the date on which Mr Schulte’s employment relationship ended. 
      
In March Mr Schulte brought an action before the Arbeitsgericht (Labour Court) Dortmund for payment of allowances in
         lieu of paid annual leave not taken during the reference periods corresponding to the calendar years 2006, and 2008.
         
      
The Arbeitsgericht Dortmund upheld the action in respect of those three periods in so far as the payment in lieu sought by
         Mr Schulte related to the minimum paid leave entitlement of working days per annum under European Union law plus the five
         days per annum to which he was entitled under German law because he was severely disabled.
      
In its appeal against the decision taken by that court, KHS AG argued that Mr Schulte’s entitlements to paid annual leave
         for the years and had lapsed, since the carry-over period provided for in the third subparagraph of Paragraph 11(1)
         of the EMTV had expired.
      
The Landesarbeitsgericht (Higher Labour Court) Hamm points out that, under the national legislation and the EMTV, the entitlements
         to paid annual leave for and still existed when the contract of employment ended and only entitlement to paid annual
         leave for was lost on account of the expiry of the carry-over period, which amounted to months in total.
      
The national court does not however exclude the possibility that the loss, under the national rules, of entitlement to paid
         annual leave for is contrary to Article 7(1) of Directive 2003/88.
      
In those circumstances, the Landesarbeitsgericht Hamm decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Is Article 7(1) of Directive 2003/… to be interpreted as precluding national legislation and/or practices under which entitlement
         to minimum paid annual leave lapses at the end of the reference period and/or carry-over period even in the case where the
         worker has been unfit for work over a prolonged period (and that prolonged period of unfitness for work has the result that
         that worker could have accumulated entitlements to minimum leave for several years if the possibility of carrying over such
         entitlements had not been limited in time)? 
      
(2)      If that question is answered in the negative, must the possibility of carrying over leave entitlement exist for a period of
         at least months?’
      
 Consideration of the questions referred
 First question
By its first question, the national court asks, essentially, whether Article 7(1) of Directive 2003/must be interpreted
         as precluding national provisions or practices, such as collective agreements, which limit, by a carry-over period of months
         on the expiry of which entitlement to paid annual leave lapses, the accumulation of entitlements to such leave of a worker
         who is unfit for work for several consecutive reference periods.
      
In that regard, it should be noted first of all that, according to settled case-law, the entitlement of every worker to paid
         annual leave must be regarded as a particularly important principle of European Union social law from which there can be no
         derogations and whose implementation by the competent national authorities must be confined within the limits expressly laid
         down by Council Directive 93/104/EC of November concerning certain aspects of the organisation of working time (OJ
         L 307, p. 18) itself, a directive now codified by Directive 2003/(see Case C‑173/BECTU [2001] ECR I‑4881, paragraph 43; Case C‑342/Merino Gómez [2004] ECR I‑2605, paragraph 29; Joined Cases C‑131/and C‑257/Robinson-Steele and Others [2006] ECR I‑2531, paragraph 48; and Joined Cases C‑350/and C‑520/Schultz-Hoff and Others [2009] ECR I‑179, paragraph 22).
      
Further, the Court has already had the opportunity to examine the implementation and the conditions for application of this
         principle of entitlement to paid annual leave by competent national authorities in the case of workers denied entitlement
         to periods of paid annual leave because they were on sick leave that did not exceed the duration of the reference periods
         applicable under the relevant national law (Schultz-Hoff and Others, paragraph 19). 
      
In the course of that examination the Court observed that a provision of national law setting out a carry-over period for
         annual leave not taken by the end of the reference period aims, as a rule, to give a worker who has been prevented from taking
         his annual leave an additional opportunity to benefit from that leave. The laying down of such a period forms part of the
         conditions for the exercise and implementation of the right to paid annual leave and therefore falls, as a rule, within the
         competence of the Member States (see Schultz-Hoff and Others, paragraph 42). 
      
Thus, the Court held that Article 7(1) of Directive 2003/does not preclude, as a rule, national legislation which lays
         down conditions for the exercise of the right to paid annual leave expressly conferred by the directive, including even the
         loss of that right at the end of a reference period or of a carry-over period. However, the Court attached to that finding
         of principle the condition that a worker who has lost his right to paid annual leave must have actually had the opportunity
         to exercise the right conferred on him by that directive (see Schultz-Hoff and Others, paragraph 43). 
      
It is to be noted that a worker who, like the applicant in the main proceedings in relation to 2006, is on sick leave throughout
         the reference period and beyond the carry-over period laid down by national law, is denied any period giving him the opportunity
         to benefit from his paid annual leave.
      
Although it follows from the abovementioned case-law that a national rule laying down a carry-over period cannot provide that
         a worker’s right to paid annual leave will lapse without him actually having had the opportunity to exercise that right, that
         conclusion must none the less be qualified in specific circumstances such as those in the main proceedings. 
      
Otherwise, a worker, such as the applicant in the main proceedings, who is unfit for work for several consecutive reference
         periods, would be entitled to accumulate, without any limit, all the entitlements to paid annual leave that are acquired during
         his absence from work. 
      
A right to such unlimited accumulation of entitlements to paid annual leave, acquired during such a period of unfitness for
         work, would no longer reflect the actual purpose of the right to paid annual leave.
      
The right to paid annual leave, as laid down in Article 31(2) of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and
         in Article of Directive 2003/88, has the dual purpose of enabling the worker both to rest from carrying out the work he
         is required to do under his contract of employment and to enjoy a period of relaxation and leisure (see Schultz-Hoff and Others, paragraph 25).
      
In this connection, it is true that the Court has stated that, while the positive effect of paid annual leave for the safety
         and health of the worker is deployed fully where that leave is taken in the year prescribed for that purpose, namely the current
         year, the significance of that rest period in that regard remains if it is taken during a later period (Case C‑124/Federatie Nederlandse Vakbeweging [2006] ECR I‑3423, paragraph 30, and Schultz-Hoff and Others, paragraph 30).
      
None the less, it should be pointed out that the right to paid annual leave acquired by a worker who is unfit for work for
         several consecutive reference periods can reflect both the aspects of its purpose, as set out in paragraph above, only
         in so far as the carry-over does not exceed a certain temporal limit. Beyond such a limit annual leave ceases to have its
         positive effect for the worker as a rest period and is merely a period of relaxation and leisure.
      
In consequence, in light of the actual purpose of the right to paid annual leave directly conferred on every worker by European
         Union law, a worker who is unfit for work for several consecutive years and who is prevented by national law from taking his
         paid annual leave during that period cannot have the right to accumulate, without any limit, entitlements to paid annual leave
         acquired during that period. 
      
With regard to the carry-over period beyond which the right to paid annual leave may lapse where entitlements to paid annual
         leave are accumulated during a period of unfitness for work, it is necessary to assess, in the light of Article of Directive
         2003/and taking the above considerations into account, whether a period for carrying over entitlement to paid annual leave
         set at months under national provisions or practices, such as collective agreements, may reasonably be described as a period
         beyond which paid annual leave ceases to have its positive effect for the worker as a rest period. 
      
In that context, the following points are to be noted. 
      
The right to paid annual leave is, as a principle of European Union social law, not only particularly important, as noted
         in paragraph above, but is also expressly laid down in Article 31(2) of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European
         Union, which Article 6(1) TEU recognises as having the same legal value as the Treaties. 
      
It follows that, in order to uphold that right, the objective of which is the protection of workers, any carry-over period
         must take into account the specific circumstances of a worker who is unfit for work for several consecutive reference periods.
         Thus, the carry-over period must inter alia ensure that the worker can have, if need be, rest periods that may be staggered,
         planned in advance and available in the longer term. Any carry-over period must be substantially longer than the reference
         period in respect of which it is granted.
      
That carry-over period must also protect the employer from the risk that a worker will accumulate periods of absence of too
         great a length, and from the difficulties for the organisation of work which such periods might entail.
      
In the present instance, the carry-over period laid down in the third subparagraph of Paragraph 11(1) of the EMTV is months,
         which is longer than the reference period to which it relates, a factor which distinguishes the present case from Schultz-Hoff and Others, where the carry-over period was six months.
      
It should also be noted in that regard that, under Article 9(1) of Convention No of the International Labour Organisation
         of June concerning Annual Holidays with Pay (revised), the uninterrupted part of the annual holiday with pay must
         be granted and taken no later than one year, and the remainder of the annual holiday with pay no later than months, from
         the end of the year in respect of which the holiday entitlement has arisen. That rule may be construed as being based on the
         consideration that when the periods for which it provides expire the purpose of the leave entitlement may no longer be fully
         achieved.
      
Therefore, in view of the fact that, according to recital in its preamble, Directive 2003/took into account the principles
         of the International Labour Organisation with regard to the organisation of working time, calculation of the carry-over period
         should take into consideration the purpose of the right to annual leave as resulting from Article 9(1) of that convention.
         
      
In the light of the foregoing it may reasonably be considered that a period of months for carrying over the right to paid
         annual leave, such as the period at issue in the main proceedings, is not contrary to the purpose of that right, in that it
         ensures that the latter retains its positive effect for the worker as a rest period.
      
Consequently, the answer to the first question is that Article 7(1) of Directive 2003/must be interpreted as not precluding
         national provisions or practices, such as collective agreements, which limit, by a carry-over period of months on the expiry
         of which the right to paid annual leave lapses, the accumulation of entitlements to such leave of a worker who is unfit for
         work for several consecutive reference periods. 
      
 Second question
In view of the answer to the first question, there is no need to answer the second question. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby rules:
Article 7(1) of Directive 2003/88/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of November concerning certain aspects
            of the organisation of working time must be interpreted as not precluding national provisions or practices, such as collective
            agreements, which limit, by a carry-over period of months on the expiry of which the right to paid annual leave lapses,
            the accumulation of entitlement to such leave of a worker who is unfit for work for several consecutive reference periods.
[Signatures]
Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 