
Case C-120/Bavaria NV
v
Bayerischer Brauerbund eV
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Bundesgerichtshof)
(Reference for a preliminary ruling – Regulations (EEC) No 2081/and (EC) No 510/– Temporal application – Article – Registration in accordance with the simplified procedure – Relations between trade marks and protected geographical indications)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Agriculture – Uniform legislation – Protection of geographical indications and designations of origin for agricultural products
            and foodstuffs – Regulation No 2081/– Conflict between geographical indications and trade marks – Article 14(1) – Ambit
(Council Regulations No 2081/92, Arts 14(1) and 17, and No 692/2003)
2.        Agriculture – Uniform legislation – Protection of geographical indications and designations of origin for agricultural products
            and foodstuffs – Regulation No 2081/– Conflict between geographical indications and trade marks – Name registered as a
            geographical indication in accordance with the simplified procedure
(Council Regulations No 2081/92, Arts 6(2), 13, 14(1), and 17, and No 692/2003)
1.        Article 14(1) of Regulation No 2081/on the protection of geographical indications and designations of origin for agricultural
         products and foodstuffs is applicable for resolving the conflict between a name validly registered as a protected geographical
         indication in accordance with the simplified procedure under Article of that regulation and a trade mark corresponding
         to one of the situations referred to in Article of that regulation relating to the same type of product, the application
         for registration of which was submitted both before the registration of that name and before the entry into force of Regulation
         No 692/amending Regulation No 2081/92. 
      
First, Article 14(1) of Regulation No 2081/concerns designations of origin and geographical indications registered ‘in
         accordance with this Regulation’, without a distinction being drawn on the basis of the registration procedure used. Secondly,
         the objective of Article of Regulation No 2081/was to register in accordance with a simplified procedure names existing
         in the Member States which, whilst fulfilling the substantive conditions of that regulation, were already protected by law
         or established by usage.
      
In that regard, the system introduced by Regulation No 2081/92, in particular that provided for in Article 17, was intended
         to afford to names registered in accordance with the simplified procedure the same level of protection as afforded to names
         registered in accordance with the normal procedure.
      
(see paras 53-55, 57, 68, operative part)
2.        The reference date for the purposes of resolving, under Article 14(1) of Regulation No 2081/on the protection of geographical
         indications and designations of origin for agricultural products and foodstuffs, a conflict between, on the one hand, a name
         validly registered as a protected geographical indication in accordance with the simplified procedure under Article of
         Regulation No 2081/and, on the other hand, a trade mark corresponding to one of the situations referred to in Article of that regulation relating to the same type of product, the application for registration of which was submitted both before
         the registration of that name and before the entry into force of Council Regulation No 692/amending Regulation No 2081/is the date of the entry into force of the registration of that name.
      
The entry into force of the registration satisfies both the objectives of the reference date provided for in Article 14(1)
         of Regulation No 2081/and the general scheme of that regulation.
      
Whilst, in the context of the normal procedure, the reference date for the purposes of the abovementioned provision is established
         by reference to publication at Union level, such as the publication provided for in Article 6(2) of Regulation No 2081/92,
         which satisfies the requirements of the principle of legal certainty, in the context of the simplified procedure, the first
         time the names registered are published at Union level is when they are registered.
      
Given that national protection for the names to be registered in accordance with the simplified procedure was maintained until
         the date of registration, to establish the date of the entry into force of that registration as the reference date for those
         names for the purposes of the protection granted by Article 14(1) of Regulation No 2081/is consistent with the general
         scheme of the system introduced by that regulation. Moreover, in as much as the publication of the registration also includes
         the date of the entry into force of that registration, that publication satisfies the requirements of legal certainty too.
      
(see paras 60-66, 68, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
December (*)
      
(Reference for a preliminary ruling – Regulations (EEC) No 2081/and (EC) No 510/– Temporal application – Article – Registration in accordance with the simplified procedure – Relations between trade marks and protected geographical indications)
In Case C‑120/08,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Bundesgerichtshof (Germany), made by decision of December
         2007, received at the Court on March 2008, in the proceedings
      
Bavaria NV
v
Bayerischer Brauerbund eV,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, D. Šváby, R. Silva de Lapuerta (Rapporteur), E. Juhász and T. von Danwitz,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Mazák,
Registrar: B. Fülöp, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on June 2010,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Bavaria NV, by G. van der Wal, advocaat, and H. Kunz-Hallstein, Rechtsanwalt,
–        Bayerischer Brauerbund eV, by R. Knaak, Rechtsanwalt,
–        the German Government, by J. Möller and J. Kemper, acting as Agents,
–        the Greek Government, by I. Khalkias and S. Papaïoannou, acting as Agents,
–        the Italian Government, by G. Palmieri, acting as Agent, and F. Arena, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Netherlands Government, by C. Wissels and J. Langer, acting as Agents,
–        the European Commission, by N. Rasmussen, G. von Rintelen and T. van Rijn, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 14(1) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2081/of July on the protection of geographical indications and designations of origin for agricultural products and foodstuffs
         (OJ L 208, p. 1) and Article 14(1) of Council Regulation (EC) No 510/of March on the protection of geographical
         indications and designations of origin for agricultural products and foodstuffs (OJ L 93, p. 12), with regard to protected
         geographical indications (‘PGI’) registered in accordance with the simplified procedure under Article of Regulation No 2081/92.
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between Bavaria NV (‘Bavaria’) and Bayerischer Brauerbund eV (‘Bayerischer Brauerbund’)
         regarding Bavaria’s right to use a trade mark containing the word ‘Bavaria’, in view of the PGI ‘Bayerisches Bier’ registered
         by virtue of Council Regulation (EC) No 1347/of June supplementing the Annex to Commission Regulation (EC) No 1107/on the registration of geographical indications and designations of origin under the procedure laid down in Article of
         Regulation No 2081/(OJ L 182, p. 3).
      
 Legal context
 Regulation No 2081/Article of Regulation No 2081/provides:
      
‘1.      Within a period of six months the Commission shall verify, by means of a formal investigation, whether the registration application
         includes all the particulars provided for in Article 4.
      
The Commission shall inform the Member State concerned of its findings.
2.      If, after taking account of paragraph 1, the Commission concludes that the name qualifies for protection, it shall publish
         in the Official Journal of the European Communities the name and address of the applicant, the name of the product, the main points of the application, the references to national
         provisions governing the preparation, production or manufacture of the product and, if necessary, the grounds for its conclusions.
      
3.      If no statement of objections is notified to the Commission in accordance with Article 7, the name shall be entered in a register
         kept by the Commission entitled “Register of protected designations of origin and protected geographical indications”, which
         shall contain the names of the groups and the inspection bodies concerned.
      
4.      The Commission shall publish in the Official Journal of the European Communities:
      
–        the names entered in the Register,
–        amendments to the Register made in accordance with Article and 11.
5.      If, in the light of the investigation provided for in paragraph 1, the Commission concludes that the name does not qualify
         for protection, it shall decide, in accordance with the procedure provided for in Article 15, not to proceed with the publication
         provided for in paragraph of this Article.
      
Before publication as provided for in paragraphs and and registration as provided for in paragraph 3, the Commission may
         request the opinion of the Committee provided for in Article 15.’
      
Article 13(1) of Regulation No 2081/provides:
      
‘Registered names shall be protected against:
(a)      any direct or indirect commercial use of a name registered in respect of products not covered by the registration in so far
         as those products are comparable to the products registered under that name or in so far as using the name exploits the reputation
         of the protected name;
      
(b)      any misuse, imitation or evocation, even if the true origin of the product is indicated or if the protected name is translated
         or accompanied by an expression such as “style”, “type”, “method”, “as produced in”, “imitation” or similar;
      
(c)      any other false or misleading indication as to the provenance, origin, nature or essential qualities of the product, on the
         inner or outer packaging, advertising material or documents relating to the product concerned, and the packing of the product
         in a container liable to convey a false impression as to its origin;
      
(d)      any other practice liable to mislead the public as to the true origin of the product.
Where a registered name contains within it the name of an agricultural product or foodstuff which is considered generic, the
         use of that generic name on the appropriate agricultural product or foodstuff shall not be considered to be contrary to (a)
         or (b) in the first subparagraph.’
      
Article of Regulation No 2081/reads:
      
‘1.      Where a designation of origin or geographical indication is registered in accordance with this Regulation, the application
         for registration of a trade mark corresponding to one of the situations referred to in Article and relating to the same
         type of product shall be refused, provided that the application for registration of the trade mark was submitted after the
         date of the publication provided for in Article 6(2).
      
Trade marks registered in breach of the first subparagraph shall be declared invalid.
This paragraph shall also apply where the application for registration of a trade mark was lodged before the date of publication
         of the application for registration provided for in Article 6(2), provided that that publication occurred before the trade
         mark was registered.
      
2.      With due regard for Community law, use of a trade mark corresponding to one of the situations referred to in Article which
         was registered in good faith before the date on which application for registration of a designation of origin or geographical
         indication was lodged may continue notwithstanding the registration of a designation of origin or geographical indication,
         where there are no grounds for invalidity or revocation of the trade mark as provided respectively by Article 3(1)(c) and
         (g) and Article 12(2)(b) of First Council Directive 89/104/EEC of December to approximate the laws of the Member States
         relating to trade marks [OJ L 40, p. 1].
      
3.      A designation of origin or geographical indication shall not be registered where, in the light of a trade mark’s reputation
         and renown and the length of time it has been used, registration is liable to mislead the consumer as to the true identity
         of the product.’
      
Article of Regulation No 2081/provides:
      
‘1.      Within six months of the entry into force of the Regulation, Member States shall inform the Commission which of their legally
         protected names or, in those Member States where there is no protection system, which of their names established by usage
         they wish to register pursuant to this Regulation.
      
2.      In accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 15, the Commission shall register the names referred to in paragraph
         which comply with Articles and 4. Article shall not apply. However, generic names shall not be added.
      
3.      Member States may maintain national protection of the names communicated in accordance with paragraph until such time as
         a decision on registration has been taken.’
      
 Regulation (EC) No 1107/The first and second recitals in the preamble to Commission Regulation (EC) No 1107/of June on the registration
         of geographical indications and designations of origin under the procedure laid down in Article of Regulation No 2081/(OJ L 148, p. 1) read:
      
‘Whereas, pursuant to Article of Regulation (EEC) No 2081/92, in the six months following the entry into force of that
         Regulation the Member States forwarded to the Commission the legally protected names or names established by usage they wished
         to register;
      
Whereas, following examination of those names in accordance with Regulation (EEC) No 2081/92, some of them were found to be
         in accordance with the provisions of that Regulation and eligible to be registered and protected at Community level as geographical
         indications or designations of origin’.
      
Article of Regulation No 1107/provides:
      
‘The names listed in the Annex shall be registered as [PGI] or protected designations of origin (PDO) pursuant to Article
         of Regulation (EEC) No 2081/92.
      
Names not included in the Annex which have been forwarded pursuant to Article shall continue to be protected at national
         level until a decision has been reached on them.’
      
 Regulation (EC) No 2400/The first to the fourth recitals in the preamble to Commission Regulation (EC) No 2400/of December on the entry
         of certain names in the ‘Register of protected designation of origin and protected geographical indications’ provided for
         in Regulation No 2081/(OJ L 327, p. 11) read:
      
‘Whereas, in accordance with Article of Regulation (EEC) No 2081/92, Member States have forwarded to the Commission applications
         for the registration of certain names as geographical indications or designations of origin;
      
Whereas the applications have been found, in accordance with Article 6(1) of that Regulation, to comply with the Regulation,
         most notably in that they include all the particulars provided for in Article of the Regulation;
      
Whereas no declaration of objection within the meaning of Article of the Regulation has been forwarded to the Commission
         as a result of the publication in the Official Journal of the European Communities of the names in question;
      
Whereas, as a result, those names may be entered in the “Register of protected designations of origin and protected geographical
         indications” and therefore be protected throughout the Community as geographical indications or designations of origin’.
      
Article of Regulation No 2400/reads:
      
‘The names in the Annex hereto are hereby entered in the “Register of protected designations of origin and protected geographical
         designations” as [PGI] or protected designations of origin (PDO) as provided for in Article 6(3) of Regulation (EEC) No 2081/92.’
      
 Regulation (EC) No 692/Article 1(13) of Council Regulation (EC) No 692/of April amending Regulation No 2081/(OJ L 99, p. 1) provides:
      
‘Article [of Regulation No 2081/92] shall be amended as follows:
(a)      Paragraph shall be replaced by the following:
“1.      Where a designation of origin or geographical indication is registered under this Regulation, any application for registration
         of a trademark that is for a product of the same type and use of which will engender one of the situations indicated in Article
         shall be refused if made after the date of submission to the Commission of the application for registration of the designation
         of origin or geographical indication.
      
Trademarks registered in breach of the first subparagraph shall be invalidated.”
…’
 Regulation No 510/Recitals and in the preamble to Regulation No 510/read:
      
‘The names already registered under … Regulation (EEC) No 2081/… on the date of entry into force of this Regulation should
         continue to be protected under this Regulation and automatically included in the register. Provision should also be made for
         transitional measures applicable to registration applications received by the Commission before the entry into force of this
         Regulation. 
      
In the interests of clarity and transparency, Regulation (EEC) No 2081/should be repealed and replaced by this Regulation.’
Article of Regulation No 510/2006, headed ‘Product specification’, provides:
      
‘1.      To be eligible for a protected designation of origin (PDO) or a [PGI], an agricultural product or foodstuff shall comply with
         a product specification.
      
2.      The product specification shall include at least:
…’
Article of that regulation is headed ‘Objection/decision on registration’. Article 7(6) reads:
      
‘The Commission shall maintain updated a register of protected designations of origin and [PGI].’
Article of that regulation is headed ‘Protection’. Article 13(1) reads:
      
‘Registered names shall be protected against:
(a)       any direct or indirect commercial use of a registered name in respect of products not covered by the registration in so far
         as those products are comparable to the products registered under that name or in so far as using the name exploits the reputation
         of the protected name;
      
(b)       any misuse, imitation or evocation, even if the true origin of the product is indicated or if the protected name is translated
         or accompanied by an expression such as “style”, “type”, “method”, “as produced in”, “imitation” or similar;
      
(c)       any other false or misleading indication as to the provenance, origin, nature or essential qualities of the product, on the
         inner or outer packaging, advertising material or documents relating to the product concerned, and the packing of the product
         in a container liable to convey a false impression as to its origin;
      
(d)       any other practice liable to mislead the consumer as to the true origin of the product.
Where a registered name contains within it the name of an agricultural product or foodstuff which is considered generic, the
         use of that generic name on the appropriate agricultural product or foodstuff shall not be considered to be contrary to points
         (a) or (b) in the first subparagraph.’
      
Article of Regulation No 510/is headed ‘Relations between trademarks, designations of origin and geographical indications’.
         Article 14(1) reads:
      
‘Where a designation of origin or a geographical indication is registered under this Regulation, the application for registration
         of a trademark corresponding to one of the situations referred to in Article and relating to the same class of product
         shall be refused if the application for registration of the trademark is submitted after the date of submission of the registration
         application to the Commission.
      
Trademarks registered in breach of the first subparagraph shall be invalidated.’
Article of that regulation, headed ‘Transitional provisions’, states:
      
‘1.      The names that, on the date of entry into force of this Regulation, are listed in the Annex of … Regulation No 1107/… and
         those listed in the Annex of … Regulation … No 2400/… shall be automatically entered in the register referred to in Article
         7(6) of this Regulation. The corresponding specifications shall be deemed to be the specifications referred to in Article
         4(1). Any specific transitional provisions associated with such registrations shall continue to apply.
      
2.      In respect of pending applications, statements and requests received by the Commission before the date of entry into force
         of this Regulation:
      
(a)      the procedures in Article shall not apply, without prejudice to Article 13(3); and
(b)      the summary of the specification drawn up in conformity with Commission Regulation (EC) No 383/[of March laying
         down detailed rules for applying Regulation No 2081/as regards the summary of the main points of the product specifications
         (OJ L 64, p. 16)] shall replace the single document referred to in Article 5(3)(c). 
      
3.      The Commission may adopt, if necessary, other transitional provisions in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article
         15(2).’
      
Article of Regulation No 510/provides:
      
‘Regulation (EEC) No 2081/is hereby repealed.
References made to the repealed Regulation shall be construed as being made to this Regulation and should be read in accordance
         with the correlation table in Annex III.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Bayerischer Brauerbund is a German association with the objective of protecting the common interests of Bavarian brewers.
         According to a certificate from the Amtsgericht München (Local Court, Munich), its statutes date from December 1917. Bayerischer
         Brauerbund is the proprietor of the registered collective trade marks ‘Genuine Bavarian Beer’ (since 1958), ‘Bayrisch Bier’
         and ‘Bayerisches Bier’ (since 1968), and ‘Reinheitsgebot seit Bayrisches Bier’ (since 1985).
      
Bavaria is a Netherlands commercial company producing beer which operates on the international market. Formerly called ‘Firma
         Gebroeders Swinkels’, the company began to use the word ‘Bavaria’ in 1925, and it became part of its name in 1930. Bavaria
         was and is the proprietor of several registered trade marks and figurative elements containing the word ‘Bavaria’. The registration
         dates include 1947, 1971, 1982, 1991, and 1995. Protection in Germany of some of those trade marks was refused in 1973,
         and 1993.
      
The name ‘Bayerisches Bier’ was covered by bilateral agreements on the protection of indications of provenance, designations
         of origin and other geographic names between, on the one hand, the Federal Republic of Germany and, on the other hand, the
         French Republic (1961), the Italian Republic (1963), the Hellenic Republic (1964), the Swiss Confederation (1967) and the
         Kingdom of Spain (1970).
      
On September Bayerischer Brauerbund, in agreement with two other Bavarian associations, submitted to the German Government
         an application for registration of a PGI pursuant to Article 17(1) of Regulation No 2081/92. On January the German
         Government informed the Commission of the application for registration of ‘Bayerisches Bier’ as a PGI in accordance with the
         simplified procedure under that provision.
      
Numerous pieces of information were exchanged between the Commission and the German authorities for the purposes of supplementing
         the file, which was regarded as complete on May 1997. The final version of the specification was sent to the Commission
         by letter of March 2000.
      
The Regulatory Committee on Geographical Indications and Designations of Origin discussed on a number of occasions two draft
         Commission regulations for registration of ‘Bayerisches Bier’ as a PGI. The existence of marks which also include the words
         ‘Bayerisches Bier’ or translations of them was one of the issues discussed.
      
As the majority laid down in the second paragraph of Article of Regulation No 2081/was not reached within that committee,
         the latter was unable to deliver an opinion within the prescribed period. The Commission therefore converted its last draft
         into a proposal for a Council regulation, and the Council then adopted Regulation No 1347/which registered ‘Bayerisches
         Bier’ as a PGI by including it among the names listed in the Annex to Regulation (EC) No 1107/96.
      
Following similar proceedings in other Member States, Bayerischer Brauerbund applied to the Landgericht München for an order
         requiring Bavaria to agree to renounce the protection of one of the trade marks cited in paragraph above. The trade mark
         in question is the international trade mark registered under No 349, protected in Germany with priority from April
         1995.
      
The Landgericht München granted Bayerischer Brauerbund’s application by a judgment which was upheld on appeal by the Oberlandesgericht
         München (Higher Regional Court, Munich). Bavaria appealed on a point of law to the Bundesgerichtshof (Federal Court of Justice).
      
Against that background, the Bundesgerichtshof decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to the
         Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Does Article 14(1) of Regulation … No 510/apply in the case where the protected indication has been validly registered
         in accordance with the simplified procedure under Article of Regulation … No 2081/…?
      
2.      (a)   If the answer to Question is in the affirmative, what date should be taken as the basis for determining the classification
         in time of the protected geographical indication for the purposes of Article 14(1) of Regulation … No 510/2006?
      
(b)      If the answer to Question is in the negative, what provision governs the conflict between a geographical indication validly
         registered in accordance with the simplified procedure under Article of Regulation … No 2081/and a trade mark, and what
         determines the classification in time of the protected geographical indication?
      
3.      May the national provisions on the protection of geographical designations be applied in the event that the indication “Bayerisches
         Bier” fulfils the conditions for registration under Regulation … No 2081/and Regulation … No 510/2006, but Regulation …
         No 1347/is invalid?’
      
By decision of the President of the Court of Justice of May 2008, the present proceedings were stayed pending delivery of
         the judgment in Case C‑343/Bavaria and Bavaria Italia [2009] ECR I‑5491. That case was a reference for a preliminary ruling from the Corte d’appello di Torino (Appeal Court, Turin)
         (Italy) in a dispute which concerned, inter alia, the validity of Regulation No 1347/and was also between Bavaria and
         Bayerischer Brauerbund.
      
 Consideration of the questions referred
As a preliminary point, it should be noted that while the first and second questions assume that Regulation No 1347/is
         valid, the third question is based on the premiss that it is invalid. 
      
The third question should therefore be dealt with before the first and second questions.
      
 The third question
By its third question, the referring court seeks to ascertain whether Regulation No 1347/is valid and, if the answer
         is negative, whether the national provisions on the protection of geographical designations may be applied in the event that
         the PGI ‘Bayerisches Bier’ fulfils, despite the invalidity of that regulation, the conditions for registration under Regulations
         Nos 2081/and 510/2006.
      
It is clear from the order for reference that this question was raised in respect of the same factors which might affect the
         validity of Regulation No 1347/as were raised by the Corte d’appello di Torino in Bavaria and Bavaria Italia, which was pending before the Court of Justice at that time.
      
As the answer given by the Court in that case was that consideration of the question referred did not disclose any factor
         liable to affect the validity of Regulation No 1347/2001, it is unnecessary to answer the third question.
      
 The first and second questions 
By its first and second questions, which it is appropriate to consider together, the referring court asks the Court, in essence,
         which provision and which reference date are applicable for resolving the conflict between a name validly registered as a
         PGI in accordance with the simplified procedure under Article of Regulation No 2081/and a trade mark the application
         for registration of which was submitted both before the registration of that name and before the entry into force of Regulation
         No 692/2003.
      
 Inapplicability ratione temporis of Article 14(1) of Regulation No 510/or of Regulation No 2081/92, as amended by Regulation No 692/2003, to the main
         proceedings
      
Both Article 14(1) of Regulation No 2081/92, in its original version and as amended by Regulation No 692/2003, and Article
         14(1) of Regulation No 510/are designed to resolve a conflict between a name registered as a PGI and an application for
         registration of a trade mark corresponding to one of the situations referred to in Article of Regulation No 2081/and
         Article of Regulation No 510/respectively, and relating, as the case maybe, to the same type or the same class of
         product.
      
The solution provided for in the case of such a conflict is refusal of the application for registration of the trade mark
         at issue, or, in the alternative, invalidation of the trade mark registered, where that application was submitted after the
         date respectively provided for in those various provisions.
      
Thus, under both Article 14(1) of Regulation No 510/and the version of Article 14(1) of Regulation No 2081/resulting
         from Regulation No 692/2003, the application for registration of the trade mark must be rejected or, as the case may be, the
         trade mark must be declared invalid where that application was submitted after the date on which the application for registration
         of the name concerned as a PGI was lodged with the Commission.
      
However, the provisions cited in the preceding paragraph cannot be applied retroactively in order to govern a conflict, such
         as that giving rise to the dispute in the main proceedings, between a name validly registered as a PGI in accordance with
         the simplified procedure under Article of Regulation No 2081/and a trade mark the application for registration of which
         was submitted before the entry into force of Regulation No 692/2003.
      
It is settled case-law that, as a general rule, the principle of legal certainty precludes a European Union measure from taking
         effect from a point in time before its publication, but it may exceptionally be otherwise where the purpose to be achieved
         so demands and where the legitimate expectations of those concerned are duly respected. In that regard, in order to ensure
         observance of the principles of legal certainty and the protection of legitimate expectations, the substantive rules of European
         Union law must be interpreted as applying to situations existing before their entry into force only in so far as it clearly
         follows from their terms, objectives or general scheme that such effect must be given to them (see Joined Cases C‑74/P
         and C‑75/P Falck and Acciaierie di Bolzano v Commission [2002] ECR I‑7869, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Whilst the principle of legal certainty precludes a regulation from being applied retroactively, irrespective of whether such
         application might produce favourable or unfavourable effects for the person concerned, the same principle requires that any
         factual situation should normally, in the absence of any express contrary provision, be examined in the light of the legal
         rules existing at the time when the situation obtained. However, if the new law is thus valid only for the future, it also
         applies, save for derogation, to the future effects of situations which came about during the period of validity of the old
         law (see Case C‑154/Kersbergen-Lap and Dams-Schipper [2006] ECR I‑6249, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
It must be held that the circumstances giving rise to the conflict between the name and the trade mark at issue in the main
         proceedings predate not only the entry into force of Regulation No 510/2006, but also the entry into force of Regulation No 692/which amended Regulation No 2081/92. That conflict relates to the fact that, first, the name ‘Bayerisches Bier’, following
         an application lodged by the German Government with the Commission on January 1994, was registered in accordance with the
         simplified procedure under Regulation No 2081/as a PGI by virtue of Regulation No 1347/and, second, the trade mark
         ‘Bavaria’ which was the subject of international registration No has enjoyed a right of priority and hence protection
         inter alia in Germany since April 1995.
      
Since it is not apparent from the terms, objectives or general scheme of Regulations Nos 692/and 510/2006, in particular
         the provisions examined above, that they should be given retroactive effect, a conflict such as that between the PGI and the
         trade mark at issue in the main proceedings must be governed by Article 14(1) of Regulation No 2081/in its original version.
      
In the present case it is a matter of establishing whether, when the trade mark ‘Bavaria’ at issue was registered in 1995,
         the PGI ‘Bayerisches Bier’ already enjoyed priority which could justify invalidation of that mark. That question must be answered
         in the light of the rule which governed the conflict at issue at the time when it arose.
      
It is immaterial in that regard that, according to recital in the preamble to Regulation No 510/and under Article
         of that regulation, names registered as a PGI under Regulation No 2081/are entitled to protection under Regulation No 510/2006.
      
 Applicability ratione materiae of Article 14(1) of Regulation No 2081/to the main proceedings
      
As a preliminary point, it should be noted that under the system established by Regulation No 2081/names could be registered
         either in accordance with the normal procedure under Article et seq. or in accordance with the simplified procedure under
         Article 17. Whilst the names registered in accordance with the normal procedure were listed in the Annex to Regulation No 2400/96,
         the names registered in accordance with the simplified procedure were listed in the Annex to Regulation No 1107/96.
      
The conflict that gave rise to the dispute in the main proceedings is governed by Article 14(1) of Regulation No 2081/92.
      
Article 14(1) is the only provision governing conflicts between names and applications for registration of trade marks; Article
         14(2) and Article 14(3) relate to different situations.
      
According to the conflict rule laid down in Article 14(1) of Regulation No 2081/92, the application for registration of the
         trade mark at issue is to be refused, or, if it has not been refused, the registered trade mark is to be declared invalid,
         if the application was submitted after the date of the publication provided for in Article 6(2) of that regulation. The application
         for registration is also to be refused or the trade mark declared invalid if the application was lodged before publication
         but publication occurred before the trade mark was registered.
      
That conflict rule therefore prescribes a ground for refusal of the application for registration of the mark at issue, or,
         in the alternative, for the invalidity of that mark, under which the reference date for application of the conflict rule is
         the date of the publication provided for in Article 6(2) of Regulation No 2081/92.
      
According to the Commission, establishing such a reference date means that Article 14(1) of Regulation No 2081/was not
         applicable to names registered in accordance with the simplified procedure, since the publication provided for in Article
         6(2) of that regulation applied only to the normal registration procedure.
      
That interpretation cannot be accepted.
      
First, Article 14(1) of Regulation No 2081/concerns designations of origin and geographical indications registered ‘in
         accordance with this Regulation’, without a distinction being drawn on the basis of the registration procedure used.
      
Second place, it should be noted that the objective of Article of Regulation No 2081/was to register in accordance with
         a simplified procedure names existing in the Member States which, whilst fulfilling the substantive conditions of that regulation,
         were already legally protected or established by usage.
      
In that regard, it must be held that the system introduced by Regulation No 2081/92, in particular that provided for in Article
         17, was intended to afford to names registered in accordance with the simplified procedure the same level of protection as
         afforded to names registered in accordance with the normal procedure.
      
Furthermore, as is apparent from the second recital in the preamble to Regulation No 1107/and the fourth recital in the
         preamble to Regulation No 2400/96, registration, whether in accordance with the simplified procedure or in accordance with
         the normal procedure, implied that the names at issue were in accordance with Regulation No 2081/and therefore warranted
         protection at European Union level.
      
It must therefore be held that Article 14(1) of Regulation No 2081/is also applicable to conflicts involving names registered
         as a PGI in accordance with the simplified procedure.
      
 The reference date, under Article 14(1) of Regulation No 2081/92, in a conflict involving a name registered as a PGI in accordance
         with the simplified procedure
      
The reference date referred to in Article 14(1) of Regulation No 2081/is the date of the publication provided for in Article
         6(2) of that regulation, whereas such publication did not exist under the simplified procedure. It is necessary therefore
         to establish the relevant reference date in the case of a conflict involving a name registered as a PGI in accordance with
         that procedure.
      
Since the system introduced by Regulation No 2081/is a uniform and exhaustive system of protection (see Case C‑478/Budějovický Budvar [2009] ECR I‑7721, paragraphs and 115), it must be regarded as forming a complete system that does not leave the Member
         States the power to fill a lacuna by resorting to their national law. It is thus proper to seek a solution in the light of
         the scheme and also the aims and objectives of the provision and of the regulation at issue (see, to that effect, Case 159/Hannoversche Zucker [1974] ECR 121, paragraph 4).
      
First, it should be noted in that regard that, in the case of the normal procedure, Article 14(1) of Regulation No 2081/provides for protection of names at European Union level in relation to a competing trade mark which begins on a date prior
         to the registration of the names. 
      
In this context, establishing that date by reference to publication at European Union level, such as the publication provided
         for in Article 6(2) of that regulation, satisfies the requirements of the principle of legal certainty. 
      
However, the first time the names registered in accordance with the simplified procedure were published at European Union
         level was when they were registered.
      
Second, under Article 17(3) of Regulation No 2081/92, the Member States could maintain national protection of the names communicated
         in accordance with Article 17(1) until such time as a decision on registration had been taken. Under Article of Regulation
         No 1107/96, names forwarded pursuant to Article of Regulation No 2081/continued to be protected at national level until
         a decision had been reached on them. 
      
Given that national protection for the names to be registered in accordance with the simplified procedure was maintained until
         the date of registration, to establish the date of the entry into force of that registration as the reference date for those
         names for the purposes of the protection granted by Article 14(1) of Regulation No 2081/is consistent with the general
         scheme of the system introduced by that regulation.
      
Moreover, as emerges from Regulation No 1347/2001, concerning the PGI at issue in the main proceedings, the publication of
         the registration also includes the date of the entry into force of that registration and therefore satisfies the requirements
         of legal certainty.
      
It must therefore be held that, in the case of names registered in accordance with the simplified procedure under Article
         of Regulation No 2081/92, the entry into force of the registration satisfies both the objectives of the reference date
         provided for in Article 14(1) of Regulation No 2081/and the general scheme of that regulation. 
      
That date therefore constitutes the reference date for the purposes of resolving, under Article 14(1) of Regulation No 2081/92,
         a conflict involving a name registered as a PGI in accordance with the simplified procedure.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the first and second questions is that Article 14(1) of Regulation No 2081/is applicable for resolving the conflict between a name validly registered as a PGI in accordance with the simplified procedure
         under Article of that regulation and a trade mark corresponding to one of the situations referred to in Article of that
         regulation relating to the same type of product, the application for registration of which was submitted both before the registration
         of that name and before the entry into force of Regulation No 692/2003. The date of the entry into force of the registration
         of that name constitutes the reference date for the purposes of Article 14(1) of Regulation No 2081/92.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
Article 14(1) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2081/of July on the protection of geographical indications and designations
            of origin for agricultural products and foodstuffs is applicable for resolving the conflict between a name validly registered
            as a protected geographical indication in accordance with the simplified procedure under Article of that regulation and
            a trade mark corresponding to one of the situations referred to in Article of that regulation relating to the same type
            of product, the application for registration of which was submitted both before the registration of that name and before the
            entry into force of Council Regulation (EC) No 692/of April amending Regulation No 2081/92. The date of the entry
            into force of the registration of that name constitutes the reference date for the purposes of Article 14(1) of Regulation
            No 2081/92.
[Signatures]
*  Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 