
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-170/P Schlüsselverlag J.S. Moser GmbH and OthersvCommission of the European Communities
«(Appeal – Action for a declaration of failure to act – Competition – Complaint – Control of concentrations – Definition of a position for the purposes of Article EC – Inadmissibility)»
Opinion of Advocate General Geelhoed delivered on May Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber), September Summary of the Judgment
1..
Competition – Concentrations – Examination by the Commission – Commission's obligations vis-à-vis qualifying third parties – Obligation to define its position on a complaint  (Council Regulation No 4064/89) 
2..
Actions for failure to act – Institution must be called upon to act – Action to be taken within a reasonable time – Cases relating to concentrations between undertakings  (Art. 232, second para., EC; Council Regulation No 4064/89, Arts 4, and 10(1), (3) and (6)) 
1.
 The Commission cannot refrain from taking account of complaints from undertakings which are not party to a concentration capable
         of having a Community dimension. Indeed, the implementation of such a transaction for the benefit of undertakings in competition
         with the complainants is likely to bring about an immediate change in the complainants' situation on the market or markets
         concerned. Furthermore, the Commission cannot validly maintain that it is not required to take a decision on the very principle of its
         competence as supervising authority, when it is solely responsible, under Article of Regulation No 4064/on the control
         of concentrations between undertakings, for taking, subject to review by the Court of Justice, the decisions provided for
         by that regulation. If the Commission refused to adjudicate formally, at the request of third-party undertakings, on the question
         whether or not a concentration which has not been notified to it falls within the scope of the regulation, it would make it
         impossible for such undertakings to take advantage of the procedural guarantees which the Community legislation accords them.
         The Commission would, at the same time, deprive itself of a means of checking that undertakings which are parties to a concentration
         with a Community dimension comply properly with their obligation to notify. Moreover, the complainant undertakings could not
         challenge, by means of an action for annulment, a refusal by the Commission to act which is likely to do them harm.  Finally, nothing justifies the Commission in avoiding its obligation to undertake, in the interests of sound administration,
         a thorough and impartial examination of the complaints which are made to it. The fact that the complainants do not have the
         right, under Regulation No 4064/89, to have their complaints investigated under conditions comparable to those for complaints
         within the scope of Regulation No does not mean that the Commission is not required to consider whether the matter is within
         its competence and to draw the necessary conclusions. It does not release the Commission from its obligation to give a reasoned
         response to a complaint that it has specifically failed to exercise its competence. see paras 27-2.
 The requirements of legal certainty and of continuity of Community action which are at the origin both of the fifth paragraph
         of Article EC and of Articles 4, and 10(1), (3) and (6) of Regulation No 4064/on the control of concentrations between
         undertakings would be disregarded if the Commission could, pursuant to the second paragraph of Article EC, be requested
         to make a determination, outside a reasonable period, on the compatibility with the common market of a concentration which
         was not notified to it. Undertakings could thus lead the Commission to call in question a decision taken by the competent
         national authorities with regard to a concentration, even after the exhaustion of the possible legal remedies against such
         decision in the legal system of the Member State concerned. A period of four months from the date when the competent national authority took its decision relating to the transaction
         cannot be regarded as reasonable. see paras 36-JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)September (1)
((Appeal – Action for a declaration of failure to act – Competition – Complaint – Control of concentrations – Definition of a position for the purposes of Article EC – Inadmissibility))
 In Case C-170/P, 
            
Schlüsselverlag J.S. Moser GmbH, established in Innsbruck (Austria),J. Wimmer Medien GmbH & Co. KG, established in Linz (Austria),Styria Medien AG, established in Graz (Austria),Zeitungs- und Verlags-Gesellschaft mbH, established in Bregenz (Austria),Eugen Ruß Vorarlberger Zeitungsverlag und Druckerei GmbH, established in Schwarzach (Austria),Die Presse Verlags-Gesellschaft mbH, established in Vienna (Austria),andSalzburger Nachrichten Verlags-Gesellschaft mbH & Co. KG, established in Salzburg (Austria),represented by M. Krüger, Rechtsanwalt,
            
appellants, 
 APPEAL against the order of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities (Third Chamber) of March in Case
            T-3/Schlüsselverlag J.S. Moser and Others v  
            Commission [2002] ECR II-1473, seeking to have that order set aside,
            
 the other party to the proceedings being: 
            Commission of the European Communities, represented by K. Wiedner, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
 composed of: J.-P. Puissochet (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, C. Gulmann, F. Macken, N. Colneric and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed, Registrar: R. Grass, 
            
having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on May 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By application lodged at the Court Registry on May 2002, Schlüsselverlag J.S. Moser GmbH, J. Wimmer Medien GmbH & Co. KG,
         Styria Medien AG, Zeitungs- und Verlags-Gesellschaft mbH, Eugen Ruβ Vorarlberger Zeitungsverlag und Druckerei GmbH,  
         Die Presse Verlags-Gesellschaft mbH and  
         Salzburger Nachrichten Verlags-Gesellschaft mbH & Co. KG appealed, under Article of the EC Statute of the Court of Justice, against the order
         of the Court of First Instance of March 2002, in Case T-3/Schlüsselverlag J.S. Moser and Others v  
         Commission [2002] ECR II-(hereinafter  
         the contested order), by which the Court of First Instance dismissed as manifestly inadmissible their action for a declaration that, by unlawfully
         failing to adopt a decision on the compatibility of a concentration with the common market, the Commission had failed to act.
         
         
Legal background
            
 The second paragraph of Article EC provides: The action [for failure to act] shall be admissible only if the institution concerned has first been called upon to act. 
         If, within two months of being so called upon, the institution concerned has not defined its position, the action may be brought
         within a further period of two months.
         
            
 In the terms of Article 1(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/of December on the control of concentrations between
         undertakings (OJ L 395, p. 1), as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 1310/of June (OJ L 180, p. 1,
         and corrigendum OJ L 257, p. 13, hereinafter  
         the Merger Regulation): For the purposes of this Regulation, a concentration has a Community dimension where:
         
(a)
 the combined aggregate worldwide turnover of all the undertakings concerned is more than EUR million, and 
         
(b)
 the aggregate Community-wide turnover of each of at least two of the undertakings concerned is more than EUR million,
         
          unless each of the undertakings concerned achieves more than two-thirds of its aggregate Community-wide turnover within one
         and the same Member State.
         
            
 Article 4(1) of that regulation provides: Concentrations with a Community dimension defined in this Regulation shall be notified to the Commission not more than one
         week ... .
         
            
 Under Article 6(1) of that regulation: The Commission shall examine the notification as soon as it is received.
         
(a)
 Where it concludes that the concentration notified does not fall within the scope of this Regulation, it shall record that
         finding by means of a decision. 
         
(b)
 Where it finds that the concentration notified, although falling within the scope of this Regulation, does not raise serious
         doubts as to its compatibility with the common market, it shall decide not to oppose it and shall declare that it is compatible
         with the common market. 
         ...
         
            
 Article 21(1) of that regulation provides: Subject to review by the Court of Justice, the Commission shall have sole jurisdiction to take the decisions provided for
         in this Regulation.
         Facts of the dispute
            
 By decision of January 2001, the Oberlandesgericht Wien (Higher Regional Court, Vienna, Austria), which has jurisdiction
         in relation to the application of the Austrian law on competition, approved a concentration involving Zeitschriften Verlagsbeteiligungs-Aktiengesellschaft
         (hereinafter  
         ZVB) and Verlagsgruppe News Beteiligungsgesellschaft (hereinafter  
         VNB). 
         
            
 That transaction concerned the acquisition by News Gesellschaft mbH (hereinafter  
         News Gesellschaft), a subsidiary of VNB, of Kurier-Magazine Verlags GmbH (hereinafter  
         Kurier-Magazine), a company belonging to ZVB, in consideration of an injection by the latter of capital in News Gesellschaft. 
         
            
 By letter of May 2001, the appellant companies, which are owners of newspapers in Austria, lodged a complaint with the
         Commission regarding that transaction, claiming that it had a Community dimension within the meaning of the Merger Regulation
         and that it should, therefore, have been notified to the Commission, the only authority with jurisdiction to determine its
         compatibility with the common market. 
         
            
 By letter of July 2001, the head of the Commission's office responsible, within the Directorate-General for Competition,
         for the control of concentrations between undertakings (hereinafter  
         the Merger Task Force) replied to the appellants that Kurier-Magazine's turnover in the Community was less than the threshold of EUR million
         fixed in Article 1(2)(b) of the Merger Regulation and that, therefore, the Commission had no jurisdiction to make a determination
         on the transaction in question. 
         
            
 By letter of August 2001, the applicants challenged that analysis, contending, in particular, that under the terms of the
         concentration agreement concerned, appointment of the editor and editor in chief of the two magazines brought together under
         Kurier-Magazine continued to be ZVB's responsibility.  They gave further details of that contention in a letter of August
         2001, also sent to the head of the Merger Task Force. 
         
            
 The head of the Merger Task Force replied to both letters on September 2001, stating that he had already been aware of those
         matters when he had signed his letter of July and that the managers appointed by ZVB had no rights of veto capable
         of amounting to joint control of News Gesellschaft.  He also confirmed his analysis that the concentration had no Community
         dimension. 
         
            
 By letter of September 2001, addressed to the member of the Commission responsible for competition, the appellants called
         upon the Commission, pursuant to the second paragraph of Article EC, to define its position formally  
         on whether or not to initiate an investigation procedure under Regulation No 4064/89. 
         
            
 By letter of November (hereinafter  
         the letter of November 2001), the  head of the Merger Task Force replied to the appellants that he was confirming that,  
         for the reasons given in [his] letter of July 2001, [his] office [did] not propose to reconsider the above matter and that,  
         in the absence of any competence under the Merger Regulation, the Commission [could] not adopt a decision in this legal matter. 
         
            
 By application lodged on January at the Registry of the Court of First Instance, the appellants brought an action
         against the Commission for a declaration of failure to act. 
         The contested order
            
 The Court of First Instance considered that there was sufficient information before it and, without taking further steps in
         the proceedings, decided by the contested order, made pursuant to Article of its Rules of Procedure, to dismiss the action
         as manifestly inadmissible. 
         
            
 It held, first, that the letter of November 2001, which made express reference to the letter of September calling
         upon the Commission to act, constituted the Commission's reply to that letter of formal notice. 
         
            
 Next, in concluding that the letter of November constituted a definition of the Commission's position for the purposes
         of the second paragraph of Article EC, the Court of First Instance held that, in that letter, the Commission made clear
         that it did not propose to reconsider the concentration in issue, referring for that purpose to the reasons given in its letter
         of July 2001, and confirmed that, in the absence of a Community dimension, it did not have competence, under the Merger
         Regulation, to adopt a decision in that matter. 
         
            
 Finally, the Court of First Instance found that such a definition of its position constituted an act challengeable under Article
         EC and that the appellants could not claim that the letter of November expressed the position only of the  Merger
         Task Force and not that of the Commission.  The Court of First Instance observed in that regard that, although the letters
         of July and September stated that they  
         express[ed] the view of the Merger Control Directorate and [were] not binding on the European Commission, no such statement appeared in the letter of November 2001. 
         
            
 In those circumstances, the Court of First Instance held that the failure to act was no longer subsisting and that the appellants
         had no further interest in obtaining a declaration of failure to act, which rendered the action manifestly inadmissible. 
         
         The appeal
            
 The appellants claim that the Court of Justice should set aside the contested order, declare that, by failing to adopt any
         decision with regard to the concentration in issue, the Commission has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EC Treaty,
         and order the Commission to pay the costs. 
         
            
 The Commission contends that the Court should dismiss the appeal and order the appellants to pay the costs. 
         
            
 The appellants submit that the letter of November originated only from the head of the Merger Task Force and that it
         could not legally bind the Commission as an institution.  The Court of First Instance consequently made an error of law in
         finding that that letter constituted a definition of the Commission's position for the purposes of the second paragraph of
         Article EC and that it had put an end to the failure to act. 
         
            
 The Commission submits that the action before the Court of First Instance was manifestly inadmissible, not on the grounds
         on which the contested order is based but on different grounds on which the Court of First Instance should have ruled in the
         first place.  It maintains that no provision required it formally to define its position on the complaint which the appellants
         had made to it and, in any event, that the request to act which it was sent on May was out of time.  
          Findings of the Court
         
            
 The Commission's response to the ground of appeal that the Court of First Instance was wrong in holding the letter of November
         to be a definition of its position putting an end to the failure to act is that it was under no obligation, in such a
         situation, formally to define its position on the appellants' complaint and that no failure to act could therefore be imputed
         to it. 
         
            
 That argument of the Commission cannot be accepted. 
         
            
 First, the Commission cannot refrain from taking account of complaints from undertakings which are not party to a concentration
         capable of having a Community dimension.  Indeed, the implementation of such a transaction for the benefit of undertakings
         in competition with the complainants is likely to bring about an immediate change in the complainants' situation on the market
         or markets concerned.  That is why Article of the Merger Regulation provides that interested third parties are entitled
         to be heard by the Commission, if they so request.   Commission Regulation (EC) No 447/of March on the notifications,
         time-limits and hearings provided for in Regulation No 4064/(OJ L 61, p. 1) also provides, in Article 11(c), that
          
         third parties, that is, natural or legal persons showing a sufficient interest, including customers, suppliers and competitors have the right to be heard pursuant to Article 18. 
         
            
 Furthermore, the Commission cannot validly maintain that it is not required to take a decision on the very principle of its
         competence as supervising authority, when it is solely responsible, under Article of the Merger Regulation, for taking,
         subject to review by the Court of Justice, the decisions provided for by that regulation.  If the Commission refused to adjudicate
         formally, at the request of third-party undertakings, on the question whether or not a concentration which has not been notified
         to it falls within the scope of the regulation, it would make it impossible for such undertakings to take advantage of the
         procedural guarantees which the Community legislation accords them.  The Commission would, at the same time, deprive itself
         of a means of checking that undertakings which are parties to a concentration with a Community dimension comply properly with
         their obligation to notify.  Moreover, the complainant undertakings could not challenge, by means of an action for annulment,
         a refusal by the Commission to act which, as was stated in the previous paragraph, is likely to do them harm. 
         
            
 Finally, nothing justifies the Commission in avoiding its obligation to undertake, in the interests of sound administration,
         a thorough and impartial examination of the complaints which are made to it.  The fact that the complainants do not have the
         right, under the Merger Regulation, to have their complaints investigated under conditions comparable to those for complaints
         within the scope of Regulation No of the Council of February 1962:  First Regulation implementing Articles [81] and [82]
         of the Treaty (OJ, English Special Edition 1959-1962, p. 87), does not mean that the Commission is not required to consider
         whether the matter is within its competence and to draw the necessary conclusions.  It does not release the Commission from
         its obligation to give a reasoned response to a complaint that it has specifically failed to exercise its competence. 
         
            
 In those circumstances, the Commission is not entitled to maintain that it could decline to define its position in this case
         and that, therefore, no failure to act could, in any event, be attributed to it.  
         
            
 On the other hand, the Commission argues correctly that the request to act which was sent to it on May was, in any
         event, out of time. 
         
            
 The Merger Regulation is based on the principle of a clear division of powers between the supervisory authorities of the Member
         States and those of the Community.  The 29th recital in its preamble provides that  
         concentrations not covered by this Regulation come, in principle, within the jurisdiction of the Member States.  Conversely, the Commission has sole jurisdiction to take all the decisions relating to concentrations with a Community
         dimension and, under Article of that regulation, to decide to refer to the competent authorities of a Member State the file
         on certain transactions affecting more particularly a  
         market, within that Member State, which presents all the characteristics of a distinct market. 
         
            
 The Merger Regulation also contains provisions whose purpose is to restrict, for reasons of legal certainty and in the interest
         of the undertakings concerned, the length of the proceedings for investigating transactions which are the responsibility of
         the Commission.  Thus, under Article of that regulation, the Commission must be notified of a transaction with a Community
         dimension within one week.   Articles and 10(1) of the regulation provide that the Commission then has a period equal, as
         a general rule, to one month in which to decide whether or not to initiate a formal investigation of the compatibility of
         the transaction with the common market.  Under Article 10(3) of the regulation, the Commission must give a decision on the
         file at the end of a period of four months in principle, which runs from the decision to initiate the proceeding.  Article 10(6)
         provides that,  
         [w]here the Commission has not taken a decision ... within the deadlines ..., the concentration shall be deemed to have been
         declared compatible with the common market. 
         
            
 It follows from the provisions referred to in paragraphs and of this judgment that the Community legislature intended
         to lay down a clear division between the activities of the national authorities and those of the Community authorities, by
         avoiding successive definitions of positions by those different authorities on the same transaction, and that it wished to
         ensure scrutiny of concentrations within periods compatible both with the requirements of sound administration and those of
         commercial life. 
         
            
 In addition, the actions which the undertakings concerned, be they parties to the transaction or third parties, may take against
         decisions taken by the Commission are subject to the general condition of the time-limit fixed by the fifth paragraph of Article EC and must therefore be made within a period of two months. 
         
            
 The requirements of legal certainty and of continuity of Community action which are at the origin of all those provisions
         would be disregarded if the Commission could, pursuant to the second paragraph of Article EC, be requested to make a determination,
         outside a reasonable period, on the compatibility with the common market of a concentration which was not notified to it (see,
         to that effect, Case 59/Netherlands v  
         Commission [1971] ECR 639, paragraphs to 24).  Undertakings could thus lead the Commission to call in question a decision taken by
         the competent national authorities with regard to a concentration, even after the exhaustion of the possible legal remedies
         against such decision in the legal system of the Member State concerned. 
         
            
 In this case, the concentration in issue was notified on September to the Oberlandesgericht Wien, which approved it
         on January 2001.  The appellants were entitled at any time during that period to request the Commission to examine whether
         the transaction had a Community dimension.  On May 2001, the date on which they made a complaint to the Commission, nearly
         four months had elapsed since the national authorities' decision approving completion of the transaction, that is to say,
         a period similar to that which is afforded the Commission, under Article 10(3) of the Merger Regulation, to undertake an investigation
         of a notified transaction, where the formal proceeding provided for that purpose has been initiated. 
         
            
 In those circumstances, the period of time at the end of which the Commission was seised of a complaint and subsequently called
         upon to act by the appellants could not, in this case, be regarded as reasonable and it was therefore no longer open to the
         appellants to bring an action for a declaration of failure to act in that respect. 
         
            
 The appellants' action for a declaration of failure to act was therefore, in any event, manifestly inadmissible. 
         
            
 It follows from all the foregoing that the appeal must be dismissed. 
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, which apply to appeals by virtue of Article thereof, the party which has
         been unsuccessful shall be ordered to pay the costs, if they are claimed in the other party's pleadings.  Since the appellants
         have been unsuccessful in their grounds of appeal and the Commission has sought an order for costs against them, they must
         be ordered to pay the costs. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)
 hereby: 
         
1.
 Dismisses the appeal; 
            
2.
 Orders Schlüsselverlag J.S. Moser GmbH, J. Wimmer Medien GmbH & Co. KG, Styria Medien AG, Zeitungs- und Verlags-Gesellschaft
            mbH, Eugen Ruβ Vorarlberger Zeitungsverlag und Druckerei GmbH,  
            Die PresseVerlags-Gesellschaft mbH and  
            Salzburger Nachrichten Verlags-Gesellschaft mbH & Co. KG to pay the costs. 
            
Puissochet
Gulmann 
Macken 
Colneric
Cunha Rodrigues 
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on September 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
J.-P. Puissochet  
Registrar
President of the Sixth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: German.
Top  
 