
Case C-261/Gaetano Mantello
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Oberlandesgericht Stuttgart)
(Reference for a preliminary ruling – Judicial cooperation in criminal matters – European arrest warrant – Framework Decision 2002/584/JHA – Article 3(2) – Ne bis in idem – Concept of the ‘same acts’ – Possibility for the executing judicial authority to refuse to execute a European arrest warrant – Final judgment in the issuing Member State – Possession of narcotic drugs – Trafficking in narcotic drugs – Criminal organisation)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        European Union – Police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters – Framework Decision on the European arrest warrant and
            surrender procedures between Member States – Grounds for optional non-execution of the European arrest warrant
(Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement, Art. 54; Council Framework Decision 2002/584, Art. 3(2))
2.        European Union – Police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters – Framework Decision on the European arrest warrant and
            surrender procedures between Member States – Grounds for optional non-execution of the European arrest warrant
(Council Framework Decision 2002/584, Art. 3(2))
1.        For the purposes of the issue and execution of a European arrest warrant, the concept of ‘same acts’ in Article 3(2) of Council
         Framework Decision 2002/on the European arrest warrant and the surrender procedures between Member States constitutes
         an autonomous concept of European Union law. In addition, that concept of the ‘same acts’ also appears in Article of the
         Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement and has, in that context, been interpreted as referring only to the nature
         of the acts, encompassing a set of concrete circumstances inextricably linked together, irrespective of the legal classification
         given to them or the legal interest protected. In view of the shared objective of Article of the Schengen Convention and
         Article 3(2) of the Framework Decision, which is to ensure that a person is not prosecuted or tried more than once in respect
         of the same acts, an interpretation of that concept given in the context of the Schengen Implementing Convention is equally
         valid for the purposes of Framework Decision 2002/584. 
      
(see paras 39-40, 51, operative part)
2.        In circumstances in which, in response to a request for information within the meaning of Article 15(2) of Framework Decision
         2002/on the European arrest warrant and the surrender procedures between Member States made by the executing judicial
         authority, the issuing judicial authority, applying its national law and in compliance with the requirements deriving from
         the concept of ‘same acts’ as set forth in Article 3(2) of the Framework Decision, expressly stated that the earlier judgment
         delivered under its legal system did not constitute a final judgment covering the acts referred to in the arrest warrant issued
         by it and therefore did not preclude the criminal proceedings referred to in that arrest warrant, the executing judicial authority
         has no reason to apply, in connection with such a judgment, the ground for mandatory non-execution provided for in Article
         3(2) of the Framework Decision.
      
A requested person is considered to have been finally judged in respect of the same acts within the meaning of Article 3(2)
         of Framework Decision 2002/when, following criminal proceedings, further prosecution is definitively barred or when the
         judicial authorities of a Member State have adopted a decision by which the accused is finally acquitted in respect of the
         alleged acts. Whether a person has been ‘finally’ judged for the purposes of Article 3(2) of the Framework Decision is determined
         by the law of the Member State in which judgment was delivered. Thus, a decision which, under the law of the Member State
         which instituted criminal proceedings against a person, does not definitively bar further prosecution at national level in
         respect of certain acts cannot, in principle, constitute a procedural obstacle to the possible opening or continuation of
         criminal proceedings in respect of the same acts against that person in one of the Member States of the European Union. That
         is the case, in particular, where the issuing judicial authority states expressly that, under its national law, the accused
         had been finally judged in respect of the individual acts consisting in illegal possession of drugs but that the criminal
         proceedings covered by the arrest warrant were based on different acts related to organised crime offences and other offences
         of illegal possession of drugs intended for resale, which were not covered by its earlier judgment, and that is so even if
         the investigating authorities already held certain factual information concerning those offences. When it is clear from the
         reply given by the issuing judicial authority that the first judgment delivered by a national court cannot be regarded as
         having definitively barred further prosecution at national level in respect of the acts referred to in the arrest warrant
         issued by it, the executing judicial authority was obliged to draw all the appropriate conclusions from the assessments made
         by the issuing judicial authority in its response.
      
(see paras 45-47, 49-51, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
November (*)
      
(Reference for a preliminary ruling – Judicial cooperation in criminal matters – European arrest warrant – Framework Decision 2002/584/JHA – Article 3(2) – Ne bis in idem – Concept of the ‘same acts’ – Possibility for the executing judicial authority to refuse to execute a European arrest warrant – Final judgment in the issuing Member State – Possession of narcotic drugs – Trafficking in narcotic drugs – Criminal organisation)
In Case C‑261/09,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EU from the Oberlandesgericht Stuttgart (Germany), made by decision of
         June 2009, received at the Court on July 2009, in the proceedings concerning the execution of a European arrest warrant
         issued in respect of
      
Gaetano Mantello,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, A. Tizzano, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, K. Lenaerts and J.‑C. Bonichot, Presidents of Chambers,
         M. Ilešič, J. Malenovský, U. Lõhmus, E. Levits, A. Ó Caoimh, L. Bay Larsen, C. Toader (Rapporteur) and M. Berger, Judges,
      
Advocate General: Y. Bot,
Registrar: B. Fülöp, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on July 2010,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        the German Government, by S. Unzeitig and J. Möller, acting as Agents,
–        the Czech Government, by M. Smolek, acting as Agent,
–        the Greek Government, by T. Papadopoulou and G. Karipsiadis, acting as Agents,
–        the Spanish Government, by M. Muñoz Pérez, acting as Agent,
–        the French Government, by G. de Bergues and B. Beaupère-Manokha, acting as Agents,
–        the Italian Government, by G. Palmieri, acting as Agent, assisted by P. Gentili, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Netherlands Government, by M. de Ree, acting as Agent,
–        the Polish Government, by M. Dowgielewicz, acting as Agent,
–        the Swedish Government, by A. Falk and C. Meyer-Seitz, acting as Agents,
–        the United Kingdom Government, by S. Hathaway, acting as Agent, and by S. Lee, Barrister,
–        the European Commission, by S. Grünheid and R. Troosters, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 3(2) of Council Framework Decision 2002/584/JHA
         of June on the European arrest warrant and the surrender procedures between Member States (OJ L 190, p. 1) (‘the
         Framework Decision’) and, in particular, of the ne bis in idem principle.
      
The reference was made in the context of the execution in Germany of a European arrest warrant relating to criminal proceedings
         instituted by the Italian authorities against Mr Mantello and other persons who are suspected of having organised cocaine
         trafficking in the region of Vittoria, Italy.
      
 Legal context
 European Union law
Recitals 1, 5, 8, and in the preamble to the Framework Decision read as follows:
      
‘(1)      According to the Conclusions of the Tampere European Council of and October 1999, and in particular point thereof,
         the formal extradition procedure should be abolished among the Member States in respect of persons who are fleeing from justice
         after having been finally sentenced and extradition procedures should be speeded up in respect of persons suspected of having
         committed an offence.
      
…
(5)      The objective set for the Union to become an area of freedom, security and justice leads to abolishing extradition between
         Member States and replacing it by a system of surrender between judicial authorities. Further, the introduction of a new simplified
         system of surrender of sentenced or suspected persons for the purposes of execution or prosecution of criminal sentences makes
         it possible to remove the complexity and potential for delay inherent in the present extradition procedures. Traditional cooperation
         relations which have prevailed up till now between Member States should be replaced by a system of free movement of judicial
         decisions in criminal matters, covering both pre-sentence and final decisions, within an area of freedom, security and justice.
      
…
(8)      Decisions on the execution of the European arrest warrant must be subject to sufficient controls, which means that a judicial
         authority of the Member State where the requested person has been arrested will have to take the decision on his or her surrender.
      
…
(10)      The mechanism of the European arrest warrant is based on a high level of confidence between Member States. Its implementation
         may be suspended only in the event of a serious and persistent breach by one of the Member States of the principles set out
         in Article 6(1) of the Treaty on European Union, determined by the Council pursuant to Article 7(1) of the said Treaty with
         the consequences set out in Article 7(2) thereof.
      
…
(12)      This Framework Decision respects fundamental rights and observes the principles recognised by Article of the Treaty on European
         Union and reflected in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union …, in particular Chapter VI thereof. Nothing
         in this Framework Decision may be interpreted as prohibiting refusal to surrender a person for whom a European arrest warrant
         has been issued when there are reasons to believe, on the basis of objective elements, that the said arrest warrant has been
         issued for the purpose of prosecuting or punishing a person on the grounds of his or her sex, race, religion, ethnic origin,
         nationality, language, political opinions or sexual orientation, or that that person’s position may be prejudiced for any
         of these reasons.
      
…’
Article of the Framework Decision states:
      
‘1.      The European arrest warrant is a judicial decision issued by a Member State with a view to the arrest and surrender by another
         Member State of a requested person, for the purposes of conducting a criminal prosecution or executing a custodial sentence
         or detention order.
      
2.      Member States shall execute any European arrest warrant on the basis of the principle of mutual recognition and in accordance
         with the provisions of this Framework Decision.
      
3.      This Framework Decision shall not have the effect of modifying the obligation to respect fundamental rights and fundamental
         legal principles as enshrined in Article of the Treaty on European Union.’
      
Article 2(1) and (2) of the Framework Decision state:
      
‘1.      A European arrest warrant may be issued for acts punishable by the law of the issuing Member State by a custodial sentence
         or a detention order for a maximum period of at least months or, where a sentence has been passed or a detention order
         has been made, for sentences of at least four months.
      
2.      The following offences, if they are punishable in the issuing Member State by a custodial sentence or a detention order for
         a maximum period of at least three years and as they are defined by the law of the issuing Member State, shall, under the
         terms of this Framework Decision and without verification of the double criminality of the act, give rise to surrender pursuant
         to a European arrest warrant:
      
–        participation in a criminal organisation,
…
–        illicit trafficking in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances,
…’
The Framework Decision provides in Article 3, entitled ‘Grounds for mandatory non-execution of the European arrest warrant’,
         as follows:
      
‘The judicial authority of the Member State of execution (hereinafter “executing judicial authority”) shall refuse to execute
         the European arrest warrant in the following cases:
      
…
(2)      if the executing judicial authority is informed that the requested person has been finally judged by a Member State in respect
         of the same acts provided that, where there has been sentence, the sentence has been served or is currently being served or
         may no longer be executed under the law of the sentencing Member State;
      
…’
Article of the Framework Decision, entitled ‘Surrender decision’, provides:
      
‘1.      The executing judicial authority shall decide, within the time-limits and under the conditions defined in this Framework Decision,
         whether the person is to be surrendered.
      
2.      If the executing judicial authority finds the information communicated by the issuing Member State to be insufficient to allow
         it to decide on surrender, it shall request that the necessary supplementary information, in particular with respect to Articles
         to and Article 8, be furnished as a matter of urgency and may fix a time-limit for the receipt thereof, taking into account
         the need to observe the time-limits set in Article 17.
      
3.      The issuing judicial authority may at any time forward any additional useful information to the executing judicial authority.’
Article of the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement of June between the Governments of the States of
         the Benelux Economic Union, the Federal Republic of Germany and the French Republic on the gradual abolition of checks at
         their common borders (OJ L 239, p. 19), signed in Schengen (Luxembourg) on June (‘the CISA’), provides:
      
‘A person whose trial has been finally disposed of in one Contracting Party may not be prosecuted in another Contracting Party
         for the same acts provided that, if a penalty has been imposed, it has been enforced, is actually in the process of being
         enforced or can no longer be enforced under the laws of the sentencing Contracting Party.’
      
Article 57(1) and (2) of the CISA provide:
      
‘1.      Where a Contracting Party charges a person with an offence and the competent authorities of that Contracting Party have reason
         to believe that the charge relates to the same acts as those in respect of which the person’s trial has been finally disposed
         of in another Contracting Party, those authorities shall, if they deem it necessary, request the relevant information from
         the competent authorities of the Contracting Party in whose territory judgment has already been delivered.
      
2.      The information requested shall be provided as soon as possible and shall be taken into consideration as regards further action
         to be taken in the proceedings under way.’
      
It is apparent from the information concerning the date of entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam, published in the Official Journal of the European Communities of May (OJ L 114, p. 56), that the Federal Republic of Germany made a declaration on the basis of Article 35(2)
         EU by which it accepted the jurisdiction of the Court to give preliminary rulings in accordance with the arrangements laid
         down in Article 35(3)(b) EU.
      
 National law
 German law
Article 3(2) of Framework Decision 2002/was transposed into German law by the Law on the European Arrest Warrant of July (Europäisches Haftbefehlsgesetz, BGBl. I, p. 1721) (‘the EuHbG’), which amended Paragraph 83(1) of the Law
         of December on international mutual assistance in criminal matters (Gesetz über die internationale Rechtshilfe in
         Strafsachen) (‘IRG’). That paragraph, headed ‘Supplementary conditions governing authorisation’, provides:
      
‘Extradition shall not be authorised where:
‘1.      The accused’s trial in respect of the same acts for which extradition is sought has been disposed of in another Member State
         by way of final judgment, provided that, where a sentence has been imposed, it has already been served, is currently being
         served or can no longer be executed under the law of the sentencing State …
      
…’
 Italian law
Articles and of Decree No of the President of the Republic of October 1990, containing the consolidated text of
         the laws governing narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and concerning the prevention and treatment of, and rehabilitation
         following, drug addiction (‘Decree No 309/90’), read as follows:
      
‘Article 73. Unlawful production, trafficking and possession of narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances
1.      Any person who, in the absence of the authorisation referred to in Article 17, grows, produces, manufactures, extracts, refines,
         sells, offers or provides for sale, transfers, distributes, markets, transports, procures, sends, passes on, places in transit
         or delivers for whatever purpose narcotics drugs or psychotropic substances … shall be liable to a term of imprisonment of
         between and years and to a fine of between EUR and EUR …
      
…
6.      If the offence is committed by three or more persons acting jointly, the penalty shall be increased.
Article 74. Association for the purpose of unlawful trafficking in narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances
1.      Where three or more persons act jointly for the purpose of committing several of the offences provided for under Article 73,
         the person who promotes, establishes, directs, organises or finances that association shall be liable solely to a term of
         imprisonment of not less than years.
      
2.      Any person who participates in the association shall be liable to a term of imprisonment of not less than years.
3.      The penalty shall be increased if the number of persons associated is ...
…’
Under Article of the Italian Code of Criminal Procedure, ‘an accused person who has been acquitted or convicted in criminal
         proceedings by way of a judgment or order which has become final may not have fresh criminal proceedings brought against him
         in respect of the same act, even if the latter is treated differently in terms of legal classification, degree of seriousness
         or circumstances’.
      
According to information provided by the Italian Government, it is none the less clear from the case-law of the Corte Suprema
         di cassazione (Supreme Court of Cassation) that ‘the exception laid down in Article of the Code of Criminal Procedure
         may not be relied upon if the act which gave rise to a final judgment concerns a situation in which several offences are committed
         by means of a single act, where the conduct in respect of which a final judgment has already been delivered may be factually
         redefined and classified, according to a separate or even alternative assessment, within a broader category of criminal offences’.
      
 The facts in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
On November 2008, the Tribunale di Catania (Catania District Court) (Italy) issued a European arrest warrant (‘the arrest
         warrant’) in respect of Mr Mantello, for his arrest and surrender to the Italian authorities in the context of criminal proceedings
         instituted against him. That arrest warrant is based on a national arrest warrant issued by the same court on September
         2008, in respect of Mr Mantello and other co-accused.
      
The arrest warrant is based on two alleged acts of Mr Mantello.
      
He is accused, first, of having participated, between January and November 2005, in the framework of a criminal organisation
         comprising at least other persons, in cocaine trafficking, organised in Vittoria, in other Italian cities and in Germany.
         It is alleged that Mr Mantello not only played the role of courier and middleman, but was also in charge of obtaining and
         dealing in cocaine. Under Article 74(1) and Article 74(3) of Decree No 309/90, those acts are punishable, under Italian law,
         by imprisonment for a minimum term of years.
      
Second, during that period and in the same places, acting alone or in concert with others, he is alleged to have unlawfully
         taken possession of, retained, transported, sold or disposed of cocaine to third parties. Those acts are punishable under
         Italian law by imprisonment for a term of between and years, a sentence which is liable to be increased.
      
In that regard, Mr Mantello also faces charges of aggravated criminal conduct to the extent that the cocaine was supplied
         by the network to a minor.
      
According to the information contained in the national arrest warrant, from January onwards various authorities investigated
         the unlawful trafficking in cocaine which was rife in the Vittoria region. The investigations took the form in particular
         of extensive telephone tapping which made it possible to bring to light the existence of an organised network, made up of
         two criminal organisations, resulting in the application of Article of Decree No 309/90. In addition, during the tapping
         of telephone calls made by Mr Mantello during the period from January to September 2005, his participation in the aforementioned
         network was confirmed. He was also shadowed by investigators during some of his journeys, including those between Sicily (Italy)
         and Milan (Italy) on July and August and between Sicily, Esslingen (Germany) and Catania on September 2005.
      
During that last-mentioned journey, Mr Mantello purchased g of cocaine in Esslingen and, on his return in the evening
         of September 2005, he was arrested, when alighting from the train at Catania station, by the railway police, who searched
         him and discovered that he was carrying two packets containing 9.g and 145.g of cocaine, equivalent to between and
         individual doses.
      
By judgment of November 2005, the Tribunale di Catania sentenced Mr Mantello to a term of imprisonment of years, months
         and days and to a fine of EUR 000. In its indictment the Catania Public Prosecutor accused him of having been in unlawful
         possession, on September 2005, of 155.g of cocaine, intended for resale. The Tribunale di Catania found those acts to
         be proved. At Mr Mantello’s request, the court gave judgment in abridged proceedings which enabled him to obtain a reduction
         in his sentence. By judgment of April 2006, the Corte d’appello di Catania (Court of Appeal, Catania) upheld the judgment
         of that court.
      
Subsequently, the Tribunale di Catania reduced Mr Mantello’s sentence, meaning that he in fact served a sentence of only months and days in prison, while his fine was also reduced.
      
Having become aware, on December 2008, of the arrest warrant on the Schengen Information System (SIS), the Generalstaatsanwaltschaft
         Stuttgart (Public Prosecutor’s Office, Stuttgart) had Mr Mantello arrested on December at his home and brought before
         the Amtsgericht (District Court) Stuttgart. At the hearing, Mr Mantello opposed his surrender to the issuing judicial authority
         and did not renounce his claim to the specialty principle. On application by the Generalstaatsanwaltschaft Stuttgart, on January the Oberlandesgericht (Higher Regional Court) Stuttgart requested the Italian authorities to examine to what
         extent the judgment of the Tribunale di Catania of November precluded execution of the arrest warrant.
      
Not having received any information from those authorities, the Oberlandesgericht Stuttgart then decided, on March 2009,
         to suspend execution of the arrest warrant and, in view of the complex factual and legal issues raised by the main proceedings,
         assigned a lawyer to act for Mr Mantello.
      
Subsequently and in response to a request for information from the executing judicial authority, the investigating judge at
         the Tribunale di Catania finally declared, on April 2009, in his capacity as issuing judicial authority for the arrest warrant,
         that the judgment of November did not preclude the criminal proceedings referred to in the arrest warrant and therefore
         that the case was not subject to the ne bis in idem principle. The Generalstaatsanwaltschaft Stuttgart thereupon requested the referring court to execute the arrest warrant.
      
The Oberlandesgericht Stuttgart nevertheless enquires whether it may oppose execution of the arrest warrant issued in respect
         of the offences concerning organised crime since, in its view, the Italian investigating authorities, even at the time of
         the investigation which led to Mr Mantello’s conviction for possession of cocaine intended for resale, had sufficient evidence
         to charge and prosecute him in respect of the offences referred to in the arrest warrant, including organised drug trafficking.
         However, in the interests of the investigation, in order to be able to break up that trafficking network and arrest the other
         persons involved, the investigators did not pass on the information and evidence in their possession to the investigating
         judge or at that time request the prosecution of those acts.
      
According to the referring court, under German law as interpreted by the Bundesgerichtshof (Federal Court of Justice), a crime
         relating to participation in a criminal organisation may in principle still be the subject of a subsequent prosecution if,
         first, the earlier charges and judicial investigation concerned only individual acts of a member of such an organisation and
         if, second, the accused did not have a legitimate expectation that the earlier proceedings encompassed all the acts committed
         in the framework of that organisation. However, it appears that the referring court does not fully subscribe to the Bundesgerichthof’s
         position. It suggests a third condition, namely that, at the time of the judicial decision on the individual act, the investigators
         must have been unaware of the existence of other individual offences and of an offence relating to participation in a criminal
         organisation, which was specifically not the case so far as the investigating authorities in Italy were concerned.
      
In addition, the Oberlandesgericht Stuttgart notes that, first, in the main proceedings, there is no cross-border element
         since the potential ‘idem’ is constituted by a judicial decision emanating from the issuing Member State itself and not from another Member State.
         Second, that court notes that the concept of ‘same acts’ has not yet been the subject of a decision by the Court of Justice
         in the context of the European arrest warrant. The referring court enquires whether the case-law developed in the CISA context
         may be applied in a situation such as that in the main proceedings.
      
In those circumstances, the Oberlandesgericht Stuttgart decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions
         to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)  Is the existence of the “same acts” within the meaning of Article 3(2) of the Framework Decision … to be determined:
(a)      according to the law of the issuing Member State, or
(b)      according to the law of the executing Member State, or 
(c)      according to an autonomous interpretation, based on the law of the European Union, of the phrase “same acts”?
(2)       Are acts consisting in the unlawful importation of narcotic drugs the “same acts”, within the meaning of Article 3(2) of the
         Framework Decision, as participation in an organisation the purpose of which is illicit trafficking in such drugs, in so far
         as the investigating authorities had information and evidence, at the time at which sentence was passed in respect of such
         importation, which supported a strong suspicion of participation in such an organisation, but omitted for tactical reasons
         relating to their investigation to provide the relevant information and evidence to the court and to institute criminal proceedings
         on that basis?’
      
At the referring court’s request, the reason for which was its concern not to prolong the surrender proceedings requested
         by the Italian authorities, the designated chamber assessed the need to deal with the present case under the urgent procedure
         laid down in Article 104b of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice. By decision of July 2009, taken under the
         fourth subparagraph of Article 104b(1) of those Rules, the designated chamber decided, after hearing the Advocate General,
         not to grant that request.
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling 
By its questions, the referring court seeks to ascertain, in substance, whether, in circumstances such as those in the main
         proceedings, it may oppose the execution of the arrest warrant on the basis of Article 3(2) of the Framework Decision.
      
It can be seen from the first question referred, which raises the point whether the concept of the ‘same acts’ in Article
         3(2) is an autonomous concept of European Union law, that, according to the referring court, if that concept were to be analysed
         only in the light of the law of the issuing Member State or of that of the executing Member State, it would then be bound
         to order Mr Mantello’s surrender. That would be the case because, first, under German law as interpreted by the Bundesgerichtshof,
         a crime relating to participation in a criminal organisation may as a general rule still be the subject of a subsequent prosecution
         if the earlier charges and judicial investigation concerned only individual acts of a member of such an organisation and if,
         second, the accused did not have a legitimate expectation that the earlier proceedings encompassed all the acts committed
         in the framework of that organisation. Second, taking into account the case-law of the Corte suprema di cassazione referred
         to in paragraph of the present judgment and the information, mentioned in paragraph of this judgment, which was provided
         to the referring court on April by the investigating judge of the Tribunale di Catania, the judgment of November
         by that court does not preclude, under Italian law, the institution of criminal proceedings in respect of offences such
         as those alleged in the arrest warrant.
      
By contrast, were the notion of ‘same acts’ in Article 3(2) of the Framework Decision to be regarded as an autonomous concept
         of European Union law, the referring court asks by its second question whether, contrary to German and Italian law as interpreted
         by the supreme courts of those Member States, that provision of the Framework Decision would require – in order for criminal
         proceedings to be instituted against a person on the basis of an indictment broader than that in respect of which final judgment
         has already been given concerning an individual act – the investigators to have been unaware, when the charges which led to
         that final judgment were first laid, of the existence of other individual offences and of an offence relating to participation
         in a criminal organisation, which was specifically not the case so far as the investigating authorities in Italy were concerned.
      
As a preliminary point, it should be recalled that, as is apparent in particular from Article 1(1) and (2) of the Framework
         Decision and from recitals and in the preamble thereto, the purpose of the Framework Decision is to replace the multilateral
         system of extradition between Member States with a system of surrender, as between judicial authorities, of convicted persons
         or suspects for the purpose of enforcing judgments or of criminal proceedings, that system of surrender being based on the
         principle of mutual recognition (Case C‑123/Wolzenburg [2009] ECR I‑9621, paragraph 56).
      
The principle of mutual recognition, which underpins the Framework Decision, means that, in accordance with Article 1(2) of
         the Framework Decision, the Member States are in principle obliged to act upon a European arrest warrant (Case C-388/PPU
         Leymann and Pustovarov [2008] ECR I‑8983, paragraph 51).
      
The Member States may refuse to execute such a warrant only in the cases of mandatory non-execution laid down in Article of the Framework Decision or in the cases listed in Article thereof (see, to that effect, Leymann and Pustarov, paragraph 51).
      
In that regard, the concept of ‘same acts’ in Article 3(2) of the Framework Decision cannot be left to the discretion of the
         judicial authorities of each Member State on the basis of their national law. It follows from the need for uniform application
         of European Union law that, since that provision makes no reference to the law of the Member States with regard to that concept,
         the latter must be given an autonomous and uniform interpretation throughout the European Union (see, by analogy, Case C‑66/Koszłowski [2008] ECR I‑6041, paragraphs and 42). It is therefore an autonomous concept of European Union law which, as such, may
         be the subject of a reference for a preliminary ruling by any court before which a relevant action has been brought, under
         the conditions laid down in Title VII of Protocol No to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union on transitional
         provisions.
      
It should be recalled that that concept of the ‘same acts’ also appears in Article of the CISA. In that context, the concept
         has been interpreted as referring only to the nature of the acts, encompassing a set of concrete circumstances which are inextricably
         linked together, irrespective of the legal classification given to them or the legal interest protected (see Case C-436/Van Esbroeck [2006] ECR I‑2333, paragraphs 27, and 36, and Case C-150/Van Straaten [2006] ECR I‑9327, paragraphs 41, and 48).
      
In view of the shared objective of Article of the CISA and Article 3(2) of the Framework Decision, which is to ensure that
         a person is not prosecuted or tried more than once in respect of the same acts, it must be accepted that an interpretation
         of that concept given in the context of the CISA is equally valid for the purposes of the Framework Decision.
      
Where it is brought to the attention of the executing judicial authority that the ‘same acts’ as those which are referred
         to in the European arrest warrant which is the subject of proceedings before it have been the subject of a final judgment
         in another Member State, that authority must, in accordance with Article 3(2) of the Framework Decision, refuse to execute
         that arrest warrant, provided that, where there has been sentence, the sentence has been served or is currently being served
         or may no longer be executed under the law of the sentencing Member State.
      
In its reference for a preliminary ruling, the referring court states that it would at first sight be inclined to consider
         that the acts relied upon for the purposes of the final judgment of November 2005, that is to say Mr Mantello’s possession
         of 155.g of cocaine on September at Vittoria, are, for the purposes of the concept of the ‘same acts’, different
         from those referred to in the arrest warrant, that is to say, first, the acts which took place between January and November
         concerning Mr Mantello’s participation in a criminal organisation as courier, middleman and supplier and, second, those
         concerning the illegal possession of drugs during the same period in a number of Italian and German cities.
      
Thus, in fact, the referring court’s questions must be considered to relate more to the concept of ‘finally judged’ than to
         that of ‘same acts’. The referring court enquires whether, given the fact that, when the judgment of November was
         delivered, the Italian investigating authorities were in possession of evidence pertaining to acts carried out in the period
         from January to November which could have proved that Mr Mantello had committed offences relating to participation
         in a criminal organisation and had been in illegal possession of drugs, that judgment could be regarded as constituting not
         only a final judgment convicting him in respect of the individual acts of September in relation to which the offence
         of illegal possession of drugs intended for resale was applied, but also a judgment precluding subsequent prosecution of offences
         such as those referred to in the arrest warrant.
      
In other words, that court asks whether the fact that the investigating authorities held evidence concerning acts which constituted
         the offences referred to in the arrest warrant, but did not submit that evidence for consideration by the Tribunale de Catania
         when that court ruled on the individual acts of September 2005, makes it possible to treat the judgment as if it were a
         final judgment in respect of the acts set out in that arrest warrant.
      
In that regard, a requested person is considered to have been finally judged in respect of the same acts within the meaning
         of Article 3(2) of the Framework Decision where, following criminal proceedings, further prosecution is definitively barred
         (see, by analogy, Joined Cases C-187/and C-385/Gözütok and Brügge [2003] ECR I-1345, paragraph 30, and Case C-491/Turanský [2008] ECR I‑11039, paragraph 32) or where the judicial authorities of a Member State have adopted a decision by which the
         accused is finally acquitted in respect of the alleged acts (see, by analogy, Van Straaten, paragraph 61, and Turanský, paragraph 33).
      
Whether a person has been ‘finally’ judged for the purposes of Article 3(2) of the Framework Decision is determined by the
         law of the Member State in which judgment was delivered.
      
Thus, a decision which, under the law of the Member State which instituted criminal proceedings against a person, does not
         definitively bar further prosecution at national level in respect of certain acts cannot, in principle, constitute a procedural
         obstacle to the possible opening or continuation of criminal proceedings in respect of the same acts against that person in
         one of the Member States of the European Union (see, by analogy, Turanský, paragraph 36).
      
In that regard, as is the case with the cooperation arrangements provided for under Article of the CISA, Article 15(2)
         of the Framework Decision allows an executing judicial authority to request from the judicial authority of the Member State
         in whose territory a judgment has been delivered legal information on the precise nature of that judgment in order to decide
         whether, under the national law of that State, the judgment must be considered as having definitively barred further prosecution
         at national level (see, by analogy, Turanský, paragraph 37).
      
In the main proceedings, the referring court specifically used the cooperation arrangements provided for in Article 15(2)
         of the Framework Decision. In its reply, the issuing judicial authority expressly stated that, under Italian law, the accused
         had been finally judged in respect of the individual acts consisting in illegal possession of drugs but that the criminal
         proceedings covered by the arrest warrant were based on different acts related to organised crime offences and other offences
         of illegal possession of drugs intended for resale, which were not covered by its judgment of November 2005. Thus, although
         the investigating authorities held certain factual information concerning those offences, it was clear from the reply given
         by the issuing judicial authority that the first judgment of the Tribunale di Catania could not be regarded as having definitively
         barred further prosecution at national level in respect of the acts referred to in the arrest warrant issued by it.
      
Consequently, in circumstances such as those at issue in the main proceedings, where the issuing judicial authority, in response
         to a request for information within the meaning of Article 15(2) of the Framework Decision made by the executing judicial
         authority, expressly stated and explained that its earlier judgment did not cover the acts referred to in the arrest warrant
         issued by it and therefore did not preclude the criminal proceedings referred to in that arrest warrant, that executing judicial
         authority was obliged to draw all the appropriate conclusions from the assessments made by the issuing judicial authority
         in its response.
      
Taking all the foregoing considerations into account, the answer to be given to the referring court is that, for the purposes
         of the issue and execution of a European arrest warrant, the concept of ‘same acts’ in Article 3(2) of the Framework Decision
         constitutes an autonomous concept of European Union law. In circumstances such as those at issue in the main proceedings where,
         in response to a request for information within the meaning of Article 15(2) of that Framework Decision made by the executing
         judicial authority, the issuing judicial authority, applying its national law and in compliance with the requirements deriving
         from the concept of ‘same acts’ as enshrined in Article 3(2) of the Framework Decision, expressly stated that the earlier
         judgment delivered under its legal system did not constitute a final judgment covering the acts referred to in the arrest
         warrant issued by it and therefore did not preclude the criminal proceedings referred to in that arrest warrant, the executing
         judicial authority has no reason to apply, in connection with such a judgment, the ground for mandatory non-execution provided
         for in Article 3(2) of the Framework Decision.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby rules:
For the purposes of the issue and execution of a European arrest warrant, the concept of ‘same acts’ in Article 3(2) of Council
            Framework Decision 2002/584/JHA of June on the European arrest warrant and the surrender procedures between Member
            States constitutes an autonomous concept of European Union law.
In circumstances such as those at issue in the main proceedings where, in response to a request for information within the
            meaning of Article 15(2) of that Framework Decision made by the executing judicial authority, the issuing judicial authority,
            applying its national law and in compliance with the requirements deriving from the concept of ‘same acts’ as enshrined in
            Article 3(2) of the Framework Decision, expressly stated that the earlier judgment delivered under its legal system did not
            constitute a final judgment covering the acts referred to in the arrest warrant issued by it and therefore did not preclude
            the criminal proceedings referred to in that arrest warrant, the executing judicial authority has no reason to apply, in connection
            with such a judgment, the ground for mandatory non-execution provided for in Article 3(2) of the Framework Decision.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 