
Case C-562/Müller Fleisch GmbH
v
Land Baden-Württemberg
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Bundesverwaltungsgericht)
(System for monitoring bovine spongiform encephalopathy – Regulation (EC) No 999/– Bovine animals over months of age – Slaughter under normal conditions – Meat intended for human consumption – Mandatory screening test – National rules – Obligation to screen – Extension – Bovine animals over months of age)
Summary of the Judgment
Agriculture – Approximation of laws on animal health – Protective measures with regard to transmissible spongiform encephalopathies
(European Parliament and Council Regulation No 999/2001, as amended by Regulation No 1248/2001, Art. 6(1) and Annex III, Chapter
            A, Part I)
Article 6(1) of Regulation No 999/laying down rules for the prevention, control and eradication of certain transmissible
         spongiform encephalopathies and Annex III, Chapter A, Part I, to that regulation, as amended by Regulation No 1248/2001, do
         not preclude national rules under which all bovine animals over months of age must be screened for bovine spongiform encephalopathy
         (BSE).
      
In accordance with the principle of proportionality, which is one of the general principles of European Union law, the lawfulness
         of such screening tests is subject to the condition that they be appropriate and necessary in order to attain the objectives
         legitimately pursued; when there is a choice between several appropriate measures, recourse must be had to the least onerous,
         and the disadvantages caused must not be disproportionate to the aims pursued.
      
In that regard, the introduction of testing for all bovine animals of to months of age is an appropriate measure for
         detecting cases of BSE in animals in that age bracket and therefore for achieving the directly desired objective of that regulation
         which is, in accordance with its legal basis, namely, Article 152(4)(b) EC, the protection of public health. Furthermore,
         as regards the necessity of that measure, it must be borne in mind that Member States have a discretion in that field. Therefore,
         the fact that one Member State imposes less strict rules than another Member State does not mean that the latter’s rules are
         disproportionate. Likewise, the fact that, in response to the discovery of isolated cases of BSE in animals of months of
         age the Community legislature required, in respect of bovine animals over months of age, less extensive testing than that
         introduced by a Member State does not mean that that State may not properly regard that testing as necessary. Lastly, such
         a measure does not appear to go beyond what is necessary to achieve the objective of the protection of public health as it
         results from Regulation No 999/2001.
      
(see paras 32, 43-48, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
February (*)
      
(System for monitoring bovine spongiform encephalopathy – Regulation (EC) No 999/– Bovine animals over months of age – Slaughter under normal conditions – Meat intended for human consumption – Mandatory screening test – National rules – Obligation to screen – Extension – Bovine animals over months of age)
In Case C‑562/08,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Bundesverwaltungsgericht (Germany), made by decision of September 2008, received at the Court on December 2008, in the proceedings
      
Müller Fleisch GmbH
v
Land Baden-Württemberg,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, President of the Chamber, P. Lindh, U. Lõhmus (Rapporteur), A. Ó Caoimh and A. Arabadjiev,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Mazák,
Registrar: B. Fülöp, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on November 2009,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Müller Fleisch GmbH, by A. Kiefer, Rechtsanwalt,
–        the German Government, by M. Lumma and N. Vitzthum, acting as Agents,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by F. Erlbacher and G. von Rintelen, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 6(1) of Regulation (EC) No 999/of the
         European Parliament and of the Council of May laying down rules for the prevention, control and eradication of certain
         transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (OJ L 147, p. 1) and of Annex III, Chapter A, Part I to that regulation, as
         amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1248/of June (OJ L 173, p. 12).
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings between Müller Fleisch GmbH (‘Müller Fleisch’) and the Land Baden-Württemberg
         regarding the fee charged for screening tests for bovine spongiform encephalopathy (‘BSE’) carried out in its undertaking
         in July on bovine animals intended for slaughter. 
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
Regulation No 999/was adopted on the basis of Article 152(4)(b) EC. As is apparent from recital to that regulation,
         the regulation concerns the adoption of specific rules for the prevention, control and eradication of certain transmissible
         spongiform encephalopathies (‘TSEs’), including BSE, in view of the magnitude of the risk they pose to human and animal health.
      
The first subparagraph of Article 6(1) of Regulation No 999/2001, entitled ‘Monitoring system’, provides:
      
‘Each Member State shall carry out an annual programme for monitoring BSE and scrapie in accordance with Annex III, Chapter
         A. That programme shall include a screening procedure using rapid tests.’
      
In the original version of Regulation No 999/2001, Annex III, Chapter A, Part I set out the ‘Minimum requirements for a programme
         for monitoring BSE in bovine animals’. It provided, inter alia, for the selection of certain sub-populations of bovine animals
         over months of age, including those slaughtered normally for human consumption, for the purposes of that programme.
      
Annex III, Chapter A, Part III to the original version of Regulation No 999/was entitled ‘Monitoring in higher risk animals’
         and provided:
      
‘In addition to the monitoring programmes set out in Parts I and II, Member States may on a voluntary basis carry out targeted
         surveillance for TSE in higher risk animals, such as:
      
–        animals originating from countries with indigenous TSE,
–        animals which have consumed potentially contaminated feedingstuffs,
–        animals born or derived from TSE-infected dams.’
Recitals and to Regulation No 1248/state:
      
‘(2) In view of the detection of [BSE] in two bovine animals at the age of months in routine testing of casualty slaughtered
         animals and to provide an early warning system of the emergence of any unfavourable trends in BSE incidence in younger animals,
         the age limit should be reduced to months in animals belonging to certain risk populations.
      
…
(7) Member States should be allowed to test other bovine animals on a voluntary basis, in particular where those animals are
         considered to present a higher risk, provided it is done without disrupting trade.’
      
Regulation No 1248/amends, inter alia, Annex III to Regulation No 999/2001. Annex III, Chapter A, Part I, as amended
         (referred to in paragraphs to below as ‘Part I’), applied as from July and is headed ‘Monitoring in bovine animals’.
      
Point of Part I, which concerns monitoring in animals slaughtered for human consumption, states:
      
‘2.1. All bovine animals over months of age:
–         subject to “special emergency slaughtering” as defined in Article 2(n) of Council Directive 64/433/EEC [of June on
         health problems affecting intra-Community trade in fresh meat (OJ, English Special Edition 1963-1964, p. 185)], or
      
–        slaughtered in accordance with Annex I, Chapter VI, point 28(c), to Directive 64/433/EEC,
shall be tested for BSE.
2.2. All bovine animals over months of age subject to normal slaughter for human consumption shall be tested for BSE.
…’
Point of Part I provides that bovine animals over months of age which have died or been killed for purposes other than,
         inter alia, human consumption are to be tested for BSE at random in accordance with the minimum sample sizes specified in
         that point.
      
Point of Part I, headed ‘Monitoring in other animals’, provides:
      
‘In addition to the testing referred to in points to 4, Member States may on a voluntary basis decide to test other bovine
         animals on their territory, in particular where those animals originate from countries with indigenous BSE, have consumed
         potentially contaminated feedingstuffs or were born or derived from BSE infected dams.’
      
 National legislation
The Regulation on the screening of slaughtered bovine animals for BSE in accordance with meat hygiene law (Verordnung zur
         fleischhygienerechtlichen Untersuchung von geschlachteten Rindern auf BSE) of December (BGBl. I, p. 1659), as
         amended by the Regulation of January (BGBl. I, p. 164), (‘the BSE-Untersuchungsverordnung’) makes screening for
         BSE mandatory.
      
It is apparent from the order for reference that, after a case of BSE was identified in Germany in a 28-month-old bovine animal,
         the general age limit for screening bovine animals for BSE was reduced from to months by virtue of the regulation of
         January 2001.
      
Paragraph 1(1) of the BSE-Untersuchungsverordnung thus provides that bovine animals over months of age are to be tested
         using one of the approved tests listed in Annex IVA to Commission Decision 98/272/EC of April on epidemio-surveillance
         for transmissible spongiform encephalopathies and amending Decision 94/474/EC (OJ L 122, p. 59).
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
Müller Fleisch is a slaughtering and cutting business in the meat processing industry. By assessment notice dated October
         2001, the Landratsamt Enzkreis (Chief Administrative Office for the District of Enz) required Müller Fleisch to pay fees for
         BSE screening tests carried out at its premises in July on bovine animals for slaughter. That payment included, inter
         alia, a sum of EUR 401.for tests carried out on bovine animals of to months of age.
      
The applicant in the main proceedings brought an action challenging the legality of those fees, maintaining, inter alia, that
         Article 6(1) of Regulation (EC) No 999/in conjunction with Annex III, Chapter A, Part I thereto does not permit general
         BSE screening to be introduced for bovine animals in that age bracket.
      
Müller Fleisch was not successful either in that action or on appeal. The appeal court held that the general obligation laid
         down by Community law to screen bovine animals over months of age does not entail a prohibition on the screening of younger
         bovine animals, as Annex III, Chapter A, Part I, point to Regulation (EC) No 999/expressly permits Member States to
         screen other bovine animals, in so far as it is done without disrupting trade. There had been no such disruption in the present
         case.
      
The Bundesverwaltungsgericht (Federal Administrative Court), before which an appeal on a point of law has been brought, is,
         by contrast, of the opinion that the fact that Annex III, Chapter A, Part I to Regulation (EC) No 999/establishes a specific
         monitoring system, with detailed rules, militates against such an extension of screening requirements. According to that court,
         it is apparent from the second and third examples in Annex III, Chapter A, Part I, point to Regulation (EC) No 999/that, by means of that point, the Community legislature envisaged only selective additions to the screening programme provided
         for. Furthermore, bovine animals of to months of age cannot be considered to be ‘other animals’ within the meaning of
         that provision since the screening requirements which relate to them are already regulated in a specific manner. Lastly, substantial
         changes to the Community programme might result in a disruption in trade.
      
In those circumstances, the Bundesverwaltungsgericht decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following question to the
         Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Is Article 6(1) of Regulation … No 999/2001…, in conjunction with Annex III, Chapter A, Part I to that regulation, as amended
         by … Regulation [No 1248/2001] … to be interpreted as precluding the extension of mandatory screening to all bovine animals
         over months of age, as established by the BSE-Untersuchungsverordnung…?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
By its question, the national court asks, in essence, whether Article 6(1) of Regulation No 999/and Annex III, Chapter
         A, Part I to that regulation, as amended by Regulation No 1248/2001, preclude national rules under which all bovine animals
         over months of age must be screened for BSE.
      
It is apparent from the first subparagraph of Article 6(1) of Regulation No 999/that the annual programme for monitoring
         BSE that Member States are required to carry out, which must include a screening procedure, must be in accordance with Annex
         III, Chapter A to that regulation.
      
Annex III, Chapter A, Part I, points and 3, as amended by Regulation No 1248/2001, provide that, first, all bovine animals
         over months of age which are subject to normal slaughter for human consumption and, secondly, bovine animals over months
         of age which belong to certain populations identified in those points must be tested for BSE.
      
Furthermore, under point of Part I, Member States may test bovine animals other than those mentioned, inter alia, in points
         and of Part I, which are on their territory.
      
According to Müller Fleisch, that possibility does not go so far as to enable Member States to impose a screening procedure
         for all bovine animals over months of age, as provided for by the German rules at issue in the main proceedings, but permits
         only the targeted screening of higher risk animals.
      
In that regard, first, even if the animals mentioned in the second and third examples in the list in Annex III, Chapter A,
         Part I, point to Regulation No 999/2001, as amended by Regulation No 1248/2001, were to be regarded as belonging to specific
         and restricted higher risk groups, the first example, namely animals which originate from countries with indigenous BSE, potentially
         covers the whole bovine animal population of such a country. Secondly, the words ‘in particular’ which precede the list of
         circumstances in which screening tests may be carried out on other bovine animals show that that list is not exhaustive.
      
Likewise, by using the words ‘in particular’ in recital to Regulation No 1248/2001, the Community legislature showed that
         it did not intend to restrict Member States’ power to impose such tests solely to animals regarded as presenting a higher
         risk.
      
That finding is also borne out by the fact that the provision corresponding to the abovementioned point in the original
         version of Annex III to Regulation No 999/2001, namely Chapter A, Part III of that annex, stated that Member States could
         carry out targeted surveillance in higher risk animals, whereas there is no such restriction in point 5.
      
It must be held that the wording of Annex III, Chapter A, Part I, point to Regulation No 999/2001, as amended by Regulation
         No 1248/2001, in no way bears out the interpretation of that provision proposed by Müller Fleisch and does not preclude the
         imposition, by a Member State, of screening tests on all bovine animals over months of age on its territory.
      
However, the applicant in the main proceedings submits that, as mandatory screening in respect of bovine animals of to
         months of age has already been provided for in Part I, points and 3, the animals in that age bracket cannot be considered
         to be ‘other bovine animals’ within the meaning of that provision and that the Community legislature did not leave the introduction
         of tests on other animals to the discretion of Member States.
      
That argument cannot be upheld.
      
First, that argument is tantamount to maintaining that Annex III, Chapter A, Part I, points and to Regulation No 999/2001,
         as amended by Regulation No 1248/2001, regulate the screening of bovine animals of to months of age exhaustively, with
         the result that point of Part I would apply only to bovine animals in other age brackets. It would then have to be accepted
         that the same is true as regards animals over months of age since points and also relate to tests on them. It would
         follow that point would apply only to bovine animals under months of age, which would to a great extent render it redundant.
      
Secondly, it must be pointed out that Regulation No 999/has, in accordance with its legal basis, namely Article 152(4)(b)
         EC, as its direct objective the protection of public health. According to settled case-law, the health and life of humans
         rank foremost among the assets and interests protected by the EC Treaty and it is for the Member States to determine the level
         of protection which they wish to afford to public health and the way in which that level is to be achieved, which implies
         that Member States must be allowed discretion (see, to that effect, Case C-141/Commission v Germany [2008] ECR I-6935, paragraph 51; Case C-169/Hartlauer [2009] ECR I-0000, paragraph 30; and Joined Cases C-171/and C-172/Apothekerkammer des Saarlandes and Others [2009] ECR I-0000, paragraph 19).
      
Such a discretion is in accordance with the objective set out in recital to Regulation No 1248/of providing an early
         warning system of the emergence of any unfavourable trends in BSE incidence in younger animals. Such a discretion is also
         made apparent in recital to that regulation, which shows, by its use of the word ‘considered’, that whether it is appropriate
         to test other bovine animals is a matter for the Member States to assess.
      
The amendments made by Regulation No 1248/to Annex III to Regulation No 999/show an increased discretion as against
         the original version of that annex. As was pointed out in paragraph of this judgment, Member States are no longer restricted
         to targeted screening of higher risk animals.
      
It follows that Regulation No 999/grants Member States a discretion as regards the bovine animals which they may screen
         for BSE.
      
It follows from the foregoing that the provisions of Regulation No 999/at issue in the main proceedings do not, in principle,
         preclude the extension by a Member State of mandatory BSE screening to all bovine animals over months of age on its territory.
      
However, recital to Regulation No 1248/states that Member States should be allowed to test other bovine animals in
         so far as it is done without disrupting trade.
      
It must be observed at the outset that that clarification is not to be understood as referring to all disruptions in trade.
         First, any screening procedure is liable to result in some such disruptions, such as delays for example, however minor they
         may be.
      
Secondly, although it is true that allowing Member States to test other bovine animals on a voluntary basis may result, in
         a Member State which imposes stricter standards in that regard, in the discovery of a sufficiently high number of cases of
         BSE for that Member State to be downgraded in the categories defined in Annex II to Regulation No 999/2001, headed ‘Determination
         of BSE status’, the fact remains that the disruptions in exports of animals and products of animal origin which might arise
         ought to contribute to the objective of protecting human and animal health.
      
It is also important to point out that the issue of disruptions in trade is not explicitly mentioned in the enacting terms
         of Regulations Nos 999/and 1248/2001. As the preamble to a Community act has no binding legal force (Case C-134/Tyson Parketthandel [2009] ECR I‑0000, paragraph and the case-law cited), the clarification in recital to Regulation No 1248/must,
         as the Commission of the European Communities maintained at the hearing, be interpreted as a reference to primary law and,
         in particular, to the principle of proportionality.
      
The Member States must, in exercising the discretion described in paragraphs to of this judgment, comply with the provisions
         of the Treaty on the free movement of goods where applicable. Those provisions prohibit the Member States from introducing
         or maintaining, as regards the objective of the protection of public health, unjustified restrictions on the exercise of that
         freedom (see, by analogy, Case C‑372/Watts [2006] ECR I-4325, paragraph 92; Commission v Germany, paragraph 23; and Apothekerkammer des Saarlandes and Others, paragraph 18).
      
With regard to the screening tests that a Member State decides to carry out on a part of the bovine population in pursuit
         of that objective, it cannot be accepted that there is a disproportionate disruption in trade.
      
In accordance with the principle of proportionality, which is one of the general principles of European Union law, the lawfulness
         of such screening tests is subject to the condition that they are appropriate and necessary in order to attain the objectives
         legitimately pursued; when there is a choice between several appropriate measures, recourse must be had to the least onerous,
         and the disadvantages caused must not be disproportionate to the aims pursued (see, by analogy, Case C‑220/Lennox [2003] ECR I-7091, paragraph 76). 
      
In that regard, the introduction of testing for all bovine animals of to months of age is an appropriate measure for
         detecting cases of BSE in animals in that age bracket and therefore for achieving the desired objective.
      
Furthermore, as regards the necessity of that measure, it must be borne in mind that Member States have a discretion in that
         field. Therefore, the fact that one Member State imposes less strict rules than another Member State does not mean that the
         latter’s rules are disproportionate (Commission v Germany, paragraph 51)
      
Likewise, the fact that, in response to the discovery of isolated cases of BSE in animals of months of age, as is apparent
         from recital to Regulation No 1248/and the order for reference, the Community legislature required, in respect of bovine
         animals over months of age, less extensive testing than that introduced by a Member State does not mean that that State
         may not properly regard that testing as necessary.
      
Lastly, a national measure, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, does not appear to go beyond what is necessary
         to achieve the objective of the protection of public health as it results from Regulation No 999/2001.
      
Therefore, the answer to the question referred is that Article 6(1) of Regulation No 999/and Annex III, Chapter A, Part
         I to that regulation, as amended by Regulation No 1248/2001, do not preclude national rules under which all bovine animals
         over months of age must be screened for BSE.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
Article 6(1) of Regulation (EC) No 999/of the European Parliament and of the Council of May laying down rules
            for the prevention, control and eradication of certain transmissible spongiform encephalopathies and Annex III, Chapter A,
            Part I to that regulation, as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1248/of June 2001, do not preclude national
            rules under which all bovine animals over months of age must be screened for bovine spongiform encephalopathy.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 