
Case C-183/RUMA GmbH
v
Oberfinanzdirektion Nürnberg
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Finanzgericht München)
(Common Customs Tariff – Combined Nomenclature – Tariff classification – Heading – Subheading – Keypad membrane for mobile telephones)
Judgment of the Court (Fifth Chamber), February Summary of the Judgment
Common Customs Tariff – Tariff headings – Keypad membranes of polycarbonate intended for incorporation into mobile telephones
The Combined Nomenclature in Annex I to Regulation No 2658/on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common
         Customs Tariff, as amended by Regulation No 1789/2003, must be interpreted as meaning that keypad membranes of polycarbonate
         which have moulded keys on their upper side and non-conductive contact pins on their underside and are intended for incorporation
         into mobile telephones, which are unquestionably an essential component for the operation of those mobile telephones and the
         structure and method of operation of which preclude any use other than as a component of those telephones, fall under subheading
         as part of a mobile telephone in accordance with heading 8525. 
      
(see paras 33, 37-38, 40, operative part 1)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
February (*)
      
(Common Customs Tariff – Combined Nomenclature – Tariff classification – Heading – Subheading – Keypad membrane for mobile telephones)
In Case C-183/06,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Finanzgericht München (Germany), made by decision of February
         2006, received at the Court on April 2006, in the proceedings
      
RUMA GmbH
v
Oberfinanzdirektion Nürnberg,
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
composed of R. Schintgen, President of the Chamber, A. Borg Barthet (Rapporteur) and E. Levits, Judges,
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       RUMA GmbH, by M. Beer, Rechtsanwalt,
–       the Hungarian Government, by J. Fazekas, acting as Agent,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by J. Hottiaux, acting as Agent, assisted by B. Wägenbaur, avocat,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of headings and of the Combined Nomenclature
         in Annex I to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/of July on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common
         Customs Tariff (OJ L 256, p. 1), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1789/of September (OJ L 281, p. 1) (‘the CN’).
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings between RUMA Finanzierungs- & Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH (‘RUMA’) and
         the Oberfinanzdirektion Nürnberg (Principal Revenue Office, Nuremberg – ‘the Oberfinanzdirektion’) regarding the tariff classification
         of a keypad membrane for a mobile telephone with organiser functions.
      
 Legal context
The Combined Nomenclature, established by Regulation No 2658/87, is based on the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding
         System (‘the HS’) drawn up by the Customs Cooperation Council (now the World Customs Organisation) and established by the
         International Convention concluded at Brussels on June and approved on behalf of the Community by Council Decision
         87/369/EEC of April (OJ L 198, p. 1). It uses the 6-digit headings and subheadings of the HS and only the seventh
         and eighth digits forming subdivisions are specific to it.
      
The version of the Combined Nomenclature applicable at the time of the facts in the main proceedings is set out in Annex I
         to Regulation No 1789/2003. Part Two of that annex includes Section XVI, ‘Machinery and mechanical appliances; electrical
         equipment; parts thereof; sound recorders and reproducers, television image and sound recorders and reproducers, and parts
         and accessories of such articles’, which contains two chapters, Chapter of which is entitled ‘Electrical machinery and
         equipment and parts thereof; sound recorders and reproducers, television image and sound recorders and reproducers, and parts
         and accessories of such articles’.
      
Chapter of the CN contains inter alia the following headings and subheadings:
‘Transmission apparatus for radio-telephony, radio-telegraphy, radio-broadcasting or television, whether or not incorporating
         reception apparatus or sound recording or reproducing apparatus; television cameras; still image video cameras and other video
         camera recorders; digital cameras:
      
                  …
– Transmission apparatus incorporating reception apparatus:
                  …
– – – For cellular networks (mobile telephones)
…
Parts suitable for use solely or principally with the apparatus of headings to 8528:
                  …
– Other: 
                           …
– – – Parts of apparatus of subheadings 50, 91, 99, and 92’.
Heading of the CN is entitled ‘Boards, panels, consoles, desks, cabinets and other bases, equipped with two or more apparatus
         of heading or 8536, for electric control or the distribution of electricity …’.
      
Heading 8538, entitled ‘Parts suitable for use solely or principally with the apparatus of heading 8535, or 8537’, includes
         inter alia the following subheadings:
      
‘…
– Other: 
                           …
                           – – Other:
…
– – – Other’.
All the sections and, within each section, all the chapters of the CN are preceded by some notes, namely section or chapter
         notes. Note to Section XVI of the CN provides inter alia:
      
‘…
(a)       Parts which are goods included in any of the headings of Chapter or (other than headings 8409, 8431, 8448, 8466, 8473,
         8485, 8503, 8522, 8529, and 8548) are in all cases to be classified in their respective headings.
      
(b)       Other parts, if suitable for use solely or principally with a particular kind of machine, or with a number of machines of
         the same heading … are to be classified with the machines of that kind or in heading 8409, 8431, 8448, 8466, 8473, 8503, 8522,
         or as appropriate …
      
…’
The general rules for the interpretation of the CN, which are in Part One, Section I, A, of the CN, state inter alia:
‘Classification of goods in the Combined Nomenclature shall be governed by the following principles:
1.       The titles of sections, chapters and sub-chapters are provided for ease of reference only; for legal purposes, classification
         shall be determined according to the terms of the headings and any relative section or chapter notes and, provided such headings
         or notes do not otherwise require, according to the following provisions.
      
…
3.       When ... goods are prima facie classifiable under two or more headings, classification shall be effected as follows:
(a)       the heading which provides the most specific description shall be preferred to headings providing a more general description.
         ... 
      
…
6.      For legal purposes, the classification of goods in the subheadings of a heading shall be determined according to the terms
         of those subheadings and any related subheading notes and, mutatis mutandis, to the above rules, on the understanding that only subheadings at the same level are comparable. For the purposes of this
         rule, the relative section and chapter notes also apply, unless the context requires otherwise.’
      
Council Regulation (EC) No 2505/of December opening and providing for the administration of Community tariff quotas
         for certain agricultural and industrial products (OJ L 345, p. 1), as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 2243/of December (OJ L 381, p. 1) (‘Regulation No 2505/96’), includes, in Annex I, serial number 09.relating
         to keypads, the relevant parts of which for the case in the main proceedings are the following:
      
‘Serial number
CN code
Taric sub-division
Description
09.Keypads,
ex — comprising a layer of silicone and polycarbonate keytops or
ex — wholly of silicone or wholly of polycarbonate, including printed keys, 
For the manufacture or repair of mobile radio-telephones of subheading …’
Commission Regulation (EC) No 1578/of October concerning the classification of certain goods in the Combined
         Nomenclature (OJ L 291, p. 3), provides inter alia in the second and third recitals of the preamble:
      
‘(1) In order to ensure uniform application of the Combined Nomenclature annexed to Regulation (EEC) No 2658/87, it is necessary
         to adopt measures concerning the classification of the goods referred to in the Annex to this Regulation.
      
…
(3)       Pursuant to those general rules, the goods described in column of the table set out in the Annex to this Regulation should
         be classified under the CN codes indicated in column 2, by virtue of the reasons set out in column of that table.’
      
The annex to Regulation No 1578/provides inter alia the following:
‘Description of the goods
Classification
(CN Code)
Reasons
(1)
(2)
(3)
1. Keypad membrane (dimensions: approximately x x mm) made of polycarbonate, without any electric conductive elements.
                  The product has moulded keys on one side and non-conductive contact pins on the other side.
               
The product has printed keycaps constituting an alpha/numeric keyboard, call buttons and other features typical of mobile
                  telephones.
               
Classification is determined by General Rules and for the interpretation of the Combined Nomenclature, Note 2(b) to Section
                  XVI and the wording of CN Codes 8529, and 40. 
               
The construction of the keypad, in particular the shape, as well as the positioning, the layout and the print of the keycaps
                  lead to classification of the keypad under CN code as a part for use solely or principally with apparatus of heading
                  8525.’
               
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
In August 2004, RUMA applied for binding tariff information concerning a keypad membrane which it described as a ‘mobile telephone
         keypad in the form of a contact pad’.
      
In tariff information of September 2004, the Oberfinanzdirektion classified the product in question under subheading of the CN as ‘a part suitable for use solely with the apparatus of heading 8537’.
      
As it was of the opinion that that keypad membrane should be classified under subheading of the CN as a part for
         products of heading 8525, RUMA lodged an objection against that binding tariff information. As that objection was rejected,
         RUMA brought an action before the Finanzgericht München (Finance Court, Munich).
      
The national court describes the products in question as follows:
‘According to the information sheets, photographs and sample product submitted to the Zolltechnische Prüfungs- und Lehranstalt
         (Customs Testing and Teaching Institution) the disputed product, “a mobile telephone keypad in the form of a contact pad”,
         is a keypad made of polycarbonate. That polycarbonate membrane has moulded keys on its upper side and non-conductive contact
         pins on its underside. When a key is pressed the non-conductive contact pin operates a contact point on a contact membrane
         which lies under the polycarbonate membrane and which is not the subject of the binding tariff information. The keypad membrane
         is used as a pad to operate and cover the keys of mobile telephones.’
      
The national court takes the view that, according to note 2(b) to Section XVI of the CN, the product in question should be
         classified not on the basis of which of the machines listed in that section it is ultimately intended for use with, but on
         the basis of the machine which it is directly intended for use with. It considers a keypad membrane serves the direct purpose
         of completing a keyboard in accordance with heading with the result that the product in question should be classified
         under heading of the CN.
      
According to the national court, such a classification is confirmed by Regulation No 2243/pursuant to which, under serial
         number 09.2995, ‘keypads … wholly of polycarbonate, including printed keys, for the manufacture or repair of mobile radio-telephones’
         are classified under heading of the CN.
      
Nevertheless, the national court considers that it is prevented from confirming the binding tariff information issued by the
         Oberfinanzdirektion inter alia on account of the fact that the Customs Tariff and Statistical Nomenclature Committee has been
         dealing with the tariff classification of the disputed product for years, but has not managed to come to a decision.
      
In those circumstances, the Finanzgericht München decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following question to the
         Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Is the [CN] to be interpreted as meaning that keypads which have non-conductive contact pins on the underside are to be classified
         under heading 8538?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
 Observations submitted to the Court
RUMA submits that the keypad membrane at issue in the main proceedings is a ‘part’ of a mobile telephone and must therefore
         be classified as such. According to RUMA, that membrane is necessary for the use of a mobile telephone with organiser functions
         and as it has been adapted especially for that purpose it cannot be used other than as part of a mobile telephone. Furthermore,
         it fulfils a protective function, in particular as it prevents dust from entering the mobile telephone.
      
RUMA is of the opinion that the keypad membrane at issue should therefore be classified under heading of the CN, as it
         is a part suitable for use solely with apparatus of heading 8525. It adds that classifying that membrane as part of a keyboard
         under heading of the CN would amount to categorising a mobile telephone keypad as an independent piece of apparatus,
         which cannot be the case given that the keypad obtains its function only when it is incorporated into the mobile telephone.
      
The Commission of the European Communities observes inter alia that it follows from the very wording of subheading that it includes the keypad membrane at issue in the main proceedings. The fact that that membrane is manifestly not an
         independent object, but a part of a mobile telephone, is a decisive factor according to the Commission. Firstly, the membrane
         is essential as it plays a direct role in the use of the mobile telephone. Secondly, it protects it from moisture and dust,
         thus preserving its ability to function.
      
The Commission adds that, according to Case C-339/Peacock [2000] ECR I‑8947, paragraph 21, the term ‘part’ implies ‘a “whole” for the operation of which the part is essential’. It
         takes the view that a mobile telephone is such a ‘whole’ as it is a piece of apparatus which is complete and directly operational
         from a technical point of view and the keypad membrane is essential for it to function.
      
The Hungarian Government observes that a part of a piece of apparatus covered by heading should, given the principles
         set out in the explanatory notes to the CN and the HS, be classified under heading 8529. It adds that, in accordance with
         the general rules for the interpretation of the CN, heading should be ruled out as regards the keypad membrane at issue
         in the main proceedings, since the wording of heading describes the product concerned most precisely as a part suitable
         for use with the apparatus of heading 8525.
      
 The Court’s answer
The national court is essentially asking whether the keypad membrane at issue in the main proceedings should be classified
         under subheading of the CN as part of a keyboard in accordance with heading or under subheading as part of a mobile telephone in accordance with heading 8525.
      
It should be noted at the outset that it is settled case-law that, in the interests of legal certainty and ease of verification,
         the decisive criterion for the classification of goods for customs purposes is in general to be found in their objective characteristics
         and properties as defined in the wording of the relevant heading of the combined nomenclature and of the notes to the sections
         or chapters (see, inter alia, Case C-396/DFDS [2004] ECR I-8439, paragraph 27; Case C-495/Intermodal Transports [2005] ECR I-8151, paragraph 47; and Case C-445/Possehl Erzkontor [2005] ECR I-10721, paragraph 19).
      
In the present case, clearly the keypad membrane at issue in the main proceedings is not expressly referred to either in the
         wording of the headings of the CN or in that of the notes to the sections or chapters.
      
The wording of heading of the CN under which, according to RUMA, the keypad membrane at issue in the main proceedings
         comes refers to ‘[p]arts suitable for use solely or principally with the apparatus of headings to 8528’, which inter
         alia includes mobile telephones. The wording of heading 8538, under which the keypad membrane should, according to the Oberfinanzdirektion,
         be classified, relates to ‘[p]arts suitable for use solely or principally with the apparatus of heading 8535, or 8537’,
         which include inter alia ‘[b]oards, panels, consoles, desks, cabinets and other bases, equipped with two or more apparatus
         of heading or 8536, for electric control or the distribution of electricity’.
      
According to note 2(b) to Section XVI of the CN, ‘[o]ther parts, if suitable for use solely or principally with a particular
         kind of machine, or with a number of machines of the same heading …, are to be classified with the machines of that kind or
         in heading 8409, 8431, 8448, 8466, 8473, 8503, 8522, or as appropriate’.
      
It must be borne in mind that the term ‘part’ implies a whole for the operation of which the part is essential (Peacock, paragraph 21, and Case C-276/Turbon International [2002] ECR I-1389, paragraph 30). 
      
In this connection, it must be noted that the assembling of the keypad membrane at issue in the main proceedings with the
         other components of a mobile telephone serves to ensure that it is a functional unit. The term ‘functional unit’, as defined
         by the case-law of the Court, applies where a machine or appliance consists of separate components which are designed to contribute
         together to a single clearly defined function (Case 223/Telefunken Fernseh und Rundfunk [1985] ECR 3335, paragraph 29).
      
In the present case, the membrane plays a direct role in the use of the mobile telephone, in that it makes it possible to
         activate the contact points and thereby access the mobile telephone’s various functions. It is impossible to access the various
         functions of the telephone without the keypad membrane at issue in the main proceedings. Consequently, it is unquestionably
         an essential component for the operation of the mobile telephone.
      
On the other hand, a mobile telephone keypad is not a functional unit which is distinct from the piece of apparatus into which
         it is incorporated inasmuch as it cannot be used independently or for a function other than that which may be performed by
         the telephone as a whole (see, inter alia, to that effect, Telefunken Fernseh und Rundfunk, paragraph 31).
      
According to the wording of point 3(a) of the general rules for the interpretation of the CN in Part One, Section I, A, of
         the CN, which specifically covers the situation where goods are prima facie classifiable under two or more headings, ‘the
         heading which provides the most specific description shall be preferred to headings providing a more general description’.
         In the present case, it must be pointed out that, as regards the objective characteristics and properties of the keypad membrane
         at issue in the main proceedings, and in particular given the fact that it refers expressly to ‘[p]arts of apparatus of subheadings
         … 91’, namely to parts of mobile telephones, subheading provides a more specific description than subheading
         which covers a much wider and more varied range of goods, as shown by its title read in conjunction with that of
         heading 8537.
      
The intended use of a product may also constitute an objective criterion for classification if it is inherent to the product,
         and that inherent character must be capable of being assessed on the basis of the product’s objective characteristics and
         properties (see Case C-459/Thyssen Haniel Logistic [1995] ECR I-1381, paragraph 13). 
      
In the present case, the construction of the keypad membrane at issue in the main proceedings, in particular its shape, which
         is specially adapted to a type of mobile telephone, and its method of operation preclude any use of that membrane other than
         as a component of that telephone. The characteristics of the keypad membrane also have the function of ensuring that the telephone
         has a certain imperviousness as they prevent in particular dust and moisture from entering it.
      
It follows from the above considerations that the keypad membrane at issue in the main proceedings must be classified under
         subheading of the CN as part of a mobile telephone in accordance with heading 8525.
      
That finding is not called into question by the national court’s view that the classification of the keypad membrane at issue
         in the main proceedings under heading of the CN is confirmed by Regulation No 2505/96, in which, under serial number
         09.2995, ‘keypads … wholly of polycarbonate, including printed keys, for the manufacture or repair of mobile radio-telephones’
         are classified under heading of the CN, given that that provision, which was inserted into Annex I to Regulation No 2505/by Regulation No 2243/2004, was not applicable at the time of the facts in the main proceedings. Furthermore, it must, for
         the sake of completeness, be added that Regulation No 1578/2006, which has a date of adoption later than that of Regulation
         No 2243/2004, expressly provides for the classification of keypad membranes of polycarbonate, without any conductive elements
         and with moulded keys on one side and non-conductive contact pins on the other side, under subheading of the CN.
      
In the light of all those considerations, the answer to the question referred for a preliminary ruling must be that the CN
         must be interpreted as meaning that keypad membranes of polycarbonate which have moulded keys on their upper side and non-conductive
         contact pins on their underside and are intended for incorporation into mobile telephones are covered by subheading 40.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fifth Chamber) hereby rules:
The Combined Nomenclature in Annex I to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/of July on the tariff and statistical
            nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff, as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1789/of September 2003,
            must be interpreted as meaning that keypad membranes of polycarbonate which have moulded keys on their upper side and non-conductive
            contact pins on their underside and are intended for incorporation into mobile telephones are covered by subheading 40.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 