
Case C-96/Criminal proceedings against
Standesamt Stadt Niebüll
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Amtsgericht Niebüll)
(Preliminary reference – Determination of a child’s surname – Procedure to transfer that determination to one of the parents – Lack of jurisdiction of the Court)
Summary of the Judgment
Preliminary rulings – Reference to the Court – National court for the purposes of Article EC – Definition 
(Art. EC)
It is clear from Article EC that a national court may refer a question to the Court only if there is a case pending before
         it and if it is called upon to give judgment in proceedings intended to lead to a decision of a judicial nature. 
      
Therefore, when it exercises administrative authority, without at the same time being called on to decide a dispute, the Amtsgericht
         (Germany), as Familiengericht, cannot be regarded as exercising a judicial function.
      
That is the case where it is called upon to transfer the right to determine the child’s surname to one of the parents where
         parents who do not use a married name but who jointly exercise custody of a child have not chosen, by declaration before a
         Registry Office official, either the father’s or the mother’s name as the birth name of that child, since the Familiengericht
         is required to adopt a decision without the Registry Office official which brought the action having taken, or been able to
         take, an earlier decision on the matter, since the dispute between the parents and the administration as to the possibility
         of registering the double-barrelled name consisting of the parents’ surnames was settled at last instance by another Court
         and is not the subject of the proceedings before the Amtsgericht and since there is no dispute between the parents, because
         they are in agreement about the name they wish to give to their child, namely the double-barrelled name composed of their
         respective surnames.
      
(see paras 13-19)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
April (*)
      
(Preliminary reference – Determination of a child’s surname – Procedure to transfer that determination to one of the parents – Lack of jurisdiction of the Court)
In Case C-96/04,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, by the Amtsgericht Niebüll (Germany), made by decision of June
         2003, received at the Court on February 2004, in the proceedings brought by
      
Standesamt Stadt Niebüll,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of P. Jann (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, N. Colneric, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, M. Ilešič and E. Levits, Judges,
Advocate General: F.G. Jacobs,
Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on April 2005,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Leonhard Matthias, a minor, by his father, S. Grunkin,
–        the German Government, by A. Tiemann and A. Dittrich, acting as Agents,
–        the Belgian Government, by A. Goldman, acting as Agent,
–        the Greek Government, by E.-M. Mamouna, S. Vodina and G. Skiani, acting as Agents,
–        the Spanish Government, by E. Braquehais Conesa, acting as Agent,
–        the French Government, by G. de Bergues and A. Bodard-Hermant, acting as Agents,
–        the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster and C.W. Wissels, acting as Agents,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by M. Condou-Durande and S. Grünheid, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on June 2005,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles EC and EC.
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings brought by the Standesamt Stadt Niebüll (the Registry Office, Niebüll)
         (‘the Standesamt’) in order to transfer the right to determine a child’s surname to one of his parents. They had previously
         refused to give the child any name other than a double-barrelled name composed of their respective surnames, under which that
         child was already registered in Denmark where he was born. 
      
 National law
 Private international law 
Paragraph 10(1) of the Law introducing the Civil Code (Einführungsgesetz zum Bürgerlichen Gesetzbuch) (‘the EGBGB’) provides:
      
‘A person’s name falls to be decided by the law of the State of his or her nationality.’
 Civil law 
As regards the determination of the name of a child whose parents bear different surnames, Paragraph of the German Civil
         Code (Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch) (‘the BGB’) provides:
      
‘(1)      If the parents do not share a married surname but have joint custody of the child, they shall, by declaration before a registrar,
         choose either the father’s or the mother’s surname at the time of the declaration to be the surname given to the child at
         birth. …
      
(2)      If the parents have not made that declaration within a period of one month following the child’s birth, the Familiengericht
         shall transfer the right to determine the child’s surname to one of the parents. Subparagraph shall apply mutatis mutandis. The court may lay down a time-limit for the exercise of that right. If the right to choose the child’s surname has not been
         exercised on the expiry of that period, the child shall bear the surname of the parent to whom the right was transferred.
      
(3)      Where a child is born outside German territory, the court shall not transfer the right to choose the child’s surname in accordance
         with subparagraph unless either a parent or the child so requests or unless it is necessary to record the child’s surname
         on a German registration or identity document.’
      
Paragraph of the Law on non-contentious proceedings (Gesetz über die Angelegenheiten der freiwilligen Gerichtsbarkeit)
         states:
      
‘Before making a decision transferring to one parent the right to determine the surname pursuant to Paragraph 1617(2) of the
         [BGB], the Familiengericht shall hear both parents and seek to bring them to an agreed choice. The Familiengericht’s decision
         need not state the grounds on which it is based; no appeal shall lie from it.’
      
 The procedure in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
The child Leonhard Matthias was born on June to a married couple, Dorothee Paul and Stefan Grunkin, both of German
         nationality. The child, who also had German nationality, was living in Denmark at the date of the order for reference.
      
In accordance with a certificate (‘navnebevis’) issued by the competent Danish authority attesting to that name, the child
         was given, in accordance with Danish law, the surname Grunkin-Paul, which was entered on his birth certificate drawn up in
         Denmark.
      
The Registrar’s Office in Germany refused to recognise the surname of the child of Ms Paul and Mr Grunkin as it had been determined
         in Denmark on the ground that, under Paragraph of the EGBGB, the name of a person falls to be decided under the law of
         the country of his nationality, and that German law does not allow a child to bear a double-barrelled name composed of his
         father and mother’s surnames. The actions brought by Ms Paul and Mr Grunkin against that refusal were dismissed at final instance
         by the judgment of the Kammergericht (Higher Regional Court) Berlin. The Bundesverfassungsgericht (Federal Constitutional
         Court) refused to examine the constitutional complaint brought in the child’s name. 
      
Ms Paul and Mr Grunkin, who had divorced in the meantime, did not use a common married name and refused to determine the name
         of their child in accordance with Paragraph 1617(1) of the BGB.
      
The Standesamt brought the matter before the Amtsgericht (Local Court) Niebüll, as Familiengericht, in order to transfer the
         right to determine the child’s surname to one of his parents in accordance with Paragraph 1617(2) and (3) of the BGB. Taking
         the view that, if Community law requires that the name which is valid under Danish law be recognised under the German legal
         system, the proceedings pending before it would have no purpose, the Amtsgericht Niebüll decided to stay the proceedings before
         it and to refer the following question to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘In light of the prohibition on discrimination set out in Article EC and having regard to the right to the freedom of movement
         for every citizen of the Union laid down by Article EC, is the provision on the conflict of laws contained in Article of the EGBGB valid, in so far as it provides that the right to bear a name is governed by nationality alone?’
      
 The jurisdiction of the Court
Under the first paragraph of Article EC, the Court of Justice has jurisdiction to give preliminary rulings concerning,
         inter alia, the interpretation of the EC Treaty and of the acts of the institutions of the European Community. The second
         paragraph of that article adds that ‘where such a question is raised before any court or tribunal of a Member State, that
         court or tribunal may, if it considers that a decision on the question is necessary to enable it to give judgment, request
         the Court of Justice to give a ruling thereon’. The third paragraph of Article EC states that ‘where any such question
         is raised in a case pending before a court or tribunal of a Member State against whose decisions there is no judicial remedy
         under national law, that court or tribunal shall bring the matter before the Court of Justice’.
      
In order to determine whether a body making a reference is a court or tribunal for the purposes of Article EC, which is
         a question governed by Community law alone, the Court takes account of a number of factors, such as whether the body is established
         by law, whether it is permanent, whether its jurisdiction is compulsory, whether its procedure is inter partes, whether it applies rules of law and whether it is independent (see, in particular, Case C-54/Dorsch Consult [1997] ECR I-4961, paragraph 23, and the case-law cited; Joined Cases C-110/to C-147/Gabalfrisa and Others [2000] ECR I-1577, paragraph 33; Case C-178/Salzmann [2001] ECR I-4421, paragraph 13; and Case C-182/Lutzand Others [2002] ECR I-547, paragraph 12). 
      
Furthermore, whilst Article EC does not make a reference to the Court subject to there having been an inter partes hearing in the proceedings in the course of which the national court refers a question for a preliminary ruling (see Case
         C-18/Corsica Ferries [1994] ECR I-1783, paragraph 12), it follows none the less from that article that a national court may refer a question to
         the Court only if there is a case pending before it and if it is called upon to give judgment in proceedings intended to lead
         to a decision of a judicial nature (see orders in Case 138/Borker [1980] ECR 1975, paragraph 4, and in Case 318/Greis Unterweger [1986] ECR 955, paragraph 4; and judgments in Case C-111/Job Centre [1995] ECR I-3361, paragraph 9; Salzmann, paragraph 14; Lutz, paragraph 13; and Case C-165/Längst [2005] ECR I-5637, paragraph 25).
      
Therefore, when it exercises administrative authority, without at the same time being called on to decide a dispute, the referring
         body, even if it satisfies the other conditions mentioned in paragraph of the present judgment, cannot be regarded as exercising
         a judicial function (see Job Centre, paragraph 11; Salzmann, paragraph 15; and Lutz, paragraph 14).
      
In that connection it must be observed that where parents who do not use a married name but who jointly exercise custody of
         a child have not chosen, by declaration before a Registry Office official, either the father’s or the mother’s name as the
         birth name of that child, German law provides that the Familiengericht is competent to transfer the right to determine the
         child’s surname to one of the parents.
      
It follows that the Familiengericht is required to adopt a decision without a Registry Office official having taken, or been
         able to take, an earlier decision on the matter. Thus, it is apparent from the file that, in the case in the main proceedings,
         the Standesamt merely brought the matter before the Amtsgericht Niebüll.
      
In those circumstances it must be held that the Amtsgericht Niebüll exercises administrative authority, without at the same
         time being called on to decide a dispute.
      
It is true that there was a dispute between the parents and the administration as to the possibility of registering the double-barrelled
         name ‘Grunkin-Paul’ in Germany. However, that dispute was settled at last instance by the Kammergericht Berlin and is not
         the subject of the proceedings before the Amtsgericht Niebüll.
      
Furthermore, there is no dispute, in the case in the main proceedings, between the parents, since they are in agreement about
         the name they wish to give to their child, namely the double-barrelled name composed of their respective surnames.
      
It is clear from all of the foregoing that, in those proceedings, the Amtsgericht Niebüll cannot be regarded as exercising
         a judicial function. Therefore, the Court has no jurisdiction to answer the question referred by the Amtsgericht Niebüll in
         its decision of June 2003. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the Amtsgericht
         Niebüll, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than
         the costs of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
The Court of Justice of the European Communities has no jurisdiction to answer the question referred by the Amtsgericht Niebüll
            in its decision of June 2003. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 