
Case C-138/Todaro Nunziatina & C. Snc
v
Assessorato del Lavoro, della Previdenza Sociale, della Formazione Professionale e dell’Emigrazione della regione Sicilia
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
the Tribunale ordinario di Palermo)
(Reference for a preliminary ruling – State aid – Commission decisions – Interpretation – Aid granted by the Region of Sicily to undertakings entering into training and work-experience contracts or converting such
         contracts into open-ended contracts – Time-limit for the grant of aid – Budgetary limits – Default interest – Inadmissibility)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Preliminary rulings – Jurisdiction of the Court – Limits – Question manifestly without relevance
2.        Preliminary rulings – Jurisdiction of the Court – Limits – Jurisdiction of the national court – Establishment and assessment
            of the facts of the dispute
(Art. EC)
3.        State aid – Prohibition – Exceptions – Aid scheme intended to promote training and job creation in a region
(Art. 88(3) EC)
4.        State aid – Existing aid and new aid – Classification of new aid
(Art. EC; Council Regulation No 659/1999, Art. 1( c))
5.        State aid – Prohibition – Exceptions – Aid scheme providing for a maximum budgetary provision
6.        State aid – Planned aid – Notification to the Commission – Commission Decision not to raise objections – Default interest
            in the event of late payment of aid with effect from the date of the Commission’s decision
(Art. 88(3) EC)
1.        The Court may decide not to give a preliminary ruling determining the validity of a Community act where it is quite obvious
         that that determination, requested by the national court, bears no relation to the actual facts of the main action or its
         purpose.
      
(see para. 16)
2.        It is solely for the national court, before which the dispute has been brought, and which must assume responsibility for the
         subsequent judicial decision, to determine in the light of the particular circumstances of the case both the need for a preliminary
         ruling in order to enable it to deliver judgment and the relevance of the questions which it submits to the Court.
      
(see para. 25)
3.        A decision of the Commission not to raise objections to an aid scheme to promote training and job creation in a region and
         consisting, firstly, of the grant of a subsidy for the remuneration of workers recruited on training and work-experience contracts
         for the entire duration of those contracts, on condition that the workers were recruited during a particular period and, secondly,
         of the grant of a degressive subsidy for the remuneration of workers if such a contract is converted into an open-ended contract
         within the first three years of that contract, on condition that that conversion took place during the same period and concerns
         workers recruited before that period, must be interpreted as having accepted, as being compatible with the common market,
         an aid scheme composed of those two measures, which may not be cumulative and the event giving rise to which, that is to say,
         the recruitment of a worker or the conversion of the contract into an open-ended contract, must have taken place before expiry
         of that period, but the payments to which they give rise may be made after that date, on condition that the applicable national
         budgetary and financial rules do not preclude that and that the budgetary provision approved by the Commission of the European
         Communities is not exceeded.
      
(see paras 29-30, 34-38, operative part 1)
4.        Article of Decision 2003/on the scheme by which Italy plans to aid employment in the Region of Sicily must be interpreted
         as meaning that the aid scheme by which Italy sought to extend the period of application of an aid scheme previously approved
         for the promotion of training and job creation constitutes new aid distinct from that in respect of which the Commission had
         given its approval.  The Decision therefore precludes the grant of subsidies in respect of any employment of workers recruited
         under training or work-experience contracts or conversion of training and work-experience contracts into open-ended contracts
         after the expiry of the aid scheme approved by the Commission.
      
Since measures taken after the entry into force of the Treaty to grant or alter aid, whether the alterations relate to existing
         aid or to initial plans notified to the Commission, must be regarded as new aid, Italy, by providing for both an increase
         in the budget allocated to the aid scheme and a two-year extension of the period during which the conditions for grant of
         that aid were applicable, created new aid distinct from the aid  referred to in the Decision not to raise objections to the
         preceding aid scheme.
      
(see paras 46-47, operative part 2)
5.        In the case of an aid scheme approved by the Commission and providing for a budgetary provision, it is for the Member State
         concerned to determine which party to the proceedings bears the burden of proving that the budgetary provision allocated for
         the aid measures referred to has not been exhausted.
      
When there is no Community legislation on the matter, it is for the internal legal order of each Member State to define the
         detailed arrangements and rules of evidence intended to establish that the budgetary provision allocated to the aid scheme
         authorised by the Commission Decision has not been exceeded.
      
However, it should be emphasised that the national authorities must be in a position to justify, in particular at the request
         of the Commission, the status of payments made under an aid scheme where the Commission has ruled in respect of a scheme for
         which the Member State has provided for a maximum budgetary provision that may be disbursed individually to beneficiaries
         of that scheme.
      
(see paras 54-55, operative part 3)
6.        The first sentence of Article 88(3) EC imposes on the Member States an obligation to inform the Commission of any plans to
         grant or alter aid. Under the second sentence of Article 88(3) EC, if the Commission considers that the plan notified is not
         compatible with the common market within the meaning of Article EC, it is without delay to initiate the procedure provided
         for in Article 88(2) EC. Under the final sentence of Article 88(3) EC, the Member State that envisages granting aid may not
         put its proposed measures into effect until that procedure has resulted in a final decision of the Commission.
      
The prohibition laid down by that article is intended to ensure that the aid measures do not come into effect before the Commission
         has had a reasonable period in which to consider the plan in detail and, if necessary, to initiate the procedure provided
         for in Article 93(2).
      
A Commission Decision not to raise objections to an aid scheme renders the aid scheme compatible with the common market only
         with effect from the date of that decision, so that any late payment of the aid can give rise to the calculation of interest
         only in respect of amounts of aid due after that date.
      
The amount of statutory interest that may be due in the event of late payment of the aid authorised by the Commission Decision
         for the period following that decision is not to be included in the amount of the budgetary provision authorised by that decision.
         The rate of interest and the detailed arrangements for applying that rate fall within the scope of national law.
      
(see paras 58-62, operative part 4)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
May (*)
      
(Reference for a preliminary ruling – State aid – Commission decisions – Interpretation – Aid granted by the Region of Sicily to undertakings entering into training and work-experience contracts or converting such
         contracts into open-ended contracts – Time-limit for the grant of aid – Budgetary limits – Default interest – Inadmissibility)
      
In Case C‑138/09,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Tribunale ordinario di Palermo (Italy), made by decision
         of January 2009, received at the Court on April 2009, in the proceedings
      
Todaro Nunziatina & C. Snc
v
Assessorato del Lavoro, della Previdenza Sociale, della Formazione Professionale e dell’Emigrazione della regione Sicilia,
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of J.-C. Bonichot, President of the Chamber, C. Toader, K. Schiemann, P. Kūris (Rapporteur) and L. Bay Larsen, Judges,
Advocate General: N. Jääskinen,
Registrar: R. Şereş, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on March 2010,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        l’Assessorato del Lavoro, della Previdenza Sociale, della Formazione Professionale e dell’Emigrazione della regione Sicilia,
         by G. Palmieri, acting as Agent, assisted by F. Arena, avvocato dello Stato,
      
–        Todaro Nunziatina & C. Snc, by G. Bentivegna, avvocato,
–        the European Commission, by D. Grespan, acting as Agent,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
The reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Commission Decision SG (95) D/of December relating to Regional Law No of the Region of Sicily of May providing for measures to promote employment (State
         aid NN 91/A/95) (‘the Decision’) and of  Commission Decision 2003/195/EC of October on the scheme by which Italy
         plans to aid employment in the Region of Sicily – C 56/(ex N 668/97) (OJ L 77, p. 57), and the validity of those decisions.
         
      
That reference has been made in the course of proceedings between  Todaro Nunziatina & C. Snc (‘Todaro Nunziatina’), an undertaking
         established in Sicily (Italy), and the Assessorato del Lavoro, della Previdenza Sociale, della Formazione Professionale e
         dell’Emigrazione della regione Sicilia, (Regional Ministry for Employment, Social Security, Vocational Training and Emigration
         for the Region of Sicily; ‘the amministrazione’) concerning payment of the sum of EUR 320.64, together with statutory interest,
         due under the subsidies provided for in Article of Regional Law No of the Region of Sicily of May providing
         for measures to promote employment (GURS No of May 1991; ‘Law 27/91’).
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
Article 1(c) of Council Regulation (EC) No 659/of March laying down detailed rules for the application of Article
         [EC] (OJ L 83, p. 1) provides:
      
‘For the purpose of this Regulation:
…
(c)      “new aid” shall mean all aid, that is to say, aid schemes and individual aid, which is not existing aid, including alterations
         to existing aid’. 
      
In the Decision, the Commission of the European Communities did not raise any objections to the aid measures proposed
         in Law 27/91, as it took the view that those measures were compatible with the EC Treaty. In that decision, moreover, the
         Commission requested the Member State concerned to notify the Law at issue again in the event of refinancing of that aid beyond
         1997. 
      
In recital in the preamble to Decision 2003/195, the Commission noted that ‘Article 11(1) of Regional Law No 16/[of
         the Region of Sicily of May authorising expenditure for the use of the provisions entered in the general funds of
         the budget of the Region for the financial year (GURS No of May 1997; “Law 16/97”)] concerns the financing in and of an aid scheme (NN 91/A/95) instituted by Article
         of [Law 27/91], which the Commission authorised on November 1995, and which was to have expired at the end of 1996’.
      
Article of Decision 2003/provides:
      
‘The aid scheme which Italy plans to implement under Article 11(1) of the Sicilian Regional Law No of May is incompatible
         with the common market. 
      
The scheme may accordingly not be implemented.’
 National legislation
Articles to of Law 27/provide for a number of forms of aid designed to stimulate employment in Sicily.
      
Article of Law 27/provides, inter alia, that:
      
‘1.      The Regional Minister for Employment, Social Security, Vocational Training and Emigration shall be authorised, also in the
         context of the agreements under Article of Regional Law No of November 1988, to provide undertakings operating in the
         fields of … craftsmanship, tourism and the environment, and employers entered on the professional registers which recruit
         workers under training and work-experience contracts pursuant to Article of Decree Law No of October 1984, converted
         by Law No of December 1984, and on the basis of projects with prior approval from the Commissione regionale per l’impiego
         (Regional Employment Board) with contributions to remuneration amounting to:
      
(a)      30% of the remuneration due under collective agreements, for the duration of the training and work-experience contract. This
         shall rise to 50% in the event that the workers are recruited for projects that conform to the agreements set out in Article
         of Regional Law No of November 1988, or in the cases provided for in Article 9(2) above; 
      
(b)      50%, 40% and 25% of the remuneration due under collective agreements, for the first, second and third years respectively,
         in the event that workers recruited on training and work-experience contracts are retained under open-ended contracts. The
         assistance shall rise to 65%, 50% and 50% for the first, second and third years respectively, in the cases provided for in
         Article 9(2) above.
      
2.      The measures referred to in paragraph shall apply to workers recruited on training and work-experience contracts during
         the period between the first day of the month following that in which the present Law enters into force and December 1996,
         subject to the condition that in the twelve months preceding such recruitment the undertakings have not reduced their workforce.
         The measures referred to in paragraph 1, relating only to the assistance under subparagraph (b), shall also apply in those
         cases in which it has been ascertained within the abovementioned period that workers recruited on training and work-experience
         contracts before that period have been retained under open-ended contracts.
      
…’
Article 11(1) of Law 16/provides:
      
‘For the purposes set out in Article of [Law 27/91], further expenditure of ITL million (item 33709) is authorised
         for the financial year 1997. The time-limit of December laid down by Article of Regional Law No of March shall also apply to the assistance referred to in Articles and of [Law 27/91], as subsequently amended and supplemented.’
         
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
It is apparent from the decision for reference that Todaro Nunziatina applied to the amministrazione for aid under Article
         10(1)(a) and (b) of Law 27/for the recruitment of two workers on training and work-experience contracts, which were subsequently
         converted into open-ended contracts. For that purpose, it submitted six applications for subsidies relating to the period
         from June to September 1999.
      
As the amministrazione did not pay it the aid requested, Todaro Nunziatina brought proceedings against it before the Tribunale
         ordinario di Palermo (District Court, Palermo) seeking payment of the sum of EUR 320.64, plus statutory interest. The amministrazione
         opposes that claim, submitting, in essence, that it is not authorised to grant that aid by reason of Decision 2003/195.
      
In that context, the Tribunale ordinario di Palermo decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to
         the Court for a preliminary ruling: 
      
‘1.      In the light of the fact that the aid scheme (Ref. NN 91/A/95) established by the Region of Sicily in Article of [Law 27/91]
         laid down a mechanism of assistance for a minimum of two, and a maximum of five, years (two years for workers recruited on
         training and work-experience contracts, plus a maximum of three years in cases where those contracts are converted into open-ended
         contracts), was it the intention of the [Commission], in [the Decision] authorising the scheme’s implementation:
      
–        to permit such a cumulative increase to the duration and financial amount of the assistance (two years + three years) or,
         on the other hand,
      
–        to authorise, on a mutually exclusive basis, either the grant of assistance for workers recruited on training and work-experience
         contracts (for the two years’ duration of such contracts) or the grant of assistance for those workers recruited previously
         on training and work-experience contracts which were subsequently converted into open-ended contracts (for the three years
         from that conversion)?
      
2.      Should the time-limit of the financial year for the implementation of State aid, laid down by the [Commission] in the
         authorising decision approving the scheme established by Article of [Law 27/91], be interpreted as referring to:
      
–        the initial provision for expenditure on aid scheduled in any event to be paid in subsequent years (according to the various
         interpretations of authorised aid possible, which have been referred to), or rather
      
–        the time-limit for the actual payment of assistance by the competent regional bodies?
3.      Thus, for workers recruited on training and work-experience contracts, pursuant to Article of [Law 27/91], for instance
         on January 1996, and therefore before the time-limit for the period for implementing the State aid set out in [the Decision], was the Region of Sicily permitted – and indeed required – actually to implement the aid scheme in question for
         all of the years authorised (that is to say, two + three), and even where, as in the example mentioned, the implementation
         of the authorised scheme entailed the actual payment of the assistance until December (that is to say, + five
         years = 2001)?
      
4.      Was it the intention of the [Commission], by Article of Decision 2003/…, which states: “The aid scheme which Italy plans
         to implement under Article 11(1) of [Law 16/97] is incompatible with the common market. The scheme may accordingly not be
         implemented”:
      
–        to refuse authorisation of the “new” aid scheme established under Article of [Law 16/97], because the Commission regarded
         that scheme as an “autonomous” system designed to extend the period for implementing the aid instituted by Article of [Law
         27/91] beyond the time-limit of December to include even the costs of recruiting workers and/or converting contracts
         carried out in the years and 1998, or 
      
–        rather, by that decision, to prevent the Region from materially acquiring the financial resources, in order to prevent the
         actual payment of the State aid laid down in Article of [Law 27/91], even for workers recruited and/or contracts converted
         before December 1996?
      
5.      If [Decision 2003/195] is to be interpreted along the lines of the first option in Question 4, is such a decision compatible
         with the Commission’s interpretation of Article [EC] in determining similar cases relating to the exemptions from the costs
         of social-security contributions on training and work-experience contracts in Decision 2000/128/EC of May [concerning
         aid granted by Italy to promote employment (OJ L 42, p. 1)] (… specifically referred to in the grounds of the decision
         of incompatibility of 2002) and in Decision 2003/739/EC of May [on the aid scheme which Italy is planning to implement
         to promote employment in the Region of Sicily (OJ L 267, p. 29)] …?
      
6.      If [Decision 2003/195] is to be interpreted along the lines of the second option in Question 4, what interpretation is to
         be given to the previous decision authorising the aid measures, taking into account the dual meaning that may be ascribed
         to the adjective “further”, that is to say “further in relation to the budget as laid down in the Commission’s decision” or
         “further in relation to the provision for finance made by the Region only until the budget”?
      
7.      Ultimately, which aid is to be regarded as lawful, and which as unlawful, according to the Commission?
8.      Which of the parties to the present proceedings [Todaro Nunziatina or the amministrazione] has the burden of proving that
         the budget laid down by the Commission itself has not been exceeded?
      
9.      Should the award of statutory interest to a company for late payment of assistance that is held to be lawful and admissible
         be taken into account in determining whether the budget originally approved by [the Decision] has been exceeded?
      
10.      If the award of such interest is relevant in determining whether that budget has been exceeded, what measure of interest is
         to be applied?’ 
      
 The questions referred
 Admissibility of the second, fifth and eighth questions
 Admissibility of the fifth question
–       Observations submitted to the Court
The Commission takes the view that this question concerns the validity of Decision 2003/195. The Commission understands the
         national court as seeking to ascertain whether that decision is compatible with the interpretation of Article EC which
         the Commission followed in Decisions 2000/and 2003/739. In that regard, the Commission points out that the fifth question
         has no bearing on the resolution of the dispute in the main proceedings.
      
Todaro Nunziatina submits that the question is irrelevant for the purposes of the ruling in the main proceedings, inasmuch
         as Decisions 2000/and 2003/concern situations which differ from that in the main proceedings. 
      
–       Findings of the Court
The question seeking determination of the validity of Decision 2003/was referred by the national court.
      
In that regard, it should be borne in mind that the Court may decide not to give a preliminary ruling on the validity of a
         Community act where it is quite obvious that that determination, requested by the national court, bears no relation to the
         actual facts of the main action or its purpose (Case C‑222/Cassa di Risparmio di Firenze and Others [2006] ECR I‑289, paragraph and the case‑law cited).
      
Decision 2003/examines the compatibility, in regard to Article EC et seq., of Article 11(1) of Law 16/concerning
         the refinancing for and of an aid scheme instituted by Article of Law 27/91, which was approved by the Decision.
         
      
By contrast, Decision 2000/examines the compatibility, in regard to Article EC et seq., of a package of aid measures
         to promote employment implemented by the Italian Republic at national level, other than those referred to in Decision 2003/195,
         and accepts that those aid measures are in part compatible with the common market. 
      
Furthermore, Decision 2003/also examines, in the light of Article EC et seq., the refinancing, for the period to 2006, of an aid scheme to promote employment in the Region of Sicily approved by the Commission on February and
         based on Regional Law 30/97, which provided for aid, in the form of a total exemption from charges for a maximum period of
         six years, for job creation, whether or not connected with investment.
      
Thus, it must be held that the national court has not supplied any explanation with regard to the differing interpretations
         of Article EC allegedly reflected in the abovementioned Decisions 2000/and 2003/739.
      
In any event, the Commission’s decision-making practice in other cases, such as Decisions 2000/and 2003/739, cannot affect
         the validity of Decision 2003/195, which can be assessed only in the light of the objective rules of the Treaty.
      
Accordingly, the fifth question must therefore be declared inadmissible.
      
 Admissibility of the second and eighth questions
–       Observations submitted to the Court
Todaro Nunziatina takes the view that the second question is inadmissible on the ground that it requires an interpretation
         of national legislation, something which the Court may not undertake.
      
The Commission and the amministrazione argue that the eighth question is inadmissible on the ground that the aspect of Community
         law of which an interpretation is requested by the national court is not clearly identifiable.
      
–       Findings of the Court
It must be borne in mind that it is solely for the national court before which the dispute has been brought, and which must
         assume responsibility for the subsequent judicial decision, to determine, in the light of the particular circumstances of
         the case, both the need for a preliminary ruling in order to enable it to deliver judgment and the relevance of the questions
         which it submits to the Court (see, inter alia, Case C‑295/Piaggio [1999] ECR I‑3735, paragraph and the case‑law cited, and Case C‑378/ERG and Others [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 73).
      
Suffice it to note, first, that the second question, which seeks an interpretation of the concept of ‘the time-limit of the
         financial year for the implementation of State aid’ does relate to the Decision and has a direct bearing on the
         resolution of the dispute in the main proceedings and, second, that the eighth question is not entirely unconnected to the
         Decision since it has the effect of allowing the national court to ascertain the utilisation of the budget allocated
         to the aid covered by that decision. 
      
The second and eighth questions must therefore be answered.
      
 The first, second and third questions
By its first, second and third questions, which it is appropriate to consider together, the national court asks the Court
         to interpret the Decision in order to determine its scope.
      
In that regard, by the Decision, the Commission decided not to raise objections to the aid scheme to promote employment
         provided for by Law 27/91.
      
That aid scheme, put in place by the Region of Sicily, was designed to promote training and job creation. It was to apply
         with effect from 1991, but was notified to the Commission by the Italian Government, pursuant to Article 88(3) EC, only on
         May 1995.
      
In order to interpret the Decision, it is appropriate not only to examine the actual text thereof, of which only a summary
         was published in the Official Journal of the European Communities on December 1995, but also to refer to the Italian Government’s notification of May of the measures adopted. 
      
It is apparent from examination of those documents that the aid measures thus notified are those provided for in Articles
         to of Law 27/and for which an annual budgetary allocation was fixed in order to ensure financing for those measures.
         
      
Having regard to the questions referred by the national court, examination of the scope of the Decision must be limited
         to Article of Law 27/91.
      
Article of that Law provides, in essence, for two aid measures to promote employment. The first consists of the grant of
         a subsidy equivalent to 30% or 50% of the remuneration of workers recruited on training and work-experience contracts for
         the entire duration of those contracts, on condition that the workers were recruited during the period from the first day
         of the month following the month of entry into force of Law 27/up to December 1996.
      
The second consists of the grant of a degressive subsidy varying from 50% to 25% of the remuneration of workers in the event
         of conversion of such a contract into an open-ended contract within the first three years of that contract, on condition that
         that conversion took place during the period from the first day of the month following the month of entry into force of Law
         27/up to December and concerns workers recruited before that period.
      
Next, it must be noted, firstly, that those two forms of aid cannot be cumulative in time in respect of the same worker since,
         in order to benefit from the second form of aid following conversion of a fixed-term contract, the worker must have been recruited
         before the date on which Law 27/entered into force. 
      
Secondly, payment of the sums allocated in respect of the aid granted may, subject to the national budgetary rules applicable,
         be made after December 1996. 
      
By contrast, the event giving rise to the aid, that is to say, the recruitment of the worker, in the first case, or the conversion
         of the contract into an open-ended contract, in the second, must have occurred before December 1996.  
      
In addition, as is apparent from the descriptive list attached to the abovementioned notification letter of May 1995, the
         budgetary provision approved by the Commission for both of those measures under Article of Law 27/amounts to ITL thousand million, that is to say, approximately EUR 79.million, for the period to 1996. 
      
In that regard, it must be noted that the Decision merely fixes the commitment limit of the budgetary provision and neither
         specifies nor interferes in the rules governing payment of that aid, which remain subject to the national provisions. 
      
It follows from the foregoing that the answer to the first, second and third questions is that the Decision must be interpreted
         as having accepted, as being compatible with the common market, an aid scheme composed of two measures provided for in Article
         10(1)(a) and (b) of Law 27/91, which cannot be cumulative and the event giving rise to which, that is to say, the recruitment
         of a worker or the conversion of the contract into an open-ended contract, must have taken place before December 1996,
         but the payments to which they give rise may be made after that date, on condition that the applicable national budgetary
         and financial rules do not preclude that and that the budgetary provision approved by the Commission is not exceeded.
      
 The fourth, sixth and seventh questions
By its fourth, sixth and seventh questions, which it is appropriate to consider together, the national court asks the Court,
         in essence, to interpret Article of Decision 2003/in order to determine whether the aid to which that decision relates
         is new aid.  
      
In Article of Decision 2003/195, the Commission declared that the aid scheme laid down in Article 11(1) of Law 16/was
         incompatible with the common market. 
      
Article 11(1) of that Law provides, in the light of recital in the preamble to Decision 2003/195, for the refinancing for
         and of the aid scheme instituted by Article of Law 27/in the additional amount of ITL thousand million,
         that is to say, approximately EUR 42.million. 
      
In that regard, ‘all aid, that is to say, aid schemes and individual aid, which is not existing aid, including alterations
         to existing aid’ must be considered to be new aid within the meaning of Article 1(c) of Regulation No 659/1999.
      
Furthermore, it is settled case-law that measures taken after the entry into force of the Treaty to grant or alter aid, whether
         the alterations relate to existing aid or to initial plans notified to the Commission, must be regarded as new aid (Joined
         Cases C‑346/and C‑529/Atzeni and Others [2006] ECR I‑1875, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
It follows that, by providing both for an increase in the budget allocated to the aid scheme referred to in Article of
         Law 27/91, in an amount exceeding 50% in the present case, and for a two-year extension of the period during which the conditions
         for grant of that aid were applicable, Article 11(1) of Law 16/created new aid distinct from the aid referred to in the
         Decision. That new aid alone was declared incompatible with the common market by the Commission in Decision 2003/195.
         
      
Accordingly, the employment of workers recruited on training and work-experience contracts or conversion of training and work-experience
         contracts into open-ended contracts with effect from January can no longer give rise to the grant of any aid.  
      
The answer to the fourth, sixth and seventh questions is therefore that Article of Decision 2003/must be interpreted
         as meaning that the aid scheme provided for in Article 11(1) of Law 16/constitutes new aid distinct from that provided
         for in Article of Law 27/91. Article of Decision 2003/precludes the grant of subsidies in respect of any employment
         of workers recruited under training or work-experience contracts or conversion of training and work-experience contracts into
         open-ended contracts with effect from January 1997.
      
 The eighth question
By its eighth question, the national court seeks, in essence, to determine which party to the proceedings has the burden of
         proving that the budgetary provision allocated for the aid measures referred to in Article 10(1)(a) and (b) of Law 27/and
         authorised by the Decision has not been exhausted.
      
Firstly, it must be borne in mind that, as has been pointed out in paragraphs and of the present judgment, the budgetary
         provision accepted by the Decision is that allocated by the Region of Sicily to the aid scheme provided for in Article
         10(1)(a) and (b) of Law 27/91, as determined in the Italian Government’s notification of May to the Commission of
         the measures adopted.
      
Secondly, it must be held that the Decision has the effect of authorising an aid scheme by declaring it compatible with
         the common market, but does not have the effect of imposing that scheme on the Member State concerned. 
      
Thus, the purpose and effect of the Decision are not to compel the Italian Republic to grant the aid referred to in Article
         10(1)(a) and (b) of Law 27/91, but rather to authorise it to implement that aid if that continues to be its wish (see, to
         that effect, Case C‑18/Foselev Sud-Ouest [2008] ECR I‑8745, paragraph 16).
      
Accordingly, in the absence of Community legislation on the matter, it is for the internal legal order of each Member State
         to define the detailed arrangements and rules of evidence intended to establish that the budgetary provision allocated to
         the aid scheme authorised by the Decision has not been exceeded.
      
However, it should be pointed out that the national authorities must be in a position to justify, in particular at the request
         of the Commission, the status of payments made under an aid scheme where, as is the case with regard to the Decision,
         the Commission has ruled in respect of a scheme for which the Member State has provided for a maximum budgetary provision
         which may be disbursed individually to beneficiaries of that scheme. 
      
Accordingly, the answer to the eighth question is that it is for the Member State concerned to determine which party to the
         proceedings has the burden of proving that the budgetary provision allocated for the aid measures referred to in Article 10(1)(a)
         and (b) of Law 27/and authorised by the Decision has not been exhausted.
      
 The ninth and tenth questions
By its ninth and tenth questions, which it is appropriate to consider together, the national court asks, in essence, whether
         the amount of statutory interest which may be due from the Region of Sicily in the event of delay in payment of the aid is
         to be included in the amount of the budgetary provision authorised by the Decision and, if so, what the applicable rate
         may be. 
      
In that regard, it is appropriate, firstly, to note that the first sentence of Article 88(3) EC imposes on the Member States
         an obligation to inform the Commission of any plans to grant or alter aid (Case C‑199/CELF and Ministre de la Culture et de la Communication [2008] ECR I‑469, paragraph 33). 
      
Under the second sentence of Article 88(3) EC, if the Commission considers that the plan notified is not compatible with the
         common market within the meaning of Article EC, it must, without delay, initiate the procedure provided for in Article 88(2)
         EC (CELF and Ministre de la Culture et de la Communication, paragraph 34). 
      
Under the final sentence of Article 88(3) EC, the Member State which envisages granting aid must not put its proposed measures
         into effect until that procedure has resulted in a final decision of the Commission (CELF and Ministre de la Culture et de la Communication, paragraph 35).
      
The prohibition laid down by that provision is designed to ensure that an aid scheme cannot become operational before the
         Commission has had a reasonable period in which to study the proposed measures in detail and, if necessary, to initiate the
         procedure provided for in Article 88(2) EC (Case C‑301/France v Commission (‘Boussac Saint Frères’) [1990] ECR I‑307, paragraph 17, and CELF and Ministre de la Culture et de la Communication, paragraph 36).
      
It follows that, as the Decision rendered the aid scheme provided for in Article 10(1)(a) and (b) of Law 27/compatible
         with the common market only with effect from the date of that decision, any late payment of the aid can give rise to the calculation
         of interest only in respect of amounts of aid due after that date.
      
Secondly, as follows from the answer to the eighth question, the right to obtain payment of interest in the event of late
         payment of the aid and the detailed arrangements and rates applicable to that interest fall within the scope of national law.
      
It must, however, be pointed out that the Decision relates only to the aid measures provided for in Law 27/91, in particular
         in Article 10(1)(a) and (b) thereof, within the limit of the budgetary provision set out in the Italian Government’s notification
         of May of the measures adopted.
      
By contrast, the amount of interest which may be due in the event of late payment of those aid measures cannot constitute
         aid, whether in whole or in part, and, accordingly, cannot be paid from the budgetary provision allocated to that aid. 
      
It follows from the foregoing that the answer to the ninth and tenth questions is that the amount of statutory interest which
         may be due in the event of late payment of the aid authorised by the Decision for the period following that decision
         is not to be included in the amount of the budgetary provision authorised by that decision. The rate of interest and the detailed
         arrangements for applying that rate fall within the scope of national law. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Commission Decision SG (95) D/of December relating to Regional Law No of the Region of Sicily of May providing for measures to promote employment (State aid NN 91/A/95) must be interpreted as having accepted, as being compatible
            with the common market, an aid scheme composed of two measures provided for in Article 10(1)(a) and (b) of abovementioned
            Regional Law No 27, which cannot be cumulative and the event giving rise to which, that is to say, the recruitment of a worker
            or the conversion of the contract into an open-ended contract, must have taken place before December 1996, but the payments
            to which they give rise may be made after that date, on condition that the applicable national budgetary and financial rules
            do not preclude that and that the budgetary provision approved by the Commission of the European Communities is not exceeded.
            
2.      Article of Commission Decision 2003/195/EC of October on the scheme by which Italy plans to aid employment in the
            Region of Sicily – C 56/(ex N 668/97) must be interpreted as meaning that the aid scheme provided for in Article 11(1)
            of Regional Law No of the Region of Sicily of May authorising expenditure for the use of the provisions entered
            in the general funds of the budget of the Region for the financial year constitutes new aid distinct from that provided
            for in Article of Regional Law No of the Region of Sicily of May providing for measures to promote employment.
            Article of Decision 2003/precludes the grant of subsidies in respect of any employment of workers recruited under training
            or work-experience contracts or conversion of training and work-experience contracts into open-ended contracts with effect
            from January 1997. 
3.      It is for the Member State concerned to determine which party to the proceedings has the burden of proving that the budgetary
            provision allocated for the aid measures referred to in Article 10(1)(a) and (b) of Regional Law No of the Region of Sicily
            of May providing for measures to aid employment and authorised by Decision SG (95) D/has not been exhausted.
4.      The amount of statutory interest which may be due in the event of late payment of the aid authorised by Decision SG (95) D/for the period following that decision is not to be included in the amount of the budgetary provision authorised by that decision.
            The rate of interest and the detailed arrangements for applying that rate fall within the scope of national law. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 