
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-372/Italian Republic
v
Commission of the European Communities
(State aid – Transport of goods by road – Effect on trade between Member States and distortion of competition – Conditions for a derogation from the prohibition laid down in Article 92(1) of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article
         87(1) EC) – Existing aid or new aid – Principles of proportionality and the protection of legitimate expectations – Statement of reasons)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        State aid – Commission decision finding aid which has not been notified incompatible with the common market – Obligation to
            state reasons – Scope
(EC Treaty, Arts 93(3) and (now Arts 88(3) EC and EC)) 
2.        State aid – Effect on trade between Member States – Adverse effect on competition – Criteria of assessment – Aid the individual
            amounts of which are relatively small but awarded in a sector characterised by strong competition and a large number of small
            companies
(EC Treaty, Art. (now, after amendment, Art. EC)) 
3.        State aid – Effect on trade between Member States – Transport sector – Recipients operating exclusively at a local level –
            Not relevant
(EC Treaty, Art. 92(1) (now, after amendment, Art. 87(1) EC)) 
4.        State aid – Adverse effect on competition – State measures aimed at approximating the conditions of competition in a particular
            sector of the economy to those prevailing in other Member States
(EC Treaty, Art. 92(1) (now, after amendment, Art. 87(1) EC)) 
5.        Acts of the institutions – Statement of reasons – Obligation – Scope – Commission decision finding aid incompatible with the
            common market – Necessary indications
(EC Treaty, Art. 92(1) (now, after amendment, Art. 87(1) EC) and Art. (now Art. EC))
6.        State aid – Prohibiton – Derogations – Member State seeking derogation under a duty to cooperate
(EC Treaty, Art. 92(2) (now, after amendment, Art. 87(2) EC)) 
7.        State aid – Prohibition – Derogations – Commission’s discretion – Judicial review – Limits
(EC Treaty, Art. 92(3) (now, after amendment, Art. 87(3) EC)) 
8.        State aid – Recovery of unlawful aid – Breach of the principle of proportionality – None – Discretionary power of the Commission
(EC Treaty, Art. 93(2), first para. (now Art. 88(2), first para., EC)) 
9.        State aid – Recovery of unlawful aid – Protection of legitimate expectations – Permissible with regard to the recipient –
            Excluded with regard to a Member State which has granted aid contrary to the procedural rules in Article of the EC Treaty
            (now Article EC)
(EC Treaty, Arts (now, after amendment, Art. EC) and (now Art. EC)) 
1.        Where aid has been granted by a Member State without having been notified to the Commission at the planning stage, the decision
         finding that aid incompatible with the common market is not required to be based on a demonstration of the real effect of
         that aid on competition or trade between Member States. To decide otherwise would ultimately favour those Member States which
         grant aid in breach of the duty to notify in Article 93(3) of the EC Treaty (now Article 88(3) EC), to the detriment of those
         which do notify aid at the planning stage.
      
(see para. 45)
2.        When financial aid granted by a Member State strengthens the position of an undertaking compared with other undertakings competing
         in intra-Community trade the latter must be regarded as affected by that aid.
      
The relatively small amount of aid or the relatively small size of the undertaking which receives it do not as such exclude
         the possibility that intra-Community trade might be affected.
      
Aid of a relatively small amount is liable to affect competition and trade between Member States where there is strong competition
         in the sector in which the undertakings which receive it operate. Furthermore, where a sector has a large number of small
         companies, aid potentially available to all or a very large number of undertakings in that sector can, even if individual
         amounts are small, have an impact on competition and trade between Member States.
      
(see paras 52-54, 57, 114)
3.        The condition for the application of Article 92(1) of the Treaty (now, after amendment, Article 87(1) EC), namely that the
         aid must be capable of affecting trade between Member States, does not depend on the local or regional character of the transport
         services supplied or on the scale of the field of activity concerned.
      
(see para. 60)
4.        The fact that a Member State seeks to approximate, by unilateral measures, the conditions of competition in a particular sector
         of the economy to those prevailing in other Member States cannot deprive the measures in question of their character as State
         aid. 
      
(see para. 67)
5.        The statement of reasons required by Article of the Treaty (now Article EC) must be appropriate to the nature of the
         measure in question and must show clearly and unequivocally the reasoning of the institution which adopted the measure so
         as to inform the persons concerned of the justification for the measure adopted and to enable the Court to exercise its powers
         of review. The requirements to be satisfied by the statement of reasons depend on the circumstances of each case, in particular
         the content of the measure in question, the nature of the reasons given and the interest which the addressees of the measure,
         or other parties to whom it is of direct and individual concern, may have in obtaining explanations. It is not necessary for
         the reasoning to go into all the relevant facts and points of law, since the question whether the statement of reasons for
         a measure meets the requirements of Article of the Treaty must be assessed with regard not only to its wording but also
         to its context and to all the legal rules governing the matter in question.
      
Even, if, in certain cases, the very circumstances in which State aid is granted show that the aid is capable of affecting
         trade between Member States and of distorting or threatening to distort competition, the Commission must at least set out
         those circumstances in the statement of reasons for its decision 
      
(see paras 69-71)
6.        A Member State which seeks to be allowed to grant aid by way of derogation from the Treaty rules has a duty to collaborate
         with the Commission, in pursuance of which it must in particular provide all the information to enable the Commission to verify
         that the conditions for the derogation sought are fulfilled 
      
(see para. 81)
7.        In the application of Article 92(3) of the Treaty (now, after amendment, Article 87(3) EC), the Commission has a wide discretion
         the exercise of which involves economic and social assessments which must be made in a Community context. When it examines
         the impact of aid on competition and intra-Community trade, the Commission must weigh the beneficial effects of the aid against
         its adverse effects on trading conditions and on the maintenance of undistorted competition. Judicial review of the manner
         in which that discretion is exercised is confined to establishing that the rules of procedure and the rules relating to the
         duty to give reasons have been complied with and to verifying the accuracy of the facts relied on and that there has been
         no error of law, manifest error of assessment in regard to the facts or misuse of powers. 
      
(see paras 82-83)
8.        Abolishing unlawful aid by means of recovery is the logical consequence of a finding that it is unlawful. Consequently, the
         recovery of State aid unlawfully granted, for the purpose of restoring the previously existing situation, cannot in principle
         be regarded as disproportionate to the objectives of the Treaty in regard to State aid.
      
By repaying the aid, the recipient forfeits the advantage which it had enjoyed over its competitors on the market, and the
         situation prior to payment of the aid is restored. It also follows from that function of repayment of aid that, as a general
         rule, save in exceptional circumstances, the Commission will not exceed the bounds of its discretion if it asks the Member
         State to recover the sums granted by way of unlawful aid since it is only restoring the previous situation
      
(see paras 103-104)
9.        A recipient of unlawfully granted aid cannot be precluded from relying on exceptional circumstances on the basis of which
         it had legitimately assumed the aid to be lawful and thus declining to refund that aid.
      
However, a Member State whose authorities have granted aid contrary to the procedural rules laid down in Article of the
         EC Treaty (now Article EC) may not plead the legitimate expectations of recipients in order to justify a failure to comply
         with the obligation to take the steps necessary to implement a Commission decision instructing it to recover the aid. If it
         could do so, Article of the Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) and Article of the Treaty would be deprived
         of all practical force, since national authorities would thus be able to rely on their own unlawful conduct in order to render
         decisions taken by the Commission under those provisions of the Treaty ineffectual.
      
(see paras 111-112)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)April 2004(1)
(State aid  –  Transport of goods by road  –  Effect on trade between Member States and distortion of competition  –  Conditions for a derogation from the prohibition laid down in Article 92(1) of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article
                  87(1) EC)  –  Existing aid or new aid  –  Principles of proportionality and the protection of legitimate expectations  –  Statement of reasons)
               
 In Case C-372/97,
            
Italian Republic, represented by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, assisted by O. Fiumara, avvocato dello Stato, with an address for service
            in Luxembourg, 
            
applicant,
v
Commission of the European Communities, represented by P. Nemitz and P. Stancanelli, acting as Agents, assisted by M. Moretto, avvocato, with an address for service
            in Luxembourg, 
            
defendant,
 APPLICATION for the partial annulment of Commission Decision 98/182/EC of July concerning aid granted by the Friuli-Venezia
            Giulia Region (Italy) to road haulage companies in the Region (OJ L 66, p. 18),
            
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
 composed of: V. Skouris, acting for the President of the Sixth Chamber, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, J.‑P. Puissochet, R. Schintgen
            and F. Macken (Rapporteur), Judges,  
            
 Advocate General: S. Alber, Registrar: M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator,
            
 after hearing oral argument from the parties at the hearing on March 2003, during which the Italian Republic was represented
            by G. Aiello, avvocato dello Stato, and the Commission by V. Di Bucci, acting as Agent,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on May 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By application lodged at the Court Registry on October 1997, the Italian Republic brought an action under Article of
         the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) for the partial annulment of Commission Decision 98/182/EC of July
         concerning aid granted by the Friuli-Venezia Giulia Region (Italy) to road haulage companies in the Region (OJ L
         66, p. 18, hereinafter ‘the contested decision’).
         
Legal background
            
 The general provisions on State aid set out in Articles of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC), and
         of the EC Treaty (now Articles EC and EC) apply in the field of transport, subject to the special provisions of Article
         of the EC Treaty (now Article EC), which state that aids meeting the needs of coordination of transport or representing
         reimbursement for the discharge of certain obligations inherent in the concept of a public service are compatible with the
         Treaty.
         
            
 Article of Council Regulation (EEC) No 1107/of June on the granting of aids for transport by rail, road and inland
         waterway (OJ, English Special Edition (II), p. 360), as last amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 543/of March
         (OJ L 84, p. 6), which is based on Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) and Articles
         and of the Treaty, confirms that Articles to of the Treaty are to apply in the field concerned. The regulation
         also lays down certain special rules on the aid in question in so far as they relate specifically to activities in that sector.
         It thus sets out the cases in and conditions on which Member States are entitled to adopt coordination measures or impose
         obligations inherent in the concept of a public service which involve the granting of State aid pursuant to Article of
         the Treaty.
         
            
 Regarding the coordination of transport, Article 3(1)(d) of Regulation No 1107/authorises, until the entry into force of
         Community rules on access to the transport market, aid granted in order to eliminate, as part of a reorganisation plan, excess
         capacity causing serious structural problems, and thus to contribute towards meeting the needs of the transport market more
         effectively. Article 3(1)(e) of that regulation also authorises, under certain conditions, aids designed to facilitate the
         development of combined transport.
         
            
 In the course of introducing a common transport policy, the international road haulage market was partially liberalised within
         the Community by Council Regulation No 1018/of July on the establishment of a Community quota for the carriage
         of goods by road between Member States (Journal Officiel L 175, p. 13), which introduced a quota system in 1969. Under
         that quota system, Community authorisations permitted their holders to carry out transport operations between Member States
         for a period of one year. That system was kept in force up to January 1993, the date on which this activity was fully liberalised
         by Council Regulation (EEC) No 881/of March on access to the market in the carriage of goods by road within the
         Community to or from the territory of a Member State or passing across the territory of one or more Member States (OJ L 95, p. 1).
         
            
 Regarding the market for the carriage of goods within a Member State, Council Regulation (EEC) No 4059/of December laying down conditions under which non-resident carriers may operate national road haulage services within a Member State
         (OJ L 390, p. 3) made cabotage, that is to say, the carriage of goods within one Member State by a carrier established
         in another Member State, subject, with effect from July 1990, to a transitional system in the form of a progressively increasing
         Community quota. Council Regulation (EEC) No 3118/of October laying down conditions under which non-resident carriers
         may operate national road haulage services within a Member State (OJ L 279, p. 1) provided for the continuance of this
         transitional system until the definitive introduction of the full liberalisation of cabotage activities with effect from July 1998.
         
FactsThe aid in question
            
 On May 1981, the Friuli-Venezia Giulia Region (hereinafter ‘the Region’) adopted Law No on action to promote and develop
         transport of concern to the Friuli-Venezia Giulia Region and the carriage of goods by road for hire or reward (‘Law No 28/1981’).
         Articles 4, and of that law provided for certain aid for road haulage contractors established within the Region.
         
            
 The system introduced by Law No 28/was replaced by Regional Law No of January on action to promote and develop
         transport of concern to the Friuli‑Venezia Giulia Region and the carriage of goods by road for hire or reward (hereinafter
         ‘Law No 4/1985’). Articles to of that law introduced a system of regional aid that was essentially identical to the system
         set up by Law No 28/1981.
         
            
 Those laws provided for three measures in favour of road haulage contractors established in the Region:
         
(a)
annual financing, over a maximum period of years, of up to 60% (for individual contractors) and 70% (for cooperatives and
               groups) of the reference rate laid down by Ministerial Decree, of interest on loans contracted for the purpose of (Articles
               of Laws No 28/and 4/1985):
            
–
developing the contractor’s infrastructure (construction, purchase, expansion, completion and modernisation of premises required
                     for its operations, including those to be used for the warehousing, storage and handling of goods);
                  
–
purchasing, developing and renewing fixed and movable equipment, together with internal and road transport vehicles; 
(b)
financing the cost of leasing, for a period of three or five years, new vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers and their swap
               bodies, suitable for the operation of road haulage, together with the installations, machinery and equipment for the use,
               maintenance and repair of vehicles and for the handling of goods, up to the level of 25% (for individual contractors) and
               30% (for cooperatives and groups) of the purchase price of the assets. This aid, laid down in Article of Law No 28/and Article of Law No 4/1985, was reduced, for all recipients, to 20% and then to 15% of the purchase price by subsequent
               regional laws; 
            
(c)
annual financing, for groups and other forms of association, of up to 50% of investment to be used for the construction or
               purchase of installations and equipment required in pursuing the aims of the group or association, or contributing to the
               operation and development of service centres for housing, maintenance and repair of vehicles or related facilities and equipment
               (Article of Law No 28/and Article of Law No 4/1985).
            
            
 According to information sent to the Commission of the European Communities by the Italian authorities on November 1996,
         the amount of credits earmarked for the aid referred to in Article of Law No 4/1985, for the period from to 1995, was
         ITL million (EUR 6.million), and applications were granted. On average, the level of aid disbursed ranged from
         13% to 26% of the cost of the loans and interest. The budget for the period to was ITL million (EUR 0.million),
         and applications were granted during this period (section II of the reasons for the contested decision).
         
            
 The budget allocated for the aid covered by Article of Law No 4/amounted to ITL million (EUR 11.million) for
         the period from to 1995, and applications were granted, with an average financing rate of around 19%, over that
         period. In 1993, applications were granted and the level of aid was 10%. From to 1985, applications were granted
         and aid amounting to ITL million (EUR 2.million) was disbursed (section II of the reasons for the contested decision).
         
            
 According to the information sent by the Italian Government to the Commission after the initiation of the administrative procedure,
         aid granted under Article of Law No 4/was for investment in the combined transport sector, namely the purchase of swap
         bodies and corresponding attachment devices for inter‑modal vehicles and semi‑trailers. According to that information, such
         aid accounted for between and 15% of the total amount of aid allocated (sections II, seventh paragraph, and VIII, seventh
         and eighth paragraphs, of the reasons for the contested decision).
         
The administrative procedure and the contested decision
            
 Having learned of the existence of Law No 4/1985, the Commission, by letter of September 1995, asked the Italian authorities
         to send it all the legislation, documents, information and data necessary to assess whether the system of aid introduced by
         that law was compatible with the common market.
         
            
 By letter of February 1997, the Commission informed the Italian Government of its decision to initiate the procedure laid
         down in Article 93(2) of the Treaty in respect of the system of aid for commercial road haulage companies introduced by Law
         No 28/and Law No 4/(OJ C 98, p. 16). It asked the Italian authorities and interested third parties to submit
         their comments and furnish all documents, information and data required in order to examine the compatibility of the aid in
         question with the common market. On April 1997, the Commission received the Italian Government’s comments, to which the
         supplementary report by the Region (hereinafter ‘the supplementary report’) was annexed.
         
            
 On July 1997, the Commission closed the procedure provided for in Article 93(2) of the Treaty by adopting the contested
         decision.
         
            
 Section VI of the reasons for the contested decision states that, since the aid in question seeks to improve the competitive
         position of commercial road haulage companies in the Region, by reducing their normal business running costs, whereas such
         costs have to be borne in full by their competitors outside the Region, it benefited those companies and that specific activity
         in such a way that it was liable to produce a distortion of competition. 
         
            
 First, the Commission makes a distinction, in section VII, third to eleventh paragraphs, of the reasons for the contested
         decision, between the road haulage market at local, regional and national level, on the one hand, and the international road
         haulage market, on the other. It points out that the former was not open to Community competition until Regulation No 4059/entered into force on July 1990. Consequently, the aid granted before that date to carriers operating exclusively at local,
         regional or national level could not affect intra‑Community trade and therefore did not constitute State aid for the purposes
         of Article 92(1) of the Treaty. However, the aid granted to those carriers after that date is State aid for the purposes of
         that provision, since it was liable to affect trade between Member States. 
         
            
 With regard to the international road haulage market, the Commission states, in section III, fourth paragraph, of the reasons
         for the contested decision, that it has been open to intra‑Community competition since 1969, when Regulation No 1018/entered
         into force. It infers from this, in section VII, last paragraph, of those reasons, that the aid provided for by Laws Nos 28/and 4/had strengthened the financial position and hence the scope of commercial haulage companies in the Region vis-à-vis
         their competitors since for companies engaged in international transport and was accordingly capable of affecting trade
         between Member States. The aid in question therefore constitutes State aid for the purposes of Article 92(1) of the Treaty
         and the local or limited nature of the competition represented by the regional hauliers cannot preclude the application of
         that provision.
         
            
 Next, in examining whether the aid thus characterised as State aid qualifies for a derogation, the Commission considers, in
         section VIII, ninth paragraph, of the reasons for the contested decision, that the aid for financing equipment designed for
         combined transport can benefit from the exemption provided for in Article 3(1)(e) of Regulation (EEC) No 1107/70. As regards
         the other aid in question, it does not qualify for the derogation provided for by Article 3(1)(d) since there is no excess
         capacity and no reorganisation plan for the sector.
         
            
 According to the contested decision, the derogations provided for in Article 92(3)(a) and (c) of the Treaty for aid to promote
         the economic development of certain areas do not apply, firstly, because there is no regional development plan affecting all
         sectors of the Region’s economy and, secondly, because not all the territory of the Region is in areas qualifying for the
         exemptions. 
         
            
 With regard to the derogations provided for in Article 92(3)(c) of the Treaty for sector‑based aid, they do not apply to the
         aid in question since it is not accompanied by any action aimed at an objective of common interest, such as a restructuring
         plan for the sector. Moreover, aid for leasing transactions relating to the acquisition of new vehicles is operating aid (section
         VIII, 13th paragraph, of the reasons for the contested decision). 
         
            
 Finally, section VIII, last paragraph, of the reasons for the contested decision states that aid granted under Laws Nos 28/and 4/to commercial road haulage companies in the Region engaged in local, regional or national transport operations
         from July onwards, as well as to those engaged in international transport operations, is incompatible with the common
         market within the meaning of Article of the Treaty. The Commission therefore concludes, in section IX of those reasons,
         that, since the Italian Government implemented the aid scheme in question without having fulfilled the obligation of notification,
         the scheme should be regarded as illegal and recovery of the aid in question should be regarded as necessary in order to restore
         the fair conditions of competition which existed before that aid was granted.
         
            
 The operative part of the contested decision is worded as follows:
         ‘Article Subsidies granted under Laws No 28/and No 4/of the Friuli-Venezia Giulia Region (hereinafter referred to as “the
         subsidies”) up to July to companies exclusively engaged in transport operations at local, regional or national level
         do not constitute State aid within the meaning of Article 92(1) of the Treaty.
          Article The subsidies not covered by Article of this Decision constitute aid within the meaning of Article 92(1) of the Treaty and
         are illegal since they were introduced in breach of Article 93(3).
          Article The subsidies for financing equipment specifically adapted for, and used solely for, combined transport constitute aid within
         the meaning of Article 92(1) of the Treaty but are compatible with the common market by virtue of Article 3(1)(e) of Regulation
         (EEC) No 1107/70.
          Article The subsidies granted from July onwards to companies engaged in transport operations at a local, regional or national
         level and to companies engaged in transport operations at an international level are incompatible with the common market since
         they do not fulfil any of the conditions for derogation provided for in Article 92(2) and (3) of the Treaty, or the conditions
         provided for in Regulation (EEC) No 1107/70.
          Article Italy shall abolish and recover the aid referred to in Article 4. The aid shall be reimbursed in accordance with the provisions
         of domestic law, together with interest, calculated by applying the reference rates used for assessment of regional aid, as
         from the date on which the aid was granted and ending on the date on which it is actually repaid.
         …
          Article This Decision is addressed to the Italian Republic.’
         
            
 Following the adoption of the contested decision, the Region, which had suspended granting of the aid in question from January
         onwards, abolished the system of aid provided for by Law No 4/and took the steps necessary to recover the aid already
         disbursed.
         
Procedure
            
 In addition to the present action brought by the Italian Republic, certain road haulage companies which had received aid from
         the Region (hereinafter ‘the recipient undertakings’) also brought actions, by applications lodged at the Registry of the
         Court of First Instance of the European Communities between December and January 1998, registered under numbers
         T‑298/97, T‑312/97, T‑313/97, T‑315/97, T‑600/to T‑607/97, T‑1/98, T‑3/to T‑6/and T‑23/98, for the partial annulment
         of the contested decision. By order of the President of the First Chamber (Extended Composition) of June 1998, those cases
         were joined for the purposes of the written procedure, the oral procedure and the judgment.
         
            
 By order of the President of the Fourth Chamber (Extended Composition) of September 1998, the Italian Republic was granted
         leave to intervene in support of the forms of order sought by the recipient undertakings.
         
            
 By order of November 1998, the Court of Justice stayed proceedings in the present case pending delivery of the judgment
         of the Court of First Instance in the joined cases mentioned in paragraph of this judgment.
         
            
 By judgment of June in Joined Cases T‑298/97, T‑312/97, T‑313/97, T‑315/97, T‑600/to T‑607/97, T‑1/98, T‑3/to
         T‑6/and T‑23/Alzetta and Others v Commission [2000] ECR II‑2319, the Court of First Instance annulled Article of the contested decision, in so far as it declares illegal
         the aid granted after July to undertakings engaged exclusively in local, regional or national transport, and Article
         of that decision, in so far as it requires the Italian Republic to recover that aid. The Court of First Instance dismissed
         the remainder of the action brought by the recipient undertakings. 
         
            
 By application lodged at the Registry of the Court of Justice on August 2000, the Italian Republic brought an appeal against
         that judgment of the Court of First Instance, registered under number C‑298/P.
         
Subject‑matter of the action
            
 The Italian Republic claims that the Court should annul Articles and of the contested decision or, in the alternative,
         annul Article of that decision in so far as it requires that Member State to recover the aid in dispute, together with interest. It
         also claims that the Commission should be ordered to pay the costs. 
         
            
 In support of its action, the Italian Republic puts forward four pleas for annulment, alleging, in the first place, infringement
         of Article 92(1) of the Treaty, in the second place, infringement of Article 92(3)(c) of the Treaty and Article 3(1)(d) of
         Regulation No 1107/70, in the third place, infringement of Article of the Treaty and, in the fourth place, breach of the
         principles of proportionality and the protection of legitimate expectations and of the obligation to state reasons.
         
            
 The Commission contends that the Court should dismiss the application and order the Italian Republic to pay the costs. However,
         following delivery of the judgment in Alzetta and Others v Commission, cited above, the Commission accepted the interpretation of the Court of First Instance regarding the aid granted after July to undertakings engaged exclusively in local, regional or national transport and, accordingly, withdrew its ground
         of defence concerning that aid. 
         
            
 Article 92(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice states:
         ‘The Court may at any time of its own motion consider whether there exists any absolute bar to proceeding with a case, and
         shall give its decision in accordance with Article 91(3) and (4) of these Rules.’
         
            
 In that regard, as the Court has already observed in paragraph of this judgment, the judgment in Alzetta and Others v Commission, cited above, which was delivered after the present action was brought, annulled Articles and of the contested decision
         in so far as they concern aid to undertakings engaged in local, regional or national road transport.
         
            
 Moreover, during the proceedings on the appeal against the judgment in Alzetta and Others v Commission, the Commission raised no objection to the annulment by the Court of First Instance of Articles and of the contested
         decision in so far as that annulment relates to aid to undertakings engaged in local, regional or national road transport. In
         its judgment delivered today in Case C‑298/P Italy v Commission [2004] ECR I‑0000, the Court of Justice dismissed all the objections raised both by the Italian Republic and by the Commission
         to the aforementioned judgment of the Court of First Instance. 
         
            
 Furthermore, the authority erga omnes exerted by an annulling judgment of the Community judicature (see, inter alia, judgments in Case 1/France v High Authority [to 1956] ECR 1, at page 17; Case 2/Italy v High Authority [to 1956] ECR 37, at page 55; and in Case 3/ASSIDER v High Authority [to 1956] ECR 63) attaches to both the operative part and the ratio decidendi of the judgment (see Case C‑310/P Commission v AssiDomänKraft Products and Others [1999] ECR I‑5363, paragraph 54).
         
            
 In those circumstances, it necessarily follows from the judgment in Alzetta and Others v Commission and from the dismissal of the appeal against it by the judgment delivered today in Italy v Commission that the present action has become devoid of purpose as regards the claim for the annulment of Articles and of the contested
         decision in so far as they concern aid to undertakings engaged in transport at a local, regional or national level.
         
            
 Consequently, it is for the Court to determine whether the contested decision is compatible with the principles of Community
         law invoked by the Italian Republic solely in so far as it declares illegal aid granted under Laws Nos 28/and 4/to undertakings engaged in international road transport operations (hereinafter ‘the aid in dispute’).
         
The actionThe first plea in law Error in law concerning the interpretation of Article 92(1) of the Treaty
         
– Arguments of the parties
         
            
 By the first part of the first plea in law, the Italian Republic submits that, so far as the application of Article 92(1)
         of the Treaty to the aid in dispute is concerned, the Commission merely mentions the simple possibility that trade between
         Member States may be affected by such aid and does not demonstrate the existence of a real, concrete risk of distortion of
         competition. 
         
– Findings of the Court
         
            
 As a preliminary point, it must be noted that Article 92(1) of the Treaty defines the aid regulated by it as being any aid
         granted by a Member State or through State resources in any form whatsoever which distorts or threatens to distort competition
         by favouring certain undertakings or the production of certain goods, in so far as it affects trade between Member States.
         
            
 In that regard, the procedural rules laid down by the Treaty vary depending on whether the aid is existing aid or new aid.
         
            
 With regard to existing aid, under the provisions of Article 93(1) and (2) of the Treaty and in accordance with the principle
         of legal certainty, if, in the course of its constant review of such aid, after giving notice to the parties concerned to
         submit their comments, the Commission finds that that aid is not compatible with the common market having regard to Article
         of the Treaty, or that such aid is being misused, it is to decide that the State concerned must abolish or alter such aid
         within a period of time to be determined by the Commission. Such aid may therefore be lawfully put into effect as long as
         the Commission has not found it to be incompatible (see Case C‑47/Italy v Commission [1992] ECR I-4145, paragraphs and 25, and Case C‑387/Banco Exterior de España [1994] ECR I‑877, paragraph 20).
         
            
 With regard to new aid, Article 93(3) of the Treaty provides that the Commission is to be informed, in sufficient time to
         enable it to submit its comments, of any plans to grant or alter aid. It must then undertake an initial examination of the
         planned aid. If, following that examination, it considers that any such plan is not compatible with the common market, it
         must without delay initiate the procedure provided for in paragraph of that article. In such circumstances, the Member State
         concerned must not put its proposed measures into effect until the procedure has resulted in a final decision. New aid is
         therefore subject to a precautionary review by the Commission and may not, in principle, be put into effect until such time
         as the latter has declared it compatible with the Treaty. 
         
            
 In its assessment both of existing aid, pursuant to Article 93(1) and (2) of the Treaty, and of new aid which must be notified
         to it before being implemented, pursuant to Article 93(3) of the Treaty, the Commission is required, not to establish that
         such aid has a real effect on trade between Member States and that competition is actually being distorted, but only to examine
         whether that aid is liable to affect such trade and distort competition. 
         
            
 The same applies where new aid has been granted without having been notified to the Commission beforehand. If, on the other
         hand, the Commission were required in its decision to demonstrate the real effect of aid which has already been granted, that
         would ultimately favour those Member States which grant aid in breach of the duty to notify laid down in Article 93(3) of
         the Treaty, to the detriment of those which do notify aid at the planning stage (see Case C‑301/France v Commission [1990] ECR I‑307, ‘Boussac Saint Frères’, paragraphs and 33).
         
            
 The restrictive interpretation of Article 92(1) of the Treaty proposed by the Italian Republic, to the effect that the Commission
         is required to establish that the aid in dispute is in fact having a real effect on intra‑Community trade and competition,
         must therefore be ruled out and the first part of the first plea in law must accordingly be rejected. 
         
 Effect of the aid in dispute on intra‑Community trade and competition
         
– Arguments of the parties
         
            
 By the second part of the first plea in law, the Italian Republic maintains, in the first place, that the very low total amount
         of the aid in dispute, which should logically be treated in the same way as ‘de minimis’ aid, which is exempted from the obligation of notification, proves that it cannot affect intra‑Community trade and competition.
         
            
 In the second place, the Italian Republic points out that almost all the recipients of the aid in dispute carry out their
         transport operations within the Region. The Commission failed to establish, in particular, that certain Community undertakings
         suffered harm caused by that aid. It merely found that, since July 1990, the undertakings of the Region have, in principle,
         been in competition with any other Italian or Community haulier engaging in cabotage in Italy, without even demonstrating
         that hauliers of other Member States did actually have access to the Italian market, since any such demonstration would presuppose,
         at the very least, that the Community quota was not exhausted. However, that quota would have been exhausted and, consequently,
         any effect on competition in international road haulage would have been out of the question.
         
            
 In the third place, with regard to the ‘compensatory’ function of the aid in a situation of objective competitive disadvantage,
         the Italian Republic argues that, because of its geographical situation, the Region had, first and foremost, to defend its
         small share of the international market from Austrian, Croatian and Slovenian hauliers who, at least until in the case
         of the Republic of Austria, belonged to non‑Community countries and therefore benefited from State measures and advantages
         which were unlikely to be eliminated by means of bilateral agreements.
         
            
 In that regard, the Commission maintains that the road haulage market is characterised by the existence of numerous small-sized
         undertakings and that State intervention, even on an insignificant scale, in favour of some of them is bound to have significant
         repercussions for the others and to affect intra‑Community trade as well as competition. Moreover, referring to section VII,
         eighth paragraph, of the reasons for the contested decision, it adds that, in most cases, even though a vehicle was purchased
         for use exclusively in local transport, it may nevertheless be used to provide international transport services. 
         
            
 The Commission adds that the circumstance of holding an extremely limited share of the national market or having an insignificant
         involvement in intra‑Community trade is not sufficient to prove that there is no effect on the latter and no impact on competition
         at Community level. What is important, however, is the fact that the undertakings in receipt of the aid in dispute and those
         established in other Member States which do not receive that aid are in a position to provide the same services.
         
– Findings of the Court
         
            
 In that regard, when financial aid granted by a Member State strengthens the position of an undertaking compared with other
         undertakings competing in intra‑Community trade the latter must be regarded as affected by that aid (see Case 730/Philip Morris v Commission [1980] ECR 2671, paragraph 11, and Joined Cases C‑278/to C‑280/Spain v Commission [1994] ECR I‑4103, paragraph 40).
         
            
 With regard to the Italian Government’s first argument, concerning the relatively small amount of aid or the relatively small
         size of the undertaking which receives it, it must be pointed out that such circumstances do not as such exclude the possibility
         that intra-Community trade might be affected (see Case C-142/Belgium v Commission [1990] ECR I-959, ‘Tubemeuse’, paragraph 43; Joined Cases C‑278/to C‑280/Spain v Commission, cited above, paragraph 42, and Case C‑280/Altmark Trans and Regierungspräsidium Magdeburg [2003] ECR I‑7747, paragraph 81).
         
            
 Aid of a relatively small amount is liable to affect competition and trade between Member States where there is strong competition
         in the sector in which the undertakings which receive it operate (see Case 259/France v Commission [1987] ECR 4393, paragraph 24; Case C-303/Italy  v Commission [1991] ECR I‑1433, paragraph 27, and Case C‑351/Spain v Commission [2002] ECR I‑8031, paragraph 63).
         
            
 In this case, with regard to the international road haulage market, which was opened up to Community competition from onwards, the share of operations carried out by hauliers of the Region as compared with the total volume of haulage carried
         out in Italy was 16% in tonnes per kilometre in 1993. Those hauliers are in competition with other Italian undertakings engaging
         in the same activity.
         
            
 Moreover, the Commission rightly found that the aid in dispute reduced the normal business costs of the road haulage sector
         in the Region in such as way as to engender a distortion of competition (section VI, last paragraph, of the reasons for the
         contested decision). It therefore concluded that, ‘[w]here the position of companies in a particular sector involved in trade
         between Member States is strengthened, this trade must be considered to be affected within the meaning of Article 92(1) of
         the Treaty’ (section VII, last paragraph, of those reasons). 
         
            
 Furthermore, it is clear that, where a sector has a large number of small companies, aid potentially available to all or a
         very large number of undertakings in that sector can, even if individual amounts are small, have an impact on competition
         and trade between Member States (see, to that effect, the judgment in Case C-351/Spain v Commission, cited above, paragraph 64). In that regard, the figures communicated to the Commission by the Italian Government confirm
         that more than 80% of the recipients of the aid in dispute are small undertakings.
         
            
 In addition, the Commission notice of March on the de minimis rule for State aid (OJ C 68, p. 9), which was replaced by Information from the Commission of July – Community
         guidelines on State aid for small and medium-sized enterprises (OJ C 213, p. 4), excludes transport from its scope.
         
            
 In the light of those considerations, the Italian Government’s first argument, concerning the small amount of the aid in dispute,
         must be rejected.
         
            
 With regard to the Italian Government’s second argument, which claims, first, that the majority of the undertakings in receipt
         of that aid operate exclusively at a local level, it must be recalled that the condition for the application of Article 92(1)
         of the Treaty, namely that the aid must be capable of affecting trade between Member States, does not depend on the local
         or regional character of the transport services supplied or on the scale of the field of activity concerned (see Altmark Trans and Regierungspräsidium Magdeburg, cited above, paragraph 82).
         
            
 In this case, the Commission was therefore right to find, in section VII, 10th paragraph, of the reasons for the contested
         decision, that the limited nature of the competition represented by the Region’s hauliers in the international road haulage
         sector cannot preclude the application of Article 92(1) of the Treaty.
         
            
 Secondly, as the Court has already pointed out in paragraphs to of this judgment, it is sufficient that the Commission
         establish that the aid in dispute may affect trade between Member States and threatens to distort competition, and it is not
         necessary to establish that certain Community undertakings have suffered harm as a result of the grant of that aid. The Italian
         Republic’s argument on this point must therefore be rejected.
         
            
 Finally, with regard to the setting of quotas for Community authorisations, it must be pointed out that, under the relevant
         provisions of Regulation No 1018/68, those authorisations, which were issued in the name of the haulier and valid for use
         for only one vehicle, were granted, under national quotas, for a period of one year in the case of international road haulage,
         and that the holders of such authorisations were entitled, during that period of validity, to transport goods without limitation,
         with one vehicle, between Member States of their choice. 
         
            
 Consequently, the quota systems in force from to on the international road haulage market served to establish a
         situation of effective competition within the limit of the quotas laid down, which could be affected by the grant of the aid
         in dispute. 
         
            
 Even assuming that the Community quota had been exhausted, that factor would not necessarily lead to the conclusion that the
         aid in question had no effect on intra‑Community trade and competition. In view of the free choice given by the quota systems
         to holders of Community authorisations as regards the Member States between which they may provide international road haulage
         services, exhaustion of those quotas would in any event not furnish any information as to the use made of them, in particular
         in the case of international road haulage from or to Italy or, more specifically, the Region.
         
            
 Since the mainly local nature of the operations engaged in by most of the recipients of the aid in dispute and the existence
         of quota systems were not such as to preclude that aid from affecting trade between Member States, the second argument put
         forward by the Italian Republic in support of the second part of the first plea in law must be rejected.
         
            
 With regard to the third argument, based on the alleged compensatory function of the aid in dispute in a situation of objective
         competitive disadvantage, it is sufficient to recall that, according to settled case-law, the fact that a Member State seeks
         to approximate, by unilateral measures, the conditions of competition in a particular sector of the economy to those prevailing
         in other Member States cannot deprive the measures in question of their character as aid (see Joined Cases 6/and 11/Commission v France [1969] ECR 523, paragraphs and 21, and Case C‑6/Italy v Commission [1999] ECR I‑2981, paragraph 21).
         
            
 It follows, without even needing to consider whether the Italian Republic has demonstrated that the situation of Austrian,
         Croatian and Slovenian road hauliers placed road hauliers established in the Region at a competitive disadvantage, that this
         third argument must be rejected and, accordingly, that the second part of the first plea in law cannot be upheld.
         
 The obligation to state reasons
         
            
 With regard to the third part of the first plea in law, which is based on the Commission’s obligation to state reasons, it
         is settled law that the statement of reasons required by Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC) must be appropriate
         to the nature of the measure in question and must show clearly and unequivocally the reasoning of the institution which adopted
         the measure so as to inform the persons concerned of the justification for the measure adopted and to enable the Court to
         exercise its powers of review. The requirements to be satisfied by the statement of reasons depend on the circumstances of
         each case, in particular the content of the measure in question, the nature of the reasons given and the interest which the
         addressees of the measure, or other parties to whom it is of direct and individual concern, may have in obtaining explanations
         (judgment in Joined Cases 296/and 318/Netherlands and Leeuwarder Papierwarenfabriek  v Commission [1985] ECR 809, paragraph 19).
         
            
 In that regard, it is not necessary for the reasoning to go into all the relevant facts and points of law, since the question
         whether the statement of reasons for a measure meets the requirements of Article of the Treaty must be assessed with regard
         not only to its wording but also to its context and to all the legal rules governing the matter in question (see, inter alia,
         judgments in Case C‑114/Spain v Commission [2002] ECR I‑7657, paragraphs and 63, and Case C‑301/Germany v Commission [2003] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 87).
         
            
 Nevertheless, with regard, more specifically, to a decision on State aids, the Court has held that, even if in certain cases
         the very circumstances in which the aid is granted are sufficient to show that the aid is capable of affecting trade between
         Member States and of distorting or threatening to distort competition, the Commission must at least set out those circumstances
         in the statement of reasons for its decision (judgments in Netherlands and Leeuwarder Papierwarenfabriek  v Commission, cited above, paragraph 24; Joined Cases C‑329/93, C‑62/and C‑63/Germany and Others v Commission [1996] ECR I‑5151, paragraph 52, and Case C‑409/Spain v Commission [2003] ECR I‑1487, paragraph 74).
         
            
 In this case, it is apparent from the foregoing considerations that the Commission set out clearly, in the contested decision,
         the circumstances in which the aid in dispute was granted and specified the reasons why it is such as to affect trade between
         Member States and to distort or threaten to distort competition. It also refuted the objections which had been raised by the
         Italian Government during the administrative procedure. In those circumstances, the third part of the first plea in law cannot
         be upheld. 
         
            
 On all those grounds, the first plea in law put forward by the Italian Republic in support of its action, alleging infringement
         of Article 92(1) of the Treaty and an inadequate statement of the reasons for the contested decision, must be rejected.
         
The second plea in law 
            
 By its second plea in law, the Italian Republic complains, firstly, that the Commission ruled out application of the derogations
         referred to in Articles 3(1)(d) of Regulation No 1107/and 92(3)(c) of the Treaty to this case and, secondly, that it failed
         to state reasons for the contested decision in that regard.
         
 Article 3(1)(d) of Regulation No 1107/– Arguments of the parties
         
            
 With regard to the first part of the second plea in law, relating to Article 3(1)(d) of Regulation No 1107/70, the Italian
         Republic maintains that, notwithstanding the Commission’s finding that, contrary to that provision, the subsidies for leasing
         are ‘difficult to reconcile’ with the common market, ‘notably because [they] involve ... an increase in capacity’, the Region
         had explained that the leasing aid for new vehicles had been granted temporarily in the light of the structural difficulties
         arising from over-use of technical and human resources, together with a potential adverse impact on safety. 
         
            
 The Commission contends that granting the derogation in question is precluded by non-fulfilment of the two conditions for
         the application of Article 3(1)(d) of Regulation No 1107/70, namely, that aid must be granted as part of a reorganisation
         plan for the sector and that there must be excess capacity which needs to be eliminated. In its view, the Italian authorities
         themselves confirmed, in point 2.4, first and second paragraphs, of the supplementary report that ‘… there is no structural
         over‑capacity in the road haulage industry [in the Region]’ or, therefore, any reorganisation plan for the sector, as referred
         to in the aforementioned provision. As to the argument that the aid intended to renew the Region’s vehicle fleet was necessary
         for reasons of environmental protection and safety, the Commission points out that, in section VIII, sixth paragraph, of the
         contested decision, it explained that ‘… subsidies for vehicle leasing constitute aid of a type which is difficult to reconcile
         with the common market, notably because it involves an increase in capacity, which is contrary to the spirit of Article 3(1)(d)
         of Regulation (EEC) No 1107/70’ and that the Italian Republic has not put forward any argument demonstrating an alleged error
         of assessment in that regard.
         
– Findings of the Court
         
            
 Article 3(1)(d) of Regulation No 1107/covers only aid granted in order to eliminate, as part of a reorganisation plan,
         excess capacity causing serious structural problems. In this case, there is nothing in the file which gives grounds for assuming
         the existence of such excess capacity. On the contrary, it is apparent from section VIII, third paragraph, of the reasons
         for the contested decision that, in their comments on the initiation of the procedure, the Italian authorities pointed out
         that ‘there [was] no problem of excess capacity in the haulage sector [in the Region] but rather an under‑capacity in vehicle
         fleets of about 20% as compared to real needs – in other words, an excessive workload [was] being placed on existing equipment
         and personnel in the Region …’. 
         
            
 It is also clear that the aid schemes in question make no reference whatsoever to the need to avoid an increase in capacity
         in the transport sector in the Region and do not lay down any conditions in order to avoid such an increase. Consequently,
         the first part of the second plea in law cannot be upheld.
         
 Article 92(3)(c) of the Treaty
         
– Arguments of the parties
         
            
 With regard to the second part of the second plea in law, relating to Article 92(3)(c) of the Treaty, the Italian Republic
         maintains that, contrary to what the Commission contends, namely that the exemption referred to in that article cannot apply
         to the scheme in question since the latter consists of measures which are not accompanied by any action aimed at an objective
         of common interest, the aid in dispute was presented as resources intended to facilitate a genuine restructuring designed
         to improve the quality of services. It was therefore possible to regard that aid as being intended to promote the development
         of certain economic activities within the meaning of that article.
         
            
 In order to refute the allegation that it infringed Article 92(3)(c) of the Treaty, the Commission points out that, in point
         2.4, second paragraph, of the supplementary report, the Italian authorities did not provide any concrete evidence of a specific,
         detailed plan for the restructuring of the sector concerned, but instead made general references to a future process of restructuring
         and rationalisation to be implemented through new legislative aid measures. In the contested decision, it took the view that
         aid for leasing new vehicles is comparable to operating aid or aid which is intended to relieve an undertaking of expenses
         it would normally have to bear in its day-to-day management or its usual activities. In principle, such aid distorts the conditions
         of competition in the sectors for the benefit of which it is granted, yet without being capable, by itself, of achieving any
         of the aims laid down in Article 92(3), and is therefore not covered by that provision. 
         
– Findings of the Court
         
            
 A Member State which seeks to be allowed to grant aid by way of derogation from the Treaty rules has a duty to collaborate
         with the Commission. In pursuance of that duty, it must in particular provide all the information to enable the Commission
         to verify that the conditions for the derogation sought are fulfilled (see Case C‑364/Italy v Commission [1993] ECR I‑2097, paragraph 20).
         
            
 Economic assessments in connection with the application of Article 92(3) of the Treaty must be made in a Community context,
         which means that the Commission must examine the impact of aid on competition and intra‑Community trade. During that examination,
         the Commission must weigh the beneficial effects of the aid against its adverse effects on trading conditions and on the maintenance
         of undistorted competition (see Philip Morris v Commission, cited above, paragraphs and 26, and Joined Cases C‑278/to C‑280/Spain v Commission, cited above, paragraph 51).
         
            
 In the application of Article 92(3) of the Treaty, the Commission has a wide discretion the exercise of which involves economic
         and social assessments which must be made in a Community context (see, inter alia, Case 310/Deufil v Commission [1987] ECR 901, paragraph 18). Judicial review of the manner in which that discretion is exercised is confined to establishing
         that the rules of procedure and the rules relating to the duty to give reasons have been complied with and to verifying the
         accuracy of the facts relied on and that there has been no error of law, manifest error of assessment in regard to the facts
         or misuse of powers (see Case C‑351/Spain  v Commission, cited above, paragraph 74, and Case C‑114/Spain v Commission, cited above, paragraph 93).
         
            
 In this case, the file shows that, contrary to the claims of the Italian Republic, the Region did not provide, in the course
         of the administrative procedure, any definite evidence of a specific, detailed plan for the restructuring of the road haulage
         sector. On the contrary, it is apparent from point 2.4, second paragraph, of the supplementary report that, in the short term,
         no restructuring plan was necessary and the Region merely referred to possible measures to rationalise the sector through,
         inter alia, measures designed to encourage mergers and incentives for, in particular, combined transport, soon to be adopted
         by the Regional authority.
         
            
 In those circumstances, the Commission, without exceeding the limits of its discretion, was fully entitled to take the view
         that it did not have information at its disposal enabling it to establish that the aid in dispute supported an action in the
         common interest, such as a restructuring plan.
         
            
 Moreover, since the replacement of old vehicles represents a cost which all road transport undertakings normally have to bear
         in order to be able to continue to offer their services on the market on competitive terms, the Commission was also fully
         entitled to find, in section VIII, 13th paragraph, of the reasons for the contested decision, that the leasing aid granted
         in order to finance such replacement, which artificially strengthened the financial position of the recipient undertakings
         to the detriment of competing undertakings, was operating aid which, in principle, is not covered by Article 92(3) of the
         Treaty. In those circumstances, the second part of the second plea in law cannot be upheld.
         
 Failure to state reasons for the contested decision
         
            
 With regard to the third part of the second plea in law, alleging failure to state reasons for the contested decision, reference
         should be made to the principles reiterated in paragraphs and of this judgment. In that regard, it is apparent from
         the contested decision that the Commission clearly set out the reasons why the aid in dispute did not qualify for the derogations
         provided for in Articles 92(3)(c) of the Treaty and 3(1)(d) of Regulation No 1107/and, consequently, the third part of
         the second plea in law cannot be upheld. 
         
            
 In the light of the foregoing considerations, the second plea in law put forward by the Italian Republic in support of its
         action must be rejected.
         
The third plea in law Arguments of the parties
         
            
 By its third plea in law, the Italian Republic argues that, since the international road transport market had not been opened
         up to Community competition and the grant of the aid in dispute could not affect intra‑Community trade, that aid must be classified
         as existing aid and, consequently, is not subject to Article 93(3) of the Treaty.
         
            
 The Italian Republic claims that, since the aid in dispute qualifies as existing aid, the Commission should have subjected
         it to the procedure referred to in Article 93(1) and (2) of the Treaty, which means that the Commission is entitled only to
         require the abolition or alteration of such aid within a period of time to be determined by it. However, having deemed the
         aid in question to be new aid which, as such, is subject to the procedure referred to in Article 93(3) of the Treaty, and
         having therefore taken the view that it was illegal and, at the same time, incompatible with the common market, while explicitly
         laying down an obligation to refund it to the State, the Commission committed a serious infringement of essential procedural
         requirements which affects the validity of the contested decision, at least in so far as it orders the recovery of the aid
         in dispute.
         
            
 By contrast, the Commission contends that existing aid includes only, on the one hand, aid which predates either the entry
         into force of the EC Treaty or the accession of new Member States to the Communities and, on the other hand, aid which has
         been duly authorised, either explicitly or implicitly, by the Commission. However, the aid in dispute does not fall into either
         of those categories. 
         
            
 In the first place, in the Commission’s view, what is important is the fact that, at a given time, the measures in question
         may have appeared as aid, since all the conditions for the application of Article 92(1) of the Treaty are then fulfilled.
         
         
            
 In the second place, the progressive opening up, through the introduction of a quota system, of a market previously closed
         to Community competition shows, by its very nature, the existence at Community level of at least potential harm to trade,
         which is sufficient in itself for the particular condition laid down in Article 92(1) of the Treaty to be regarded as fulfilled. The
         fact that the quota is applied and may be used, even to the point of exhaustion, as the Italian Republic maintains, is certainly
         proof that effective competition existed. The Commission adds that the number of Community authorisations provided for was
         already in 1985, and was in 1992, of which were allocated to the aforementioned Member State. 
         
 Findings of the Court
         
            
 In the present case, as the Court has already noted in paragraph of this judgment, the international road transport sector
         was opened up to competition by Regulation No 1018/from onwards and has been fully liberalised since January 1993.
         
            
 As the Court has also held in paragraphs to of this judgment, the aid in dispute strengthened the financial position
         and hence the scope of commercial haulage companies in the Region vis-à-vis their competitors and was accordingly capable
         of affecting trade between Member States.
         
            
 Having been instituted in and 1985, that aid therefore fell, at the time of its introduction, within the scope of Article
         92(1) of the Treaty.
         
            
 It follows that it had to be regarded as new systems of aid which were subject, as such, to the obligation of notification
         laid down in Article 93(3) of the Treaty.
         
            
 Consequently, the third plea in law, alleging misclassification of the aid in dispute as new aid, must be rejected.
         
The fourth plea in law Breach of the principle of proportionality
         
– Arguments of the parties
         
            
 By the first part of its fourth plea in law, the Italian Republic submits that, since the aid in dispute had an insignificant
         effect on the position of the recipient undertakings and since, therefore, the Commission has no interest in restoring the
         previously existing situation, the contested decision, in so far as it imposes an obligation to recover that aid, infringes
         the principle of proportionality. Repayment of the aid would also place a very heavy burden on the recipient undertakings,
         probably causing many of them to disappear from the market and so giving rise to a serious employment and social crisis, making
         such recovery impossible in practice. Moreover, the contested decision fails to state the reasons on which it is based in
         this respect.
         
            
 By contrast, the Commission observes, in the first place, that the recovery of State aid granted illegally, in order to restore
         the status quo ante, cannot, in principle, be regarded as a measure disproportionate to the objective of the Treaty in regard to aid. It contends
         in this regard that the probable disappearance from the market of undertakings in receipt of illegal aid as a result of complying
         with the obligation to repay it does not constitute a ground of justification for the non‑recovery of that aid (see Case 52/Commission v Belgium [1986] ECR 89, paragraph 14).
         
            
 In the second place, with regard to the fear of a serious social crisis, although insuperable difficulties may prevent a Member
         State from complying with its obligations under Community law, the Court has consistently held that mere apprehension of such
         difficulties cannot justify a failure by a Member State to apply Community law correctly (see Case C‑280/Commission v Italy [1998] ECR I‑259, paragraph 16).
         
            
 In the third place, the Commission maintains that it is not required to put forward precise grounds to justify the exercise
         of its power to order the repayment of illegal aid. However, it contends that the contested decision does make clear that
         it considered that recovery of the aid in dispute was necessary in order to restore the fair conditions of competition which
         existed before that aid was granted.
         
– Findings of the Court
         
            
 It should first be recalled that abolishing unlawful aid by means of recovery is the logical consequence of a finding that
         it is unlawful. Consequently, the recovery of State aid unlawfully granted, for the purpose of restoring the previously existing
         situation, cannot in principle be regarded as disproportionate to the objectives of the Treaty in regard to State aids (see
         Tubemeuse, cited above, paragraph 66, and Case C‑169/Spain v Commission [1997] ECR I‑135, paragraph 47).
         
            
 By repaying the aid, the recipient forfeits the advantage which it had enjoyed over its competitors on the market, and the
         situation prior to payment of the aid is restored (see Case C‑350/Commission v Italy [1995] ECR I‑699, paragraph 22). It also follows from that function of repayment of aid that, as a general rule, save in
         exceptional circumstances, the Commission will not exceed the bounds of its discretion, recognised by the case-law of the
         Court, if it asks the Member State to recover the sums granted by way of unlawful aid since it is only restoring the previous
         situation (see Case C‑75/Belgium v Commission [1999] ECR I‑3671, paragraph 66, and Case C‑310/Italy v Commission [2002] ECR I‑2289, paragraph 99).
         
            
 In this case, since the Italian Republic merely claims that repayment of the aid in dispute would place a very heavy burden
         on the recipient undertakings, liable to cause many of them to disappear from the market and so giving rise to a serious employment
         and social crisis, it is sufficient to point out, in accordance with the case‑law of the Court, that apprehension of internal
         difficulties cannot justify a failure by a Member State to comply with its obligations under Community law (see, inter alia,
         Case C‑404/Commission v Portugal [2000] ECR I‑4897, paragraph 52, Case C‑310/Italy v Commission, paragraph 105, and Case C‑404/Commission v Spain [2003] ECR I‑6695, paragraph 55).
         
            
 Consequently, there is no evidence that the Italian Republic was faced with exceptional circumstances making repayment impossible
         and, accordingly, the first part of the fourth plea in law cannot be upheld.
         
 Breach of the principle of the protection of legitimate expectations
         
– Arguments of the parties
         
            
 By the second part of its fourth plea in law, the Italian Republic maintains that, since the recipient undertakings relied
         on the lawfulness of aid instituted and paid out over many years, the contested decision is contrary to the principle of the
         protection of legitimate expectations in that it requires the recovery of the aid granted from July onwards.
         
            
 The Commission replies that, contrary to what the Italian Republic claims, where subsidies constitute aid within the meaning
         of Article 92(1) of the Treaty and are illegal, in so far as they were put into effect in infringement of Article 93(3) of
         the Treaty, the alleged breach of the principle of the protection of legitimate expectations vis‑à‑vis the recipient undertakings
         is irrelevant since there was no objective reason to consider that, in and 1985, the Commission had no objection to the
         aid instituted by Laws Nos 28/and 4/1985.
         
            
 The Commission further contends that, if the Italian authorities had the slightest doubt as to the nature of the measures
         in question, they could and should have notified the plans without delay. In actual fact, it is clear from the considerations
         of fact and of law which led to the adoption of the contested decision that, in and 1985, there was no objective reason
         to consider that the Commission had no objection to those measures. The fact that, after being informed of the existence of
         Laws Nos 28/and 4/and after initiating the procedure laid down in Article 93(2) of the Treaty, it reached the conclusion
         that the measures granted up to July to road transport undertakings operating exclusively at local, regional or national
         level did not constitute State aid, cannot have given rise, either on the part of the recipient undertakings or on the part
         of the Region, to any expectations as to the lawfulness of the aid paid out after July 1990.
         
– Findings of the Court
         
            
 As to the principle of legitimate expectations, it must be pointed out that, by a communication published in the Official Journal of the European Communities (OJ C 318, p. 3), the Commission informed potential recipients of State aid of the risk attaching to any aid granted
         to them illegally, in that they might have to refund the aid (Case C-5/Commission v Germany [1990] ECR I-3437, paragraph 15, and Case C‑310/Italy v Commission, cited above, paragraph 102).
         
            
 It is true that a recipient of unlawfully granted aid is not precluded from relying on exceptional circumstances on the basis
         of which it had legitimately assumed the aid to be lawful and thus declining to refund that aid. If such a case is brought
         before a national court, it is for that court to assess the material circumstances, if necessary after obtaining a preliminary
         ruling on interpretation from the Court of Justice (see Case C‑5/Commission v Germany, cited above, paragraph 16, and Case C‑310/Italy v Commission, cited above, paragraph 103).
         
            
 However, a Member State whose authorities have granted aid contrary to the procedural rules laid down in Article of the
         Treaty may not plead the legitimate expectations of recipients in order to justify a failure to comply with the obligation
         to take the steps necessary to implement a Commission decision instructing it to recover the aid. If it could do so, Articles
         and of the Treaty would be deprived of all practical force, since national authorities would thus be able to rely on
         their own unlawful conduct in order to render decisions taken by the Commission under those provisions of the Treaty ineffectual
         (see Case C-5/Commission v Germany, paragraph 17, and Case C‑310/Italy v Commission, paragraph 104).
         
            
 In this case, it is not disputed, firstly, that, contrary to the obligations imposed on Member States by Article 93(3) of
         the Treaty, the aid in dispute was granted without having been notified beforehand.
         
            
 Secondly, as the Court has already held in paragraph of this judgment, aid, even that which is relatively modest in terms
         of individual amounts, which is nevertheless potentially available to all or a very large proportion of the undertakings in
         the sector, is capable of having an impact on competition and trade between Member States. Unless it is accepted that there
         are exceptional circumstances which may preclude the repayment of such aid, the fact that the recipients are small undertakings
         carrying out operations of limited scale is irrelevant.
         
            
 Finally, the Italian Republic submits that, since the recipient undertakings had relied on the lawfulness of aid instituted
         and paid out over many years, that long period had given rise to legitimate expectations on the part of those recipients as
         to the validity of such aid.
         
            
 In that regard, it is important to recall that the fundamental requirement of legal certainty has the effect of preventing
         the Commission from indefinitely delaying the exercise of its powers (see Case 52/Geigy  v Commission [1972] ECR 787, paragraphs and 21, and Joined Cases C‑74/P and C‑75/P Falck and Acciaierie di Bolzano v Commission [2002] ECR I‑7869, paragraph 140).
         
            
 Admittedly, a delay by the Commission in deciding that aid is unlawful and that it must be abolished and recovered by a Member
         State may, in certain circumstances, establish a legitimate expectation on the recipients’ part so as to prevent the Commission
         from requiring that Member State to order the refund of that aid (see Case 223/RSV v Commission [1987] ECR 4617, paragraph 17). Nevertheless, the facts of the case giving rise to that judgment were exceptional and bear
         no resemblance to those in the present case. The measure at issue in that judgment concerned a sector which had for some years
         been receiving State aid approved by the Commission and its object was to meet the additional costs of an operation which
         had already received authorised aid (see Case C‑334/Germany v Commission [2003] ECR I‑1139, paragraph 44).
         
            
 In any event, as the Advocate General pointed out in point of his Opinion, in the case of State aid that has not been notified,
         such a delay may be imputed to the Commission only from the time when it learnt of the existence of the aid incompatible with
         the common market.
         
            
 In this case, it is common ground that the Commission did not learn of the aid in dispute until September 1995. In view, firstly,
         of the fact that the aid had not been authorised by the Commission and, secondly, of the fact that the Commission was not
         aware of the complex situation in which that aid had been granted, it was therefore necessary, before reaching a decision,
         to carry out an investigation. In those circumstances, the time which elapsed between September and the date of adoption
         of the contested decision, namely July 1997, is reasonable. Moreover, the Italian Republic has put forward no evidence
         that the Commission delayed that procedure.
         
            
 Consequently, the contested decision cannot, either in so far as it requires the repayment of the aid in dispute or in so
         far as it orders the payment of interest, be regarded as infringing the legitimate expectations of the undertakings in receipt
         of that aid and, accordingly, the second part of the fourth plea in law cannot be upheld.
         
 Extent of the obligation to recover the aid in dispute
         
– Arguments of the parties
         
            
 By the third part of its fourth plea in law, the Italian Republic maintains, with regard to the date from which the contested
         decision imposes the obligation to recover the aid granted in the international transport sector, that Article of the contested
         decision, to which Article refers in providing for recovery of the aid incompatible with the Treaty, unequivocally finds
         such incompatibility as regards the aid paid out from July onwards and therefore does not have to be interpreted in
         the light of the reasons for that decision. 
         
            
 The Commission, on the other hand, contends that the operative part of an act is indissociably linked to the statement of
         reasons on which it is based and when it is interpreted account must therefore be taken of the reasons that led to its adoption.
         In this case, the statement of reasons makes it clear that the date of July applies only to the aid granted to undertakings
         engaged in local, regional or national road haulage operations, to the exclusion of undertakings operating in the international
         road haulage sector.
         
            
 Moreover, in the Commission’s view, it is not necessary either to resort to the statement of reasons in order to interpret
         Article of the contested decision correctly, but it is sufficient to view that article within the context of the operative
         part as a whole, of which it forms part, and to read it in the light of the articles which precede it.
         
– Findings of the Court
         
            
 In this case, Article of the contested decision is worded equivocally as regards the requirement to recover the aid in dispute,
         which could refer either to all the aid granted to undertakings engaging in international haulage since that aid was introduced
         or only to the aid granted from July onwards.
         
            
 In that regard, it must be pointed out that, according to settled case-law, the operative part of an act is indissociably
         linked to the statement of reasons for it, so that, when it has to be interpreted, account must be taken of the reasons which
         led to its adoption (see Case C‑355/P TWD v Commission [1997] ECR I‑2549, paragraph 21, and Case C‑404/Commission v Portugal, cited above, paragraph 41).
         
            
 It is clear from the reasons for the contested decision that, firstly, in section VII, third paragraph, of those reasons the
         Commission distinguished between undertakings exclusively engaged in transport operations at a local, regional or national
         level and those engaged in international transport and that, secondly, in section VII, fifth to seventh paragraphs, it identified
         the date of July as being relevant solely as regards the subsidies granted to the former. Moreover, in section VII,
         11th paragraph, the Commission considered that the aid in dispute had strengthened the financial position of commercial haulage
         companies in the region vis‑à‑vis their competitors since July for undertakings engaged in local, regional or national
         transport and since for undertakings engaged in international transport and was therefore capable of affecting trade
         between Member States.
         
            
 Accordingly, as is also clear from section VIII, last paragraph, of the reasons for the contested decision, Article of that
         decision must be interpreted as meaning that the aid granted pursuant to Laws Nos 28/and 4/to undertakings engaged
         in local, regional or national transport operations from July as well as that granted to undertakings engaged in international
         transport operations are incompatible with the common market.
         
            
 That interpretation also follows from a reading of the operative part of the contested decision, which, taken as a whole,
         contains no ambiguity. Article of that operative part, read in conjunction with Article 1, declares the aid granted under
         the systems of aid instituted by Laws Nos 28/and 4/to undertakings engaged in international transport and, with
         effect from July 1990, to undertakings engaged in local, regional or national transport illegal on the ground that it had
         not been notified to the Commission as required by Article 93(3) of the Treaty. Article of that operative part finds that
         the aid for combined transport is compatible with the common market because it qualifies for a derogation under Article 3(1)(e)
         of Regulation No 1107/70. With regard to Article of the same operative part, it determines which of the illegal aid referred
         to in Article is incompatible with the common market on the ground that it does not fulfil the conditions for a derogation.
         Within the scheme of the operative part, it is therefore that illegal aid which was not declared compatible with the common
         market by Article of that operative part, namely, so far as the international transport sector is concerned, the aid granted
         since it was introduced by Laws Nos 28/and 4/1985. Consequently, the third part of the fourth plea in law cannot succeed.
         
         
 The obligation to state reasons
         
            
 As regards the fourth part of the fourth plea in law, relating to the alleged failure to state reasons for the contested decision,
         it is sufficient to point out that the Court has held that, in the matter of State aid, where, contrary to the provisions
         of Article 93(3) of the Treaty, the proposed aid has already been granted, the Commission, which has the power to require
         the national authorities to order its repayment, is not obliged to provide specific reasons in order to justify the exercise
         of that power (see Joined Cases C‑278/to C-280/Spain v Commission, paragraph 78, and Case C‑75/Belgium  v Commission, paragraph 82). Nevertheless, it is established that, in sections VI to VIII of the reasons for the contested decision, the
         Commission made clear the reasons which led it to decide to require the repayment of the aid in dispute. It must therefore
         be held that that decision is not vitiated in that regard by any failure to state reasons and, accordingly, the fourth part
         of the fourth plea cannot be upheld.
         
            
 It follows that the fourth plea in law must also be rejected.
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(6) of the Rules of Procedure, where a case does not proceed to judgment the costs are to be in the discretion
         of the Court. Under Article 69(2) of those Rules, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings.
         
            
 In this instance, the Italian Republic had lodged its application and reply in the present case, claiming that the Court should
         annul, inter alia, Articles and of the contested decision, concerning the aid granted to road haulage undertakings engaged
         in local, regional and national transport, before that part of the action became devoid of purpose. In so far as the action
         still has a purpose, the Italian Republic has failed in its pleas. In the light of those considerations, the parties must
         be ordered to bear their own costs.
         
On those grounds,
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)
 hereby:
         
 
1.
Declares that there is no need to rule on the claims in the application seeking the annulment of Articles and of Commission
                     Decision 98/182/EC of July concerning aid granted by the Friuli-Venezia Giulia Region (Italy) to road haulage companies
                     in the Region in so far as those articles declare the aid granted after July to undertakings engaged exclusively in
                     local, regional or national transport illegal;
                  
 
2.
Dismisses the remainder of the application;
 
3.
Orders the Italian Republic and the Commission of the European Communities to pay their own costs.	
Skouris
Cunha Rodrigues
Puissochet
Schintgen
Macken
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on April 2004.
         
R. Grass
V. Skouris
Registrar
President of the Sixth Chamber
 –
            
Language of the case: Italian.
Top  
 