
ORDER OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE THIRD CHAMBER OF THE COURT
September (*)
      
(Removal from the register)
In Case C‑41/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, brought on January (fax of January
         2012),
      
Monster Cable Products, Inc., established in Brisbane (United States), represented by O. Günzel and A. Wenninger-Lenz, Rechtsanwältinnen,
      
applicant,
the other parties to the proceedings being:
Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM), represented by R. Pethke, acting as Agent, 
      
defendant at first instance,
Live Nation (Music) UK Limited, established in London (United Kingdom), represented by S. Britton, solicitor, 
      
intervener at first instance,
THE PRESIDENT OF THE THIRD CHAMBER OF THE COURT,
after hearing the Advocate General, M. Wathelet,
makes the following
Order
By letter lodged at the Court Registry on September 2013, Monster Cable Products, Inc. informed the Court that it was discontinuing
         its appeal, in accordance with Article of the Rules of Procedure.
      
By letter lodged at the Court Registry on September 2013, OHIM informed the Court that it had no comment to make regarding
         the discontinuance, but none the less requested that Monster Cable Products, Inc. be ordered to pay the costs.
      
By letter lodged at the Court Registry on September (fax of September 2013), Live Nation (Music) UK Limited informed
         the Court that it had no comment to make regarding the discontinuance.
      
Under Article 141(1) and (2) of the Rules of Procedure, a party who discontinues or withdraws from proceedings is to be ordered
         to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the other party’s observations on the discontinuance.
      
In view of the facts of the present case, Monster Cable Products, Inc. must therefore be ordered to bear its own costs and
         those of OHIM. Live Nation (Music) UK Limited shall bear its own costs.
      
On those grounds, the President of the Third Chamber of the Court hereby orders:
1.      Case C‑41/P is removed from the Register of the Court.
2.      Monster Cable Products, Inc. is to bear its own costs and those of OHIM.
3.      Live Nation (Music) UK Limited is to bear its own costs.
Luxembourg, September 2013.
A. Calot Escobar
 
      M. Ilešič
Registrar
 
      President of the Third Chamber
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 