
Case C-507/Commission of the European Communities
v
Republic of Austria
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Conservation of wild birds – Directive 79/409/EEC – Measures transposing the directive)
Opinion of Advocate General Kokott delivered on January Judgment of the Court (Fourth Chamber), July Summary of the Judgment
1.     Environment – Conservation of wild birds – Directive 79/– Transposition without legislative action – Limits 
(Council Directive 79/409)
2.     Environment – Conservation of wild birds – Directive 79/– Scope 
(Council Directive 79/409, Arts and 11)
3.     Environment – Conservation of wild birds – Directive 79/– Implementation by Member States 
(Council Directive 79/409, Art. 9(1)(a) and (2))
4.     Environment – Conservation of wild birds – Directive 79/– Obligation to prohibit hunting during certain periods of particular
            bird vulnerability 
(Council Directive 79/409, Art. 7(4))
5.     Environment – Conservation of wild birds – Directive 79/– Opening and closing dates for hunting
(Council Directive 79/409, Art. 9(1)(c))
6.     Environment – Conservation of wild birds – Directive 79/– Implementation by Member States 
(Council Directive 79/409, Art. and Annex IV)
1.     The transposition of Community legislation into national law does not necessarily require the relevant provisions to be enacted
         in precisely the same words in a specific express legal provision and that a general legal context may be sufficient for the
         purpose if it actually ensures the full application of the directive in a sufficiently clear and precise manner.
      
However, faithful transposition is particularly important in the case of Directive 79/on the conservation of wild birds,
         where management of the common heritage is entrusted to the Member States in their respective territories.
      
(see paras 89, 92)
2.     Article of Directive 79/on the conservation of wild birds, which does no more than lay down a specific obligation requiring
         the Member States to see that the introduction of species of birds which do not occur naturally in the wild state in the European
         territory of the Member States does not prejudice the local flora and fauna, cannot be regarded as a legal basis justifying
         derogation from the obligations of protection which the Member States owe under Article of the directive and relate to all
         species of birds naturally occurring in the wild state in the European territory of the Member States, that is to say, as
         regards each of those States, both to native species and to species which occur only in other Member States. The importance
         of complete and effective protection of wild birds throughout the Community, irrespective of the areas they stay in or pass
         through, causes any national legislation which delimits the protection of wild birds by reference to national fauna to be
         incompatible with the directive. 
      
(see paras 101-103)
3.     Whilst it is true that the prevention of damage to vines can in principle justify the taking of derogating measures, pursuant
         to the third indent of Article 9(1)(a) of Directive 79/on the conservation of wild birds, that provision does not provide
         a legal basis for a species being entirely removed – even if the removal is temporally limited – from the system of protection
         laid down by the directive. Removing a species of bird entirely from that system, even for a defined period, could jeopardise
         the very existence of that species. Thus, the Member States are authorised to derogate from the system of protection for wild
         birds only if they observe the requirements set out in Article 9(2) of the directive.
      
(see paras 113-115)
4.     The system of protection against hunting laid down in Article 7(4) of Directive 79/on the conservation of wild birds is
         defined broadly, by reference to the specific biological characteristics of the species concerned, given that it concerns,
         in addition to the rearing season, the various stages of reproduction and rearing. Only such a view corresponds to the objective
         of Article 7(4), which is to secure a complete system of protection in the periods during which the survival of wild birds
         is particularly under threat. Any action during the periods that are connected with the reproduction of birds is liable to
         affect their reproduction, even if only a part of their population is concerned. That is also true of the mating season, during
         which the species concerned are particularly exposed and vulnerable. That season thus forms part of the period during which,
         in principle, all hunting is prohibited.
      
(see paras 192-195)
5.     Article 9(1)(c) of Directive 79/on the conservation of wild birds allows a Member State to derogate from the opening and
         closing dates for hunting which result from the taking into account of the objectives listed in Article 7(4) of the directive.
         In that regard, the hunting of wild birds for recreational purposes during the periods mentioned in Article 7(4) of the directive
         may, subject to compliance with the requirements laid down in Article 9(2), constitute a ‘judicious use’ within the meaning
         of Article 9(1)(c). However, the burden of proof regarding compliance with these requirements in respect of each derogation
         rests with the national authority taking the decision.
      
Moreover, when adopting measures transposing the latter provision, Member States must ensure that, in all cases of application
         of the derogation provided for therein and for all the protected species, authorised hunting does not exceed a ceiling consistent
         with the restriction on that hunting to small numbers, and that ceiling must be determined on the basis of strict scientific
         data. In order for the directive to be transposed in accordance with Community law, the authorities competent to authorise
         derogations in respect of birds of a given species must be able to rely on criteria which are sufficiently precise as to the
         quantitative ceilings to be complied with. It is therefore the task of the competent authorities of the Member State concerned
         to ensure, with sufficient legal precision and on the basis of recognised scientific data, that the quantitative ceiling is
         not in any event exceeded and, therefore, that the species covered are fully protected.
      
(see paras 196-199, 201, 225)
6.     The fact that, in a Member State, particular hunting methods or destructive practices prohibited by Directive 79/on the
         conservation of wild birds are unknown does not release the Member State in question from its obligation to adopt laws or
         regulations in order to ensure that the provisions of the directive are adequately transposed. The principle of legal certainty
         requires that the prohibitions which it imposes must be reproduced in mandatory legal instruments.
      
(see paras 280-281)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Conservation of wild birds – Directive 79/409/EEC – Measures transposing the directive)
In Case C‑507/04,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on December 2004,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by M. van Beek and B. Schima, acting as Agents, and by M. Lang, Rechtsanwalt, with an address for service in
         Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Republic of Austria, represented by H. Dossi, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, E. Juhász, R. Silva de Lapuerta (Rapporteur), G. Arestis and T. von Danwitz,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 2007,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities requests the Court to declare that the Republic of Austria
         has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles 1(1) and (2), 5, 6(1), 7(1) and (4), 8, 9(1) and (2) and of Council
         Directive 79/409/EEC of April on the conservation of wild birds (OJ L 103, p. 1; ‘the Directive’).
      
 Legal context 
 Community legislation
As set out in Article 1(1), the Directive relates to the conservation of all species of birds naturally occurring in the wild
         state in the European territory of the Member States to which the EEC Treaty applies. It covers the protection, management
         and control of these species and lays down rules for their exploitation. Article 1(2) specifies that the Directive is to apply
         to birds and their eggs, nests and habitats.
      
Article of the Directive provides:
‘Without prejudice to Articles and 9, Member States shall take the requisite measures to establish a general system of protection
         for all species of birds referred to in Article 1, prohibiting in particular:
      
(a)      deliberate killing or capture by any method; 
(b)      deliberate destruction of, or damage to, their nests and eggs or removal of their nests; 
(c)      taking their eggs in the wild and keeping these eggs even if empty; 
(d)      deliberate disturbance of these birds particularly during the period of breeding and rearing, in so far as disturbance would
         be significant having regard to the objectives of this Directive;
      
(e)      keeping birds of species the hunting and capture of which is prohibited.’
Article 6(1) of the Directive prohibits trade in protected bird species in the following terms: 
‘Without prejudice to the provisions of paragraphs and 3, Member States shall prohibit, for all the bird species referred
         to in Article 1, the sale, transport for sale, keeping for sale and the offering for sale of live or dead birds and of any
         readily recognisable parts or derivatives of such birds.’
      
Annex III/and Annex III/to the Directive list species which, in accordance with Article 6(2) and (3) of the Directive,
         are not covered by the prohibition on selling activities if certain conditions are met.
      
Article of the Directive regulates the hunting of protected bird species. The first sentence of Article 7(1) states: 
‘Owing to their population level, geographical distribution and reproductive rate throughout the Community, the species listed
         in Annex II may be hunted under national legislation.’
      
Article 7(4) of the Directive provides: 
‘Member States shall ensure that the practice of hunting, including falconry if practised, as carried on in accordance with
         the national measures in force, complies with the principles of wise use and ecologically balanced control of the species
         of birds concerned and that this practice is compatible as regards the population of these species, in particular migratory
         species, with the measures resulting from Article 2. They shall see in particular that the species to which hunting laws apply
         are not hunted during the rearing season nor during the various stages of reproduction. In the case of migratory species,
         they shall see in particular that the species to which hunting regulations apply are not hunted during their period of reproduction
         or during their return to their rearing grounds. Member States shall send the Commission all relevant information on the practical
         application of their hunting regulations.’
      
Article of the Directive provides: 
‘1.      In respect of the hunting, capture or killing of birds under this Directive, Member States shall prohibit the use of all means,
         arrangements or methods used for the large-scale or non-selective capture or killing of birds or capable of causing the local
         disappearance of a species, in particular the use of those listed in Annex IV(a). 
      
2.      Moreover, Member States shall prohibit any hunting from the modes of transport and under the conditions mentioned in Annex
         IV(b).’
      
Article 9(1) of the Directive states:
‘Member States may derogate from the provisions of Articles 5, 6, and 8, where there is no other satisfactory solution,
         for the following reasons: 
      
(a)      –              in the interests of public health and safety,
–       in the interests of air safety, 
–       to prevent serious damage to crops, livestock, forests, fisheries and water, 
–       for the protection of flora and fauna; 
(b)      for the purposes of research and teaching, of repopulation, of reintroduction and for the breeding necessary for these purposes;
(c)      to permit, under strictly supervised conditions and on a selective basis, the capture, keeping or other judicious use of certain
         birds in small numbers.’ 
      
In accordance with Article 9(2) of the Directive, the derogations must specify: 
‘–      the species which are subject to the derogations, 
–       the means, arrangements or methods authorised for capture or killing, 
–       the conditions of risk and the circumstances of time and place under which such derogations may be granted, 
–       the authority empowered to declare that the required conditions obtain and to decide what means, arrangements or methods may
         be used, within what limits and by whom, 
      
–       the controls which will be carried out.’
Article of the Directive obliges the Member States to see that any introduction of species of bird which do not occur naturally
         in the wild state in the European territory of the Member States does not prejudice the local flora and fauna. 
      
 The provisions of Laws and regulations of the various Austrian provinces the compatibility of which with the Directive’s provisions
            is contested 
 Province of Lower Austria
The following provisions are at issue: Paragraphs 17(5), 18, 20(4) and of the Law of Lower Austria on Nature Protection
         (Niederösterreichisches Naturschutzgesetz 2000, LGBl. (Niederösterreich) 87/00; ‘the Nö NSchG’); Paragraph of the Law of
         Lower Austria on Hunting (Niederösterreichisches Jagdgesetz 1974, LGBl. (Niederösterreich) 76/74; ‘the Nö JagdG’); and Paragraph
         of the Regulation of Lower Austria on Hunting (Niederösterreichische Jagdverordnung, LGBl. (Niederösterreich) 28/77; ‘the
         Nö JagdVO’). 
      
Paragraph of the Nö NSchG provides:
‘…
5.      The planting and promotion of non-native plants and plants inappropriate to the location and the release and promotion in
         the wild of non-native fauna require authorisation from the Provincial Government. Authorisation shall be refused if native
         populations appropriate to the location, the natural (genetic) characteristics of native species of fauna and flora or the
         beauty and characteristics of a landscape area will suffer lasting harm.
      
…’
Paragraph of the Nö NSchG states:
‘1.      The provisions on species protection shall serve to protect and maintain species of wild fauna and flora in their natural
         and historical diversity. Species protection encompasses:
      
(1)      the protection of animals, plants and their biocoenoses against harm caused by man, in particular by their being taken,
(2)      the protection, maintenance, development and restoration of habitats of species of wild fauna and flora and the safeguarding
         of their other conditions of life and
      
(3)      the introduction of fauna and flora of displaced wild species in appropriate biotopes within their natural range.
2.      Wild plants, or animals living in the wild that cannot be hunted, whose population needs to be protected or maintained,
(1)      because of their rarity or a threat to their population,
(2)      for scientific reasons or reasons relating to the region’s heritage,
(3)      because of their use or their importance for the ecosystem, or
(4)      in order to preserve the diversity or characteristic features of nature and landscape,
shall, by regulation of the Provincial Government, be placed entirely under protection or, if sufficient for conservation
         of the species, partly or temporarily under protection. The regulation may specify the species of fauna and flora whose population
         in the territory of the province is threatened with extinction. 
      
3.      Non-native species may, by regulation, be placed on the same footing as specially protected native species if their population
         needs to be protected in order to restrict or eliminate, within the territory covered by this Law, causes of the decline in
         population endangering their existence and 
      
(1)      they are specially protected in another Austrian province or in their country of origin,
(2)      they are listed, appropriately identified, in international treaties to which Austria has acceded, or
(3)      it is an established fact that they are threatened with extinction, but are not protected in their country of origin.
4.      In the case of the species specially protected under subparagraphs and it is prohibited:
…
(2)      to hunt, intentionally disturb, capture, hold, injure or kill animals, or, whether they are alive or dead, acquire them, keep
         them, pass them on, transport them or offer them for sale;
      
(3)      to damage, destroy or take away eggs, larvae, chrysalises or nests of these animals or their nesting, breeding or spawning
         sites or places of refuge; and
      
(4)      to cause disturbance to the biotopes, breeding sites and sites of habitation of the species threatened with extinction and
         listed in the regulation, in particular by photographing or filming.
      
5.      Where there is no other satisfactory solution, it is permitted from October until the end of February to remove, damage or
         destroy the breeding sites or nests of specially protected animals if they contain no young and are in buildings.
      
6.      If necessary, the regulation may also lay down measures to protect the habitat and maintain and increase the population of
         specially protected species, and may prohibit or restrict acts which may further reduce populations.
      
…’
Paragraph of the Nö NSchG states:
‘…
(4)      The Provincial Government may by decision grant derogations from Paragraph 18, in particular for scientific or pedagogical
         purposes, when there is no reason to fear a material risk to protected flora growing in the wild and protected fauna living
         in the wild … The authorisation shall lay down at least:
      
1.      the species which are subject to the derogation,
2.      the means, arrangements or methods authorised for capture or killing and
3.      the controls which will be carried out.’
Paragraph of the Nö NSchG is worded as follows:
‘1.      Without prejudice to specific rules laid down by the provisions of this Law or to regulations or decisions adopted on the
         basis of this Law, measures connected with commercial use of land shall remain in principle unaffected … This exemption clause
         does not apply where protected flora and fauna or protected habitats are deliberately harmed or fauna and flora threatened
         with extinction … are affected by measures.
      
2.      Without prejudice to specific rules laid down by the provisions of this Law or to regulations or decisions adopted on the
         basis of this Law, measures connected with an up-to-date and sustainable agricultural or silvicultural use of land within
         the framework of an agricultural or silvicultural operation shall remain in principle unaffected … This exemption clause does
         not apply where protected flora and fauna or protected habitats are deliberately harmed or fauna and flora threatened with
         extinction … are affected by measures.
      
3.      Agricultural or silvicultural use shall be considered to be up-to-date and sustainable where the activities in an agricultural
         or silvicultural operation serve to produce or obtain plant or animal products and are organised in accordance with processes
         which are customary in a particular area and at a particular time or on the basis of traditional experience, and the use,
         adapted to the natural conditions, durably ensures performance in a functioning system, without the productive base being
         exhausted and nature and landscape being unduly burdened.’
      
Paragraph of the Nö JagdG provides:
‘1.      All non-selective hunting methods are prohibited; in particular it is prohibited:
…
(3)      to hunt at night …; the hunting of … capercaillie, black grouse, wild goose, wild duck and snipe is excluded from this prohibition;
(4)      to use, when capturing or killing game, devices for illuminating targets,
…
(8)      to use blind or mutilated animals as live decoys, or anaesthetic bait; to use tape recorders, or electric or electronic devices
         capable of killing or stunning; to use mirrors or other dazzling devices, explosives, or nets that operate non-selectively;
         to gas or smoke animals out;
      
(9)      to hunt game birds with snares, limes, hooks, nets or traps;
(10)      to hunt from aircraft, moving motor vehicles, or boats that can be operated at a speed of more than five kilometres per hour.
…’
Paragraph of the Nö JagdVO states:
‘(1)      The following game may, in principle, be hunted, captured or killed only during the periods indicated below:
…
15.      capercaillie, from to May in even-numbered years;
16.      black grouse, from to May in odd-numbered years;
…
18.      Rackelhahn [a capercaillie/black grouse hybrid], from January to December;
…
22.      woodcock, from September to December and from March to April;
…’
 Province of Burgenland
The following provisions are at issue: Paragraphs 16, 16a and 16b of the Law of Burgenland on Nature Protection and Maintenance
         of the Countryside (Burgenländisches Naturschutz- und Landschaftspflegegesetz, LGBl. (Burgenland) 27/1991; ‘the Bgld NSchLPflG’);
         Paragraphs 88a(1) and (2) and 88b of the Law of Burgenland on Hunting (Burgenländisches Jagdgesetz 1988, LGBl. (Burgenland)
         11/1989; ‘the Bgld JagdG’); Paragraph 76(1) of the Regulation of Burgenland on Hunting (Burgenländische Jagdverordnung, LGBl.
         (Burgenland) 24/1989; ‘the Bgld JagdVO’); and Paragraphs and of the Regulation of Burgenland on the Protection of Species
         (Burgenländische Artenschutzverordnung 2001, LGBl. (Burgenland) 36/2001; ‘the Bgld ArtenschutzVO’).
      
Paragraph of the Bgld NSchLPflG provides:
‘1.      In so far as they are not regarded as game or subject to fisheries law, protection is conferred upon:
(a)      the wild animals referred to in … and in Annex I to Directive 79/409/EEC, Annexes II, IV and V to Directive 92/43/EEC and
         Appendices II and III to the Bern Convention, and the species listed in Appendices I and II to the Bonn Convention;
      
(b)      without prejudice to subparagraph (a), all other species of wild birds, with the exception of the European starling (Sturnus vulgaris) in accordance with Paragraph 88a of the [Bgld JagdG] …
      
2.      The Provincial Government may, in respect of protected or endangered animals, lay down by regulation:
(a)      exceptions …;
(b)      those measures and methods of capture which, for the purpose of protecting animal populations, are prohibited;
(c)      measures which are to be taken to protect the progeny of protected animals; in addition it shall:
(d)      list those animal species for the protection of which it is prohibited to remove, damage or destroy nests and their locations,
         mating grounds and reproduction, resting and wintering areas (trees having nests or hollows, cliffs and rockfaces used for
         hatching, reed colonies, burrows and so forth); and
      
…
4.      Protected animals at all stages of their development may not be pursued, disturbed, captured, transported, held, injured,
         killed, kept, taken away or harmed. It is prohibited to offer for sale, acquire or pass on such animals or parts of such animals,
         regardless of their condition, age or stage of development. It is also prohibited for a person to announce publicly that he
         is willing to sell or acquire such animals.
      
5.      Any person who owns or possesses animals of protected species (including parts thereof and developing forms thereof) must,
         on request, prove their provenance to the authorities. Protected animals which are found dead or in need of care shall be
         property of the province and shall without delay be handed over to the authorities or to a scientific institution named by
         them.
      
…’
Paragraph 16a of the Bgld NSchLPflG provides:
‘1.      The Provincial Government shall safeguard or restore a sufficient variety and a sufficient surface area of the habitats of
         the species referred to in Directives 79/409/EEC and 92/43/EEC … This shall involve, in particular, the following measures:
      
(a)      the establishment of protected areas … or the conclusion of agreements and the grant of aid …;
(b)      the maintenance and the protection-based formation of habitats inside and outside the specially protected areas;
(c)      the restoration of destroyed habitats;
(d)      the creation of new habitats;
(e)      the maintenance, restoration and improvement of those ecological processes which bring about the natural development of habitats.
2.      The Provincial Government shall monitor and document the conservation status of the species referred to in the directives
         ...
      
3.      The Provincial Government shall, by regulation, establish research measures, control measures or conservation measures in
         order to ensure that unintentional capture or killing has no adverse effects on protected species. 
      
…’
Paragraph 16b of the Bgld NSchLPflG provides:
‘The Provincial Government shall, bearing in mind their respective needs for protection, take special conservation measures
         for regularly occurring migratory species, as regards their breeding, moulting and wintering areas and the staging posts along
         their migration routes and in the immediate vicinity thereof. To this end, particular attention shall be paid to the protection
         of wetlands, above all to wetlands of international importance.’
      
Paragraph 88a of the Bgld JagdG states:
(1)      To protect vines (subparagraph 2), the combating of the European starling is permissible in the period from July to November.
      
(2)      The need for this measure shall be established by regulation of the Provincial Government when it is to be anticipated that
         European starlings will appear in very large numbers in the area of vineyards ...’ 
      
Paragraph 88b of the Bgld JagdG provides:
‘…
(2)      Woodcock may be hunted from March to April under the form of hunting called ‘Schnepfenstrich’ [mating flight of the snipe].’
Paragraph of the Bgld JagdVO provides:
‘1.      The following huntable animals may not be tracked, captured, or killed during the close seasons specified below:
…
(2)      Game birds:
…
(e)      Wild pigeons and doves:
         wood pigeon and collared dove, from April to June,
         turtle dove, from November to June;
(f)      Snipes:
         woodcock, from January to February and from April to September,
         … 
…’
Paragraph of the Bgld ArtenschutzVO provides:
‘1.      It is prohibited to harm the nesting, reproduction, resting and wintering areas of the following animals:
European bee-eater (Merops apiaster)
roller (Coracias garrulus)
Eurasian jackdaw (Corvus monedula)
kingfisher (Alcedo atthis)
…
common tern (Sterna hirundo)
bank swallow (Riparia riparia)
white-backed woodpecker (Dendrocopos leucotos)
white stork (Ciconia ciconia)
Eurasian hoopoe (Upupa epops)
…
2.      In particular it is prohibited:
(1)      to remove or, during the reproduction period, to climb up rocks, steep faces and woody plants which serve as living areas
         for animals listed in Paragraph 2(1);
      
…’
Paragraph of the Bgld ArtenschutzVO states:
‘Agricultural and silvicultural use is permitted in accordance with Paragraph of the [Bgld NSchLPflG]. The lawful pursuit
         of hunting and fishing is not affected by this regulation.’
      
 Province of Carinthia
The following provisions are at issue: Paragraphs 3, 51(1) to (5), 59(1) and 68(1) of the Law of Carinthia on Hunting (Kärntner
         Jagdgesetz 2000, LGBl. (Kärnten) 21/2000; ‘the KrntJagdG’); and Paragraph 9(2) of the Regulation of Carinthia implementing
         the Law on Hunting (Kärntner Jagdgesetz – Durchführungsverordnung, LGBl. (Kärnten) 132/1991; ‘the KrntJagdVO’).
      
Paragraph of the KrntJagdG provides:
‘(1)      Hunting shall be engaged in an appropriate and huntsmanlike manner, observing the principles for the proper management of
         hunting ... It is prohibited to endanger the population of a species of game by engaging in hunting in an improper manner.
         In addition, hunting shall be engaged in in such a way as not to diminish the beneficial effects of the forest that are in
         the public interest and, in particular, so as to prevent game from causing damage that threatens the forest …
      
(2)      Hunting is managed properly where, through the pursuit of hunting, including care for and protection of game, a species-rich
         and healthy game population appropriate to the size and nature of the hunting area is achieved and preserved. In this connection,
         regard is to be had to a balanced ecosystem, to the needs of agriculture and silviculture, and to land-use planning regarding
         the ecological requirements for game. The proper management of hunting also encompasses due game protection.
      
…’
Paragraph of the KrntJagdG states:
‘(1)      Throughout the entire year there shall be no hunting of: …
(2)      With regard to game not listed in subparagraph 1, the Provincial Government, having regard to the principles for the proper
         management of hunting (Paragraph 3) and to the conservation of threatened species of game, and taking account of the age,
         sex and specific biological characteristics of the game, shall by regulation lay down what game is not to be hunted throughout
         the entire year or during certain periods (close seasons). …  
      
(3)      If there is serious risk to game populations as a result of losses of game caused by exceptional weather conditions, natural
         catastrophes, epidemics affecting game and so forth, in the interests of the proper management of hunting the Provincial Government
         may, throughout the province, in individual administrative districts or in individual hunting areas, extend the close seasons
         or lay down that certain species of game are not to be hunted throughout the entire year. This regulation shall be repealed
         as soon as the reason for its adoption has ceased to apply.
      
(4)      For specified species of game the Provincial Government may, in respect of all or individual hunting areas, extend the close
         seasons laid down under subparagraph or or – in so far as game under subparagraph 4a is not at issue – cancel or shorten
         them, if this appears justified in the interests of the proper management of hunting, having regard to local or climatic conditions.
         These regulations may in each case be adopted only for a period of two years. 
      
(4a)      In order to enable game birds the hunting of which is prohibited throughout the year … to be killed, captured or kept on a
         selective basis and in small numbers, the Provincial Government may, where there is no other satisfactory solution, cancel
         or shorten the close season laid down under subparagraph for this game, in the interests of public health, public safety
         and air safety, in order to prevent serious damage to crops, livestock, forests, fisheries and water, in order to protect
         wild fauna and flora, or for purposes of research, repopulation or reintroduction and the breeding necessary for these purposes.
         In addition, such a regulation may be adopted only if the cancellation or shortening of the close season is not detrimental
         to the maintenance of the populations of the species listed in the regulation at a favourable conservation status. In so far
         as game birds the hunting of which is prohibited throughout the year are not at issue, such a regulation may also be adopted,
         if the other conditions are met, for the protection of property generally or to conserve a natural habitat. These regulations
         may in each case be adopted for a maximum period of two years.
      
(5)      The Provincial Government may in addition suspend for an appropriate period, in individual or all hunting areas in an administrative
         district, the close season applicable to a specified species of game – except one of the species referred to in subparagraph
         4a – if this is required in the interests of the proper management of hunting, or of agriculture or silviculture. The close
         season for game referred to in subparagraph 4a may be suspended, however, only where this appears to be required to protect
         one of the interests listed in subparagraph 4a, and provided that there is no other satisfactory solution and the conditions
         laid down in the second sentence of subparagraph 4a are met.
      
…’
Paragraph of the KrntJagdG states:
‘(1)      A person entitled to hunt is obliged to enter game that has been killed or captured or has otherwise perished during the hunting
         year in his hunting area on a list of game shot, to be kept separately for each hunting area; where only one shooting plan
         has been adopted for adjoining hunting areas, the entries shall be made on one list. …
      
(2)      The form laid down by regulation of the executive committee of the Carinthia Hunting Association shall be used for keeping
         the list of game shot. When adopting the regulation, consideration shall be given to the content and the objective of the
         list.
      
…’
As provided in Paragraph of the KrntJagdG:
‘(1)      It is prohibited:
…
19.      to destroy nests and clutches of game birds or to collect the eggs without authorisation … and to disturb the breeding places
         of game birds during the breeding period and the rearing of the young;
      
…’
Paragraph of the KrntJagdVO is worded as follows:
‘…
(2)      The following game may be hunted only during the indicated periods (hunting seasons) and shall be preserved outside them:
…
–       capercaillie, from to May;
–       black grouse, from to May;
…
–       common coot, from August to January;
–       woodcock, from September to December and from March to April;
–       wood pigeon and collared dove, from August to December and from March to April;
–       carrion crow, from July to March;
–       jay, from July to March;
–       black-billed magpie, from July to March.
…’
 Province of Upper Austria
The following provisions are at issue: Paragraph 27(1) and (2) of the Law of Upper Austria on Nature and Countryside Protection
         (Oberösterreichisches Natur- und Landschaftschutzgesetz 2001, LGBl. (Oberösterreich) 129/2001; ‘the Oö NSchG’); Paragraphs
         48(1) to (4) and 60(3) of the Law of Upper Austria on Hunting (Oberösterreichisches Jagdgesetz, LGBl. (Oberösterreich) 32/1964;
         ‘the Oö JagdG’); Paragraphs 5(2) and of the Regulation of Upper Austria on the Protection of Species (Oberösterreichische
         Artenschutzverordnung, LGBl. (Oberösterreich) 73/2003; ‘the Oö ArtenschutzVO’); and Paragraph of the Regulation of Upper
         Austria on Close Seasons (Oberösterreichische Schonzeitenverordnung, LGBl. (Oberösterreich) 30/1990; ‘the Oö SchonzeitenVO’).
      
Paragraph of the Oö NSchG provides:
‘1.      Wild plants and mushrooms and animals living in the wild that cannot be hunted may be specially protected by regulation of
         the Provincial Government, in so far as the relevant species is rare in the countryside of the area, the existence of its
         population is threatened, or its conservation is in the public interest on grounds of protection of the ecosystem, provided
         that other public interests do not out outweigh those conservation interests. This provision shall not affect statutory provisions
         to the contrary. 
      
2.      A regulation under subparagraph shall, regard being had to Articles to and of the Birds Directive and Articles and of the Habitats Directive, define more precisely in particular:
      
(1)      the species entirely or partly protected;
(2)      the area and period of protection;
(3)      measures to protect the progeny, wild or farmed, of protected plants, mushrooms or animals;
(4)      measures to protect the narrower habitats of protected plants, mushrooms or animals.’
Paragraph of the Oö JagdG states:
‘(1)      For the purpose of care for and protection of game …, the hunting of game shall be prohibited to the extent necessary, taking
         account of the requirements of rural development. The Provincial Government shall by regulation, after consulting the province’s
         advisory board for hunting, set the close seasons for individual species of game, subdivided if need be according to age and
         sex, or shall halt the hunting of certain species of game entirely.
      
(2)      During the close season, animals of the relevant species of game shall not be hunted, captured or killed.
(3)      It is prohibited to remove, damage or destroy clutches and nests of game birds; however, the person who has the right to hunt
         is allowed to gather eggs of game birds for the purpose of artificial rearing and to incubate them.
      
(4)      The Provincial Government may authorise game to be captured during the close season for the purpose of rearing, and to be
         killed for scientific purposes or purposes of examination.
      
…’
Paragraph of the Oö JagdG states:
‘…
3.      In residential and commercial buildings and enclosed domestic gardens, the occupier may capture or kill, and appropriate,
         … goshawks, buzzards and sparrow hawks if that is necessary to prevent serious damage, in particular to crops, in respect
         of the keeping of animals, and to other forms of property.’
      
Paragraph of the Oö ArtenschutzVO is worded as follows:
‘Protection … is conferred upon:
(2)      wild species of birds that cannot be hunted and naturally occur in the European territory of the Member States of the European
         Union (Article of Directive 79/409/EEC …), except the black-billed magpie (Pica pica), jay (Garrulus glandarius), carrion crow (Corvus corone corone) and hooded crow (Corvus corone cornix).
      
…’
Paragraph of the Oö ArtenschutzVO provides:
‘Authorisation may be given for the selective capture [of specimens] of species … for traditional song-bird exhibitions only
         in the administrative district of … outside special protection areas for birds (fourth subparagraph of Article 4(1) of the
         Birds Directive) and authorisation may be given to keep them only in the districts of …, and only subject to the following
         conditions:
      
…’
Paragraph of the Oö SchonzeitenVO provides:
‘1.      The following huntable animals may not be hunted, captured or killed during the close season specified below:
…
Capercaillie, black grouse and Rackelhahn:
–       cock, from June to April;
–       hen, throughout the year.
…
Woodcock, from May to September.
…
2.      The days on which the respective close seasons begin and end are included in the close season.’
 Province of Salzburg
The following provisions are at issue: Paragraphs 3, 54(1), 59, 60(3a) and (4a), 72(3), and of the Law of Salzburg
         on Hunting (Salzburger Jagdgesetz 1993, LGBl. (Salzburg) 100/1993; ‘the Sbg JagdG’); Paragraph of the Law of Salzburg on
         Nature Protection (Salzburger Naturschutzgesetz 1999, LGBl. (Salzburg) 73/1999; ‘the Sbg NSchG’); and Paragraph of the Regulation
         of Salzburg on Close Seasons (Salzburger Schonzeiten-Verordnung, LGBl. (Salzburg) 53/1996; ‘the Sbg SchonzeitenVO’).
      
Paragraph of the Sbg JagdG provides:
‘The right to hunt shall be exercised in compliance with the principles of proper hunting … in such a way that: 
(a)      a healthy game population that is rich in species and appropriate to the available habitat is conserved;
(b)      the natural foundations for the life of game are conserved;
(c)      the beneficial effects of the forest that are in the public interest are not prejudiced and in particular damage, caused by
         game, that threatens the forest is avoided;
      
(d)      the public interest in protection of nature and of the landscape is not prejudiced;
(e)      the diversity of the world of wild animals, as an essential component of indigenous nature and as part of the natural structure
         of interaction, is preserved;
      
(f)      proper agricultural and silvicultural use of land is affected as little as possible.’
Paragraph of the Sbg JagdG states:
‘(1)      Close seasons shall be set by regulation of the Provincial Government for the species of game listed below: … capercaillie,
         Rackelhahn, black grouse, pheasant, wood pigeon, collared dove, mallard, common pochard, tufted duck, bean goose, greylag
         goose, woodcock, common coot, carrion crow, hooded crow, raven, black-billed magpie, jay, black-headed gull, grey heron, cormorant.
         During the close seasons (including the initial and final day), these species of game may not be pursued, captured or killed
         … When setting the periods, account is to be taken of the particular biological characteristics of the species with a view
         to lasting care and protection, and of the requirements of agriculture and silviculture. Separate close seasons by reference
         to age and sex may also be fixed. For species of birds which are not named in Annex II to the Birds Directive … as species
         that may be hunted in Austria, hunting seasons may be laid down only if the conditions prescribed in Paragraph 104(4) are
         met. In the case of all other species of birds, it must be ensured that the rearing season, the various stages of reproduction
         and, in the case of migratory species, also the return to rearing grounds fall within the close season.
      
…’
Paragraph of the Sbg JagdG provides:
‘(1)      ... In addition, wild species of birds which are not named in Annex II to the Birds Directive as species that may be hunted
         in Austria may be shot down only within the framework of a shooting plan. The Provincial Government may lay down by regulation
         that certain further species of game may likewise be shot down only within the framework of a shooting plan, where this is
         necessary in order to achieve and conserve a game population corresponding to the principles in Paragraph 3. … 
      
(2).      In all planning of shooting, regard is to be had to the number of animals shot down in the preceding years, to game whose
         death has demonstrably not been caused by hunting, to the extent and development of damage to the forest caused by game, and
         to the state of health and population structure of the game.
      
(3)      The Provincial Government shall lay down by regulation the more detailed provisions necessary for drawing up and adopting
         the shooting plan ...’
      
Paragraph of the Sbg JagdG is worded as follows:
‘…
(3a)      In the case of birds covered by the second sentence of Paragraph 59(1), no minimum numbers to be shot may be set. Maximum
         numbers and their allocation to game zones are to be set by regulation of the Provincial Government, applying Paragraph 104(4)
         mutatis mutandis. Prior to adoption of such a regulation, the Salzburg Hunting Association, the Fishing Association for the
         Province of Salzburg, the Chamber for Agriculture and Silviculture in Salzburg and the Provincial Legal Office for the Environment
         shall be consulted. The maximum numbers to be shot shall be set so that in the territory of the province a population of each
         species of bird that corresponds to the principles in Paragraph is achieved or conserved and no unacceptable damage occurs.
      
…
(4a)      The annual shooting plan shall contain for each species of game, subdivided according to sex and age group in so far as necessary,
         the maximum numbers to be shot or the minimum numbers, or both, and their allocation among the individual hunting areas. ...’
      
Paragraph of the Sbg JagdG provides:
‘…
3.      The use of traps designed to kill game is in principle prohibited. The Provincial Government may, however, by decision order
         hunt owners or conservation associations to use such traps where:
      
(a)      human life or health is threatened by game and this threat cannot be averted in another manner, or
(b)      public interests of comparable importance cannot be protected in another manner.
…’
Paragraph of the Sbg JagdG states:
‘(1)      The following species of game shall be specially protected at all stages of life:
…
(b)      all species of feathered game.
(2)      The following protective provisions apply to species of game under subparagraph 1:
(a)      all forms of deliberate capture or killing of animals taken from the wild are prohibited;
(b)      deliberate disturbance of these species, in particular during breeding, rearing, wintering and migration periods, is prohibited;
(c)      any damage to, or destruction or removal of, breeding or nesting sites or resting places that is deliberate is prohibited;
(d)      the taking of eggs from the wild and the possession of eggs, even if empty, are prohibited;
(e)      the possession, transport, sale or exchange or the offering for sale of live or dead animals … taken from the wild is prohibited;
         this prohibition also applies to any derivative of the animal, and any other goods which appear, from an accompanying document,
         the packaging or a mark or label, or from any other circumstances, to be parts or derivatives of the animal;
      
(f)      the sale of live or dead animals … taken from the wild and transporting them, holding them for sale and offering them for
         sale are prohibited; this prohibition also applies to recognisable parts of those animals and to derivatives thereof.
      
(3)      Where clutches are endangered by agricultural or silvicultural measures, they may be moved by the hunt owner or removed for
         the purpose of artificial rearing if the clutch cannot be saved in any other manner.’
      
Paragraph of the Sbg JagdG provides:
‘…
4.      The authority may authorise further derogations from the prohibitions under Paragraph 103(2) where that does not jeopardise
         the population of the species of game concerned and there is no satisfactory alternative for achieving the purpose pursued.
         Such derogations may be granted only for the following purposes:
      
(a)      to protect other wild animals and plants and to conserve their natural habitats;
(b)      to avoid serious damage to crops, livestock, forests, fishing waters and, in the case of furred game, to other forms of property;
(c)      in the interests of public health and public safety or, in the case of furred game, also for other imperative reasons of overriding
         public interest, including those of a social or economic nature and beneficial consequences of primary importance for the
         environment; 
      
(d)      for the purposes of research and teaching;
(e)      to increase the population of those species or reintroduce them, and for the breeding required to that end;
(f)      for trade in a small number of animals (or parts of animals or products obtained from those animals) of those species of feathered
         game which under subparagraph are allowed to be captured or killed.’
      
Paragraph of the Sbg NSchG is worded as follows:
‘1.      The competent nature protection authority may, on application, authorise derogations from the prohibitions under … Authorisation
         may … only be granted for measures which serve one of the following purposes:
      
…
(2)      the production of beverages;
…
3.      Authorisations under subparagraph may be granted only if the purpose of the measure cannot be satisfactorily achieved by
         other means and the relevant population of the animal or plant species in question also does not suffer deterioration in the
         area of the interference.’
      
Paragraph of the Sbg SchonzeitenVO provides:
‘The following close seasons, which in each case include the initial and final day, are set for the species of game indicated:
Species of game                                              Close season
…
Capercaillie                                                        1.– 30.Rackelhahn                                                       16.– 30.Black grouse                                                       16.– 30.…
Woodcock                                                        1.– 28.16.- 30.…’
 Province of Tyrol
The following provisions are at issue: Paragraph 1(1) of the Second Regulation implementing the Law of Tyrol on Hunting (Zweite
         Durchführungsverordnung zum Tiroler Jagdgesetz, 1983, LGBl. (Tirol) 16/1995; ‘the DurchfVO Tiroler JagdG’); and Paragraph
         4(3) of the Regulation of Tyrol on Nature Protection (Tiroler Naturschutzverordnung 1997, LGBl. (Tirol) 95/1997; ‘the Tiroler
         NSchVO’). 
      
Paragraph of the DurchfVO Tiroler JagdG states:
‘1.      In so far as not otherwise provided ..., the species of game listed below may be hunted only during the periods indicated
         (hunting seasons):
      
…
(9)      Capercaillie, only in odd-numbered years from May to May;
(10)      Black grouse, from May to May;
…’
Paragraph of the Tiroler NSchVO provides:
‘…
(2)      It is prohibited:
(a)      deliberately to disturb, pursue, capture, hold, keep whether alive or dead, transport, offer for sale, sell, acquire or kill
         animals of the protected species;
      
…
(3)      The prohibition under subparagraph 2(a) does not encompass the driving away of crows, starlings and blackbirds from land cultivated
         for agricultural or silvicultural purposes and domestic gardens.’
      
 Province of Vorarlberg
The provision at issue is Paragraph 27(1) of the Regulation of Vorarlberg on Hunting (Vorarlberger Jagdverordnung, LGBl. (Vorarlberg)
         24/1995; ‘the Vlbg JagdVO’), which provides:
      
‘(1)      During the periods listed below, including the initial and the final day, the following animals may be hunted:
…
(c)      black grouse                                              11.– 31.…’
 Province of Vienna
The following provisions are at issue: Paragraph 69(1) of the Law of Vienna on Hunting (Wiener Jagdgesetz, LGBl. (Wien) 6/1948;
         ‘the Wiener JagdG’); and Paragraph 1(1) of the Regulation of Vienna on Close Seasons (Wiener Schonzeitenverordnung, LGBl.
         (Wien) 26/1975; ‘the Wiener SchonzeitenVO’). 
      
Paragraph of the Wiener JagdG provides:
‘1.      Having regard to the requirements of rural development, close seasons shall be set by regulation, in accordance with the principles
         of sound hunting management, for the individual species of huntable animals …, subdivided where appropriate according to age
         and sex. During its close season, game may not be pursued, captured or killed. The initial day and the final day are included
         in the close season.
      
…’
Paragraph of the Wiener SchonzeitenVO provides:
‘(1)      The following huntable animals may not be pursued, captured or killed during the close seasons specified below:
…
12.      Woodcock, from April to October;
…’
 Pre-litigation procedure
On April the Commission sent a letter of formal notice to the Republic of Austria concerning a number of provisions
         of Laws and regulations enacted by its provinces which, in the Commission’s view, did not satisfy the requirements for complete
         and correct transposition of the Directive. 
      
The Republic of Austria replied by a letter of July in which it informed the Commission that certain legislation was
         being amended, while contesting the Commission’s view as regards correct transposition of the Directive. 
      
On October the Commission delivered a reasoned opinion calling on the Republic of Austria to adopt the measures necessary
         to comply with it within a period of two months. It is apparent from that opinion that the Commission had not maintained some
         of the complaints set out initially. 
      
The Republic of Austria replied to the reasoned opinion by letter of December 2003. It stated that further amendments,
         consistent with the Commission’s legal views, were envisaged to Laws and regulations, while retaining a number of arguments
         supporting the position that had been put forward in its reply to the letter of formal notice. 
      
In those circumstances, the Commission decided to bring the present action.
 Procedure before the Court
In its application the Commission put forward grounds of infringement against the defendant.
In its defence, the defendant accepted that of those grounds were well founded. It also acknowledged that two other grounds
         were well founded in part.
      
In the course of the proceedings before the Court, the Commission withdrew a number of grounds of infringement in whole or
         in part, taking the view that certain provisions of the Directive had in the meantime been transposed correctly in certain
         provinces. 
      
However, the action at the current stage of the proceedings concerns the transposition of the same provisions as those referred
         to in the application initiating the proceedings.
      
 The action
 Uncontested grounds of infringement
 Subject-matter of the Commission’s complaints
–       Breach of Article 1(1) and (2) of the Directive in Carinthia, Lower Austria and Styria
The Commission states that it is apparent from Annex to the Regulation of Carinthia on the Protection of Animal Species
         (Kärntner Tierartenschutzverordnung; ‘the KrntTaSchVO’), which relates to Paragraph of that regulation, that the carrion
         crow, the hooded crow, the jay, the Eurasian jackdaw, the black-billed magpie, the house sparrow and the common pigeon are
         not protected species, even though they are wild birds. The protection required by the Directive must extend, in principle,
         to all species of birds naturally occurring in the wild state in the European territory of the Member States. 
      
The Commission observes that, under Paragraph 3(5) of the Regulation of Lower Austria on the Protection of Wild Plants and
         Animals (Niederösterreichische Verordnung über den Schutz wildwachsender Pflanzen und freilebender Tiere; ‘the Nö NschVO’),
         only ‘native’ species of birds are entirely protected. Furthermore, five species falling within this category, namely the
         carrion crow, the hooded crow, the Eurasian jackdaw, the house sparrow and the common pigeon, are excluded from the system
         of protection prescribed by the Directive.
      
The Commission submits that, under Paragraph of the Regulation of Styria on Nature Protection (Steiermärkische Naturschutzverordnung;
         ‘the Stmk NSchVO’), the European starling, the house sparrow, the common pigeon and the raven, even where native species are
         involved, are excluded between July and January from the protection required by the Directive.
      
–       Breach of Article of the Directive in Carinthia, Lower Austria and Styria
The Commission observes that it follows from Annex I to the KrntTaSchVO that the carrion crow, the hooded crow, the jay, the
         Eurasian jackdaw, the black-billed magpie, the house sparrow and the common pigeon are not protected as required by the Directive.
         
      
The Commission notes that, in accordance with Paragraph 3(5) of the Nö NSchVO, only ‘native’ species of birds are protected.
         Furthermore, five such species, namely the carrion crow, the hooded crow, the Eurasian jackdaw, the house sparrow and the
         common pigeon, are excluded from the system of protection prescribed by the Directive. Nor does the general system of protection
         laid down in Paragraph 18(4) and (5) of the Nö NschVO apply to these species. 
      
The Commission submits that Paragraph 13e of the Law of Styria on Nature Protection (Steiermärkisches Naturschutzgesetz) provides
         for the adoption of regulations to protect birds covered by the Directive. However, no regulation based on that provision
         has been adopted. Furthermore, the European starling, the house sparrow, the common pigeon and the raven, even where native
         species are involved, are protected only from February to June. 
      
–       Breach of Article 7(1) of the Directive in Lower Austria 
The Commission observes that the effect of Paragraph 3(5) and of Paragraph 4(1) and (2) of the Nö NschVO is that the carrion
         crow, the hooded crow, the Eurasian jackdaw and the house sparrow are entirely excluded from the protection required by the
         Directive, and the jay and the black-billed magpie are partially excluded. These provisions do not comply with Article 7(1)
         of the Directive, which provides that only the species listed in Annex II to the Directive may be hunted. 
      
–       Breach of Article 7(4) of the Directive in Styria
The Commission observes that Paragraph 49(1) of the Law of Styria on Hunting (Steiermärkisches Jagdgesetz; ‘the Stmk JagdG’),
         in conjunction with Paragraph 1(1) of the Regulation of Styria on Hunting Seasons (Steiermärkische Jagdzeitenverordnung),
         lays down hunting seasons incompatible with the Directive as regards a number of species, namely the capercaillie (from to May, instead of from October to February), the black grouse (from to May, instead of from September to
         March) and the woodcock (from March to April and from September to December, instead of from September to
         February).
      
–       Breach of Article 9(1) and (2) of the Directive in Styria
The Commission submits that Paragraph 62(2) of the Stmk JagdG and Paragraph 5(1) of the Stmk NschVO fail to take account of
         Article of the Directive, given that they lay down, as regards the removal of nests and breeding sites of protected species
         in private gardens and buildings, a general derogation from the system of protection prescribed by the Directive. 
      
The Republic of Austria states that the amendments needed to render all the national legislation referred to above consistent
         with the Directive are being prepared.
      
 Findings of the Court
With regard to the complaint set out by the Commission concerning whether the system of protection for the common pigeon in
         Carinthia complies with Article of the Directive, it is to be observed that, according to paragraph of the application,
         this species falls within the Directive whereas, according to paragraph of the application, it is not to be counted as
         a wild bird. 
      
It thus appears that the application contains a contradiction in this regard and, accordingly, does not satisfy the requirements
         of Article 38(1)(c) of the Rules of Procedure. The action is therefore inadmissible in so far as it relates to the system
         of protection for the common pigeon in Carinthia.
      
As to the remainder, it is settled case-law that the question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations
         must be determined by reference to the situation prevailing in that Member State at the end of the period laid down in the
         reasoned opinion, and that the Court cannot take account of any subsequent changes in primary or secondary legislation (see,
         inter alia, Case C-323/Commission v Italy [2002] ECR I-4711, paragraph 8, and Case C-23/Commission v Luxembourg [2005] ECR I-9535, paragraph 9).
      
Given the notification of the reasoned opinion on October and the period laid down in that opinion, the provisions
         of national law at issue had to be consistent with the Directive’s requirements by December at the latest.
      
However, it is apparent from the Republic of Austria’s observations concerning the grounds of infringement referred to above
         that it concedes that the measures needed to transpose the Directive correctly in those various respects had not been adopted
         within the time-limit set.
      
The action must therefore be held to be well founded so far as concerns those grounds of infringement, with the exception
         of the complaint relating to the system of protection for the common pigeon in Carinthia, which is inadmissible.
      
 Contested grounds of infringement
 Breach of Article 1(1) and (2) of the Directive in Burgenland and Upper Austria
–       Province of Burgenland
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission observes that under Paragraph 16(1)(b) of the Bgld NSchLPflG all species of wild birds are protected with the
         exception of the European starling, as laid down in Paragraph 88a of the Bgld JagdG. The European starling is a species that
         must be protected in accordance with Article of the Directive. 
      
The Commission also contends that Paragraph 88a(2) of the Bgld JagdG does not make the measure authorised by regulation subject
         to compliance with the conditions for a derogation that are laid down in Article of the Directive. 
      
The Republic of Austria states that the European starling is not in principle a species that can be hunted in Burgenland.
         However, given the considerable damage caused by that species to vines, the provincial legislature considered it necessary
         to adopt derogating provisions pursuant to Article 9(1)(a) of the Directive. Thus, hunting of the European starling can be
         permitted only between July and November.
      
According to the Republic of Austria, the protection of vines, referred to in Paragraph 88a(1) of the Bgld JagdG, is consonant
         with the objective of Article 9(1)(a) of the Directive. Furthermore, the condition that there must be no other satisfactory
         solution is met, given that flocks of up to starlings invade the region’s vineyards each year and the conventional
         means for driving them away have proved insufficient.
      
 Findings of the Court
It should be noted at the outset, first, that according to Article the Directive seeks the conservation of all species of
         birds naturally occurring in the wild state in the European territory of the Member States and covers the protection, management
         and control of these species and, second, that effective bird protection is typically a transfrontier environment problem
         entailing common responsibilities for the Member States (see, to this effect, Case 247/Commission v Belgium [1987] ECR 3029, paragraph 6).
      
Consequently, Article of the Directive is a provision which does not set out programmatic guidance, but contains a binding
         rule of law that must be transposed into Member States’ national law.
      
The Court has explained that the transposition of Community legislation into national law does not necessarily require the
         relevant provisions to be enacted in precisely the same words in a specific express legal provision and that a general legal
         context may be sufficient for the purpose if it actually ensures the full application of the directive in a sufficiently clear
         and precise manner (see, inter alia, Case 252/Commission v France [1988] ECR 2243, paragraph 5).
      
As regards the complaint set out by the Commission, it is to be noted that under the legislation of Burgenland the protection
         for wild birds is removed entirely from the European starling, a species covered by Article of the Directive, during the
         period from July to November.
      
As the Advocate General has observed in point of her Opinion, regardless of whether the national provisions at issue could
         validly be adopted under the third indent of Article 9(1)(a) of the Directive, the total exclusion of a given species from
         the system of protection prescribed in Article of the Directive – even for a defined, although considerable, period – is
         incompatible with the latter article.
      
It should be added in this regard that faithful transposition is particularly important in the case of the Directive where
         management of the common heritage is entrusted to the Member States in their respective territories (see Case 262/Commission v Italy [1987] ECR 3073, paragraph 9, and Case C-38/Commission v France [2000] ECR I‑10941, paragraph 53).
      
It follows that the legislative provisions of Burgenland to which the present complaint put forward by the Commission relates
         are incompatible with Article 1(1) and (2) of the Directive.
      
The Commission’s complaint is accordingly well founded.
–       Province of Upper Austria
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission observes that Paragraph 27(1) of the Oö NSchG requires an implementing regulation to be adopted and a certain
         number of conditions to be met in order for wild animals to be protected. However, Article of the Directive lays down an
         obligation to protect all species of wild birds. In addition, under Paragraph 5(2) of the Oö ArtenschutzVO, the black-billed
         magpie, the jay, the carrion crow and the hooded crow are entirely excluded from the system of protection provided for by
         that provision.
      
The Republic of Austria states that Paragraph 27(2) of the Oö NSchG provides for a system of protection for plants and animals,
         imposed by regulation, that takes account of the requirements laid down by the Directive. 
      
It adds that the Directive draws a distinction between native and non-native species and attaches legal consequences to the
         distinction. Article of the Directive requires the introduction of non-native species to be controlled in order to protect
         local fauna and flora. 
      
 Findings of the Court
The Court pointed out in Commission v Belgium, at paragraph 22, that the protective effect of the Directive must be ensured in relation to all species of birds naturally
         occurring in the wild state in the European territory of a Member State.
      
Consequently, the protective measures which the Member States are called upon to take by virtue of Article of the Directive
         must also relate to wild birds whose natural habitat occurs not in the territory of the State in question, but in that of
         one or more other Member States (see, to this effect, Commission v Belgium, paragraph 22, and Case C-149/Vergy [1996] ECR I‑299, paragraphs and 18). 
      
As regards the complaint set out by the Commission, it must be found that the system of protection established in Paragraph
         27(1) and (2) of the Oö NSchG, in particular the implementing power granted to the authority vested with competence to adopt
         regulations, is accompanied by numerous conditions relating to the biological characteristics of the species covered. Furthermore,
         Paragraph 5(2) of the Oö ArtenSchutzVO entirely excludes a number of species from its scope. 
      
So far as concerns the Republic of Austria’s argument derived from Article of the Directive, it should be noted that this
         provision does no more than lay down a specific obligation requiring the Member States to see that the introduction of species
         of birds which do not occur naturally in the wild state in the European territory of the Member States does not prejudice
         the local flora and fauna. 
      
This article cannot therefore be regarded as a legal basis justifying derogation from the obligations of protection which
         the Member States owe under Article of the Directive and relate to all species of birds naturally occurring in the wild
         state in the European territory of the Member States, that is to say, as regards each of those States, both to native species
         and to species which occur only in other Member States.
      
As is apparent from the judgment in Case 252/Commission v France, at paragraph 15, the importance of complete and effective protection of wild birds throughout the Community, irrespective
         of the areas they stay in or pass through, causes any national legislation which delimits the protection of wild birds by
         reference to national fauna to be incompatible with the Directive.
      
It follows that Article 1(1) and (2) of the Directive have not been correctly transposed in Upper Austria.
The complaint set out by the Commission in this regard must therefore be upheld.
 Breach of Article of the Directive in Burgenland, Carinthia and Upper Austria
–       Province of Burgenland
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission contends that the regime concerning the European starling laid down in Paragraph 16(1)(b) of the Bgld NSchLPflG
         and Paragraph 88a of the Bgld JagdG does not ensure protection for that species which complies with Article of the Directive,
         at any rate not throughout the year. 
      
The Commission also submits that, in accordance with Paragraph of the Bgld ArtenschutzVO, that regulation does not affect
         fishing and hunting. Paragraph thus allows deliberate damage to nests and to reproduction, resting and wintering areas of
         protected species. 
      
The Republic of Austria explains that the provincial legislature adopted derogating provisions because of significant damage
         caused by the European starling to vines. 
      
It submits that protection of that species is ensured at all stages of its development, including the egg stage. So far as
         concerns Paragraph of the Bgld ArtenschutzVO, its final sentence cannot be interpreted as establishing a general derogation
         for hunting and fishing. 
      
 Findings of the Court
The general system of protection established in Article of the Directive extends, as its introductory wording states, to
         all species of birds referred to in Article of the Directive. That system includes, inter alia, a prohibition on deliberately
         killing, capturing or disturbing birds of protected species.
      
As has been found in paragraphs and of the present judgment, the fact that between July and November the European
         starling is entirely excluded from the system of protection envisaged by the Directive is incompatible with Article of the
         Directive.
      
Consequently, the action authorised by the provisions referred to in paragraph of the present judgment is likewise incompatible
         with the prohibitions set out in Article of the Directive.
      
As for the ground of derogation relied upon by the Republic of Austria, it is true that the prevention of damage to vines
         can in principle justify the taking of derogating measures, pursuant to the third indent of Article 9(1)(a) of the Directive.
      
However, that provision does not provide a legal basis for a species being entirely removed – even if the removal is temporally
         limited – from the system of protection laid down by the Directive. 
      
Removing a species of bird entirely from the system of protection laid down by the Directive, even for a defined period, could
         jeopardise the very existence of that species. Thus, the Member States are authorised to derogate from the system of protection
         for wild birds only if they observe the requirements set out in Article 9(2) of the Directive.
      
As regards the protection of nests and of reproduction, resting and wintering areas, it is to be noted that the objects and
         areas concerned fall within the scope of the system of protection established in Article of the Directive, in particular
         Article 5(b) to (d).
      
In the contested legislation it is prohibited, under Paragraph 16(4) of the Bgld NSchLPflG, to pursue, disturb, capture, transport,
         hold, injure, kill, keep or take away protected animals. 
      
However, according to Paragraph 16(2)(d) of that Law, an implementing regulation must indicate the species in respect of which
         it is prohibited to remove, damage or destroy nests, mating grounds and reproduction, resting and wintering areas.
      
It must be found that, as the Advocate General has stated in point of her Opinion, the combined effect of Paragraph 16(2)
         and Paragraph 16(4) of the Bgld NSchLPflG is to give rise to a lack of protection for a number of species, so that those provisions
         must be considered incompatible with Article of the Directive.
      
Nor do the provisions of the Bgld ArtenschutzVO remedy this failure to transpose the Directive. The prohibitions set out in
         Paragraph of that regulation concern solely the nesting, reproduction, resting and wintering areas of a small number of
         species, and not those of all protected species.
      
Furthermore, as provided in Paragraph 6, the protective measures laid down by that regulation do not apply to hunting and
         fishing. 
      
However, such activities are liable to cause detriment to the protected areas and objects to which Article 5(b) to (d) of
         the Directive relates.
      
Since the Republic of Austria has not put forward any line of argument capable of justifying the set of legal rules in question,
         the failure to fulfil obligations must be considered proven.
      
The complaint alleging breach of Article of the Directive is consequently well founded as regards all of the provisions
         of Burgenland at issue.
      
–       Province of Carinthia
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission states that Paragraph 68(1) of the KrntJagdG does not transpose the prohibitions set out in Article 5(a) and
         (e) of the Directive. Paragraph 68(1) merely imposes prohibitions relating to nests and breeding areas. Nor does Paragraph
         51(4a) of the KrntJagdG transpose the abovementioned provisions of the Directive. 
      
The Republic of Austria asserts that the body of legislative provisions applicable in Carinthia ensures that disturbance of
         the breeding places of game birds is prohibited. It is also prohibited to destroy the nests and clutches of those species
         or to gather eggs without authorisation.
      
 Findings of the Court
While the regime laid down in Paragraph 68(1) of the KrntJagdG prescribes protective measures relating to the nests, clutches,
         eggs and breeding places of game birds, it does not, however, contain any provision relating to the obligation to ensure that
         the birds referred to in Article of the Directive are not killed, captured or kept, as Article 5(a) and (e) of the Directive
         require.
      
Nor does Paragraph 51(4a) of the KrntJagdG transpose those provisions of the Directive, since it merely lays down a set of
         exceptions to the general protection that results from the prohibition on hunting in Paragraph 51(1).
      
It is clear that the prohibitions prescribed in Article 5(a) and (e) of the Directive, namely the prohibitions on killing,
         capturing or keeping protected birds, are not laid down in the national provisions mentioned in paragraph of the present
         judgment.
      
The Commission’s complaint must therefore be held to be well founded in this regard.
–       Province of Upper Austria
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission submits that Paragraph 27(1) of the Oö NSchG contains measures of a programmatic nature which are limited to
         native species: under the power which it establishes for the adoption of regulations, the conditions laid down in order for
         protection to be conferred include that the species concerned must be rare in the countryside of the area, its population
         must be threatened or its conservation must be in the public interest.
      
The Commission adds that, under Paragraph 5(2) of the Oö ArtenschutzVO, the black-billed magpie, the jay, the carrion crow
         and the hooded crow are entirely excluded from the system of protection provided for by that provision. 
      
The Republic of Austria states that Paragraph 27(2) of the Oö NSchG provides for the protection of plants and animals by way
         of regulation, regard being had to, inter alia, Articles to and of the Directive. This objective of the legislature
         cannot in any way be qualified by the reference to Paragraph 27(1) of the Oö NSchG.
      
It adds that the Directive draws a distinction between native and non-native species and attaches legal consequences to the
         distinction. Article of the Directive requires the introduction of non-native species to be controlled in order to protect
         local fauna and flora. 
      
 Findings of the Court
As is evident from paragraph of the present judgment, the scope of Article of the Directive extends to all the species
         referred to in Article 1. Consequently, the exclusion of the black-billed magpie, the jay, the carrion crow and the hooded
         crow from the system of protection for species that is applicable in Upper Austria is not consistent with the Directive.
      
Furthermore, limiting the number of protected species by reference to certain conditions that relate to biological characteristics
         and to considerations of public interest is likewise incompatible with the Directive.
      
The Republic of Austria’s argument that the authority vested with the power to adopt regulations must act in a manner consistent
         with the Directive cannot alter that conclusion. Suffice it to state that implementation in accordance with a directive’s
         provisions by that authority cannot in itself achieve the clarity and precision needed to meet the requirement of legal certainty
         (see, to this effect, Case C-236/Commission v Greece [1996] ECR I‑4459, paragraphs and 13, and Case C-144/Commission v Netherlands [2001] ECR I‑3541, paragraph 21).
      
Nor can the argument derived by the Republic of Austria from Article of the Directive be accepted. As is clear from paragraphs
         and of the present judgment, this article cannot be regarded as a legal basis justifying derogation from the obligations
         of protection which the Member States owe under Article of the Directive.
      
Consequently, the complaint alleging breach of Article of the Directive in Upper Austria must be upheld. 
 Breach of Article 6(1) of the Directive in Upper Austria
–       Arguments of the parties
The Commission submits that, under Paragraph 5(2) of the Oö ArtenschutzVO, the black-billed magpie, the carrion crow and the
         hooded crow are excluded from the system of protection provided for in Article 6(1) of the Directive. 
      
The Republic of Austria states that the species referred to have been omitted from the list of birds that may be hunted in
         Austria by virtue of Annex II to the Directive, even though the experts agree that it would be appropriate to include those
         species for Austria in the annex. 
      
–       Findings of the Court
Article 6(1) of the Directive provides that the Member States are to prohibit, for all the bird species referred to in Article
         of the Directive, the sale, transport for sale, keeping for sale and offering for sale of live or dead birds. 
      
With regard to the complaint set out by the Commission, it must be found that the exclusion of the abovementioned species
         from the field of application of Paragraph 5(2) of the Oö ArtenschutzVO allows bird-trading activities which are prohibited
         by Article 6(1) of the Directive.
      
In these circumstances, the Republic of Austria’s line of argument concerning the relevance of Annex II to the Directive with
         regard to the complaint set out by the Commission is immaterial. 
      
That annex relates to Article of the Directive, which concerns the situation of the species that may be hunted, and not
         to the system of protection established in Article 6(1) of the Directive. 
      
Thus, whatever hunting regime may be applicable, the Member States are required to ensure that the prohibitions on trading
         laid down in Article 6(1) are transposed.
      
It is clear from the foregoing that those prohibitions have not been implemented in Upper Austria as regards the three bird
         species referred to above.
      
Consequently, the action must be upheld in this regard.
 Breach of Article 7(1) of the Directive in Carinthia and Upper Austria
–       Province of Carinthia
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission submits that, under Paragraph 9(2) of the KrntJagdVO, the carrion crow, the jay and the black-billed magpie
         may be hunted from July to March. This regime is incompatible with the Directive’s requirements regarding hunting.
      
The Republic of Austria states that the Community legislature failed, in Annex II/to the Directive, to include corvids in
         the list of species that may be hunted in the territory of the Republic of Austria. 
      
–       Findings of the Court
In accordance with Article 7(1) and (3) of the Directive, the species referred to in Annex II/may be hunted, under national
         legislation, in the Member States in respect of which they are indicated.
      
It is not in dispute that the species covered by the Commission’s complaint are not among the species of birds that may be
         hunted in Austria by virtue of Annex II/2.
      
Consequently, establishing a hunting season for those species is incompatible with Article 7(1) of the Directive. 
It should be added that neither the argument derived by the Republic of Austria from an alleged omission on the part of the
         Community legislature as regards the content of Annex II/to the Directive nor the fact that the Republic of Austria is seeking
         to secure the inclusion of the species concerned in the list of species that may be hunted in its territory are relevant for
         the purposes of assessing the merits of the complaint put forward by the Commission.
      
It follows that Article 7(1) of the Directive has not been correctly transposed in Carinthia.
The Commission’s action must accordingly be upheld in this regard.
–       Province of Upper Austria
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission points out that, as provided in Paragraph 5(2) of the Oö ArtenschutzVO, the black-billed magpie, the jay, the
         carrion crow and the hooded crow are not included among the species that must be protected. This regime amounts to a derogation
         from Article 7(1) of the Directive, which provides that only the species referred to in Annex II/may be hunted in Austria.
      
The Republic of Austria refers to the line of argument which it set out on the complaint put forward regarding transposition
         of the same provision of the Directive in Carinthia (see paragraph of the present judgment).
      
It also submits that, in any event, the abovementioned legislation is applied in a manner consistent with the Directive.
 Findings of the Court
Reference should be made, with regard to the merits of the complaint set out by the Commission, to paragraph of the present
         judgment which concerns the relevance of Annex II/to the Directive for the purpose of applying Article 7(1) of the Directive
         in Austria. 
      
It follows therefrom that Paragraph 5(2) of the Oö ArtenschutzVO must be regarded as incompatible with that provision of the
         Directive.
      
As regards the Republic of Austria’s argument to the effect that application of the legislation is consistent with the Directive,
         it need only be stated that mere administrative practices, which by their nature are alterable at will by the authorities
         and are not given the appropriate publicity, cannot be regarded as constituting valid fulfilment of the obligations to transpose
         a directive (see, to this effect, Case C-197/Commission v France [1997] ECR I‑1489, paragraph 14; Case C-358/Commission v Italy [2000] ECR I‑1255, paragraph 17; and Case C-33/Commission v United Kingdom [2005] ECR I‑1865, paragraph 25).
      
Consequently, the complaint set out by the Commission in this regard must be upheld.
 Breach of Article 7(4) of the Directive in Burgenland, Carinthia, Lower Austria, Upper Austria, the Province of Salzburg,
         Tyrol, Vorarlberg and the Province of Vienna
      
–       Province of Burgenland
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission states that, under Paragraph 88b(2) of the Bgld JagdG, woodcock may be hunted from March to April in accordance
         with the form of hunting called ‘Schnepfenstrich’. In addition, the periods of protection set in Paragraph of the Bgld
         JagdVO derogate from the requirements under Article 7(4) of the Directive as regards the wood pigeon (protected from April
         to June whereas, according to the Commission, it should be from February to August), the collared dove (protected
         from April to June, instead of from March to October), the turtle dove (protected from November to June, instead
         of from April to August) and the woodcock (protected from January to February and from April to September,
         instead of from February to September). 
      
The Republic of Austria states that the periods of protection set in Paragraph of the Bgld JagdVO take account of the climatic
         conditions in that region. Also, because of the selective hunting practised in Burgenland, hens, in particular in the case
         of the woodcock, are not disturbed at any stage of the period of reproduction. Furthermore, the periods of protection laid
         down take account of the conditions for derogation which are set out in Article of the Directive. Finally, since, in the
         case of woodcocks, it is only the cock that may be hunted, a measure consistent with Article is at issue. 
      
 Findings of the Court
In its application, the Commission set out hunting calendars for the woodcock, wood pigeon, collared dove and turtle dove
         which differ considerably from the hunting calendars laid down by the national provisions referred to in paragraph of
         the present judgment.
      
The calendars diverge not only as regards the total duration of the periods of protection but also as to the dates upon which
         they begin and end. 
      
In assessing the merits of the complaint set out by the Commission, it should be noted that the periods of protection to be
         observed pursuant to Article 7(4) of the Directive must be set taking account of the scientific data that are authoritative
         in the ornithological field (see, in particular, Case C-157/Commission v Italy [1991] ECR I‑57, paragraphs 15, and 24).
      
However, the application contains no data of this kind capable of substantiating the appropriateness of the periods suggested
         by the Commission in light of the reference parameters set out in Article 7(4) of the Directive, such as the principles of
         wise use and ecologically balanced control of the species of birds concerned.
      
It should be added that it was all the more necessary to submit such scientific data because the Republic of Austria stated
         that the hunting seasons were set in Burgenland having regard to the particular climatic conditions in that region.
      
In that context, the Commission had the task of adducing appropriate scientific information in order to establish that the
         hunting regimes at issue are incompatible with Article 7(4) of the Directive.
      
Given the absence of such information, the action must be dismissed in this regard.
–       Province of Carinthia
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission states, first, that for a number of species Paragraph 9(2) of the KrntJagdVO sets hunting seasons which fall
         within the various stages of reproduction and rearing, without sufficient reference being made to the conditions for derogation
         which are laid down in Article of the Directive. The species concerned are the capercaillie (the hunting of which is authorised
         from to May whereas, according to the Commission, it should be from October to February), the black grouse (the
         hunting of which is authorised from to May, instead of from September to March), the woodcock (the hunting of
         which is authorised from September to December and from March to April, instead of from September to February),
         the common coot (the hunting of which is authorised from August to January, instead of from September to March),
         the wood pigeon (the hunting of which is authorised from August to December and from March to April, instead of
         from September to January) and the collared dove (the hunting of which is authorised from August to December and
         from March to April, instead of from October to February). 
      
The Commission observes second, as regards springtime hunting in particular, that the hunting seasons thus fixed include the
         mating season of the capercaillie, black grouse and woodcock.
      
The Commission submits that it is not possible to distinguish between, on the one hand, the mating season and, on the other,
         the period of reproduction and rearing. Consequently, the national provision referred to in paragraph of the present judgment
         is contrary to Article 7(4) of the Directive.
      
The Commission stresses that the mating season forms a part of the period of reproduction and rearing. The fact that the mating
         season is prior to reproduction in the narrow sense cannot have the effect of excluding it, for the species referred to, from
         the field of application of Article 7(4) of the Directive.
      
The Commission submits, third, that Paragraph of the KrntJagdG, which governs the criteria for authorising hunting plans,
         makes no reference to the conditions and criteria for derogation set out in Article of the Directive. 
      
The Republic of Austria acknowledges that the hunting seasons laid down in Carinthia are not consistent with the Directive
         so far as concerns the common coot, wood pigeon and collared dove.
      
On the other hand, it submits that hunting the cock of the species capercaillie, black grouse and woodcock on mating grounds
         is unconnected with the period of reproduction, hatching and rearing. The breeding of these species takes place somewhere
         other than on the mating grounds. In addition, restrictive provisions guarantee that only a small number of males are taken
         and that females are protected during the breeding period. 
      
The Republic of Austria states that the hunting regime laid down by Paragraph 51(2) of the KrntJagdG corresponds to the requirements
         for protection under Article 7(4) of the Directive. The hunting seasons are set in such a way that selective hunting of game
         birds is possible, in small numbers and under strict conditions of supervision, if there is no other satisfactory solution
         and the hunting is not detrimental to the maintenance of the populations concerned. 
      
The Republic of Austria explains that the capercaillie, the black grouse and the woodcock are subject to planning of the animals
         to be shot which is consistent with the Directive. The hunting of those species is authorised on the basis of a precise census
         of the population for each hunting area and the shooting of animals is authorised on an individual basis. In addition, the
         authorisations are granted by administrative decision to persons having the right to hunt.
      
The Republic of Austria also states that, because of the restrictive provisions relating to monitoring of the populations,
         to the number of individual kills and to the shooting seasons, only a small number of cocks of the species in question are
         killed. 
      
It stresses, finally, that the consequence of a general prohibition on hunting the foregoing species during the mating season
         would be that hunters would lose interest in those species of game birds and abandon efforts to conserve the species’ habitat.
         This would have an immediate effect on the population of the species, which need a specific habitat, namely forest pasture,
         which has become considerably scarcer. 
      
 Findings of the Court
Since the defendant has acknowledged that the hunting seasons set in Carinthia for the common coot, wood pigeon and collared
         dove are incompatible with the Directive, the present complaint must be held well founded in respect of those species.
      
So far as concerns the woodcock, hunting is authorised not only from the end of summer to the beginning of winter, that is
         to say from September to December, but also from the end of winter to the beginning of spring, that is to say from March to April. The hunting season is thus open for nearly five months.
      
A hunting regime that extends over so long a period cannot in any event be considered capable of being covered by Article
         of the Directive.
      
Because of its nature and scope, such a regime is incompatible with the protective objectives pursued by the Directive.
Given that the defendant has not put forward any ground of derogation set out in Article of the Directive that would be
         capable of justifying the hunting regime in question, the failure to fulfil obligations must be considered proven in this
         respect too.
      
On the other hand, the legislation in question provides only for a spring hunting season in the case of capercaillie and black
         grouse. 
      
However, this season corresponds in part to the mating season of the species concerned.
It must therefore be determined whether the mating season is covered by the prohibitions laid down in Article 7(4) of the
         Directive. 
      
The protective regime established in this provision is defined broadly, by reference to the specific biological characteristics
         of the species concerned, given that it concerns, in addition to the rearing season, the various stages of reproduction.
      
Only such a view corresponds to the objective of Article 7(4) of the Directive, which, as the Court has previously stated,
         is to secure a complete system of protection in the periods during which the survival of wild birds is particularly under
         threat (see Case C-157/Commission v Italy, paragraph 14, and Case C‑435/Association pour la protection des animaux sauvages and Others [1994] ECR I-67, paragraph 9). This case-law reflects the consideration that any action during the periods that are connected
         with the reproduction of birds is liable to affect their reproduction, even if only a part of their population is concerned.
      
That is also true of the mating season, during which the species concerned are particularly exposed and vulnerable.
It must therefore be concluded that the mating season forms part of the period during which Article 7(4) of the Directive
         prohibits, in principle, all hunting.
      
With regard to the question whether the derogations set out in Article of the Directive are capable of applying to situations
         governed by the specific protective requirements prescribed in Article 7(4) of the Directive, it should be noted that the
         Court held in Case C-182/Ligue pour la protection des oiseaux and Others [2003] ECR I‑12105, at paragraph 9, that Article 9(1)(c) of the Directive permits authorisation, in compliance with the other
         requirements of Article 9, of the capture, keeping or other judicious use of birds during the periods mentioned in Article
         7(4) of the Directive, during which the survival of wild birds is at particular risk. 
      
Consequently, the hunting of wild birds for recreational purposes during the periods mentioned in Article 7(4) of the Directive
         may, subject to compliance with the requirements laid down in Article 9(2), constitute a ‘judicious use’ within the meaning
         of Article 9(1)(c) (see, to this effect, Ligue pour la protection des oiseaux sauvages and Others, paragraph 11).
      
However, the burden of proof regarding compliance with these requirements in respect of each derogation rests with the national
         authority taking the decision (see, to this effect, Case C-344/Commission v Finland [2005] ECR I‑11033, paragraphs and 60, and Case C-60/WWF Italia and Others [2006] ECR I‑5083, paragraph 34). 
      
With regard to determining whether the hunting regime laid down in Paragraph 51(2) of the KrntJagdG is consistent with Article
         9(1)(c) of the Directive, particularly so far as concerns the requirement that derogations be limited to ‘small numbers’,
         it should be remembered that the Member States, when adopting measures transposing the latter provision, must ensure that,
         in all cases of application of the derogation provided for therein and for all the protected species, authorised hunting does
         not exceed a ceiling consistent with the restriction on that hunting to small numbers, and that ceiling must be determined
         on the basis of strict scientific data (see WWF Italia and Others, paragraph 29).
      
Even if it is true that, as the defendant asserts, hunting of capercaillie and black grouse is subject to planning of the
         animals to be shot, the abovementioned national provision does not, however, specify what in this context is constituted by
         ‘small numbers’ within the meaning of Article 9(1)(c) of the Directive.
      
In order for the Directive to be transposed in accordance with Community law, the authorities competent to authorise derogations
         in respect of birds of a given species must be able to rely on criteria which are sufficiently precise as to the quantitative
         ceilings to be complied with (see, to this effect, WWF Italia and Others, paragraph 36).
      
Consequently, the hunting regime laid down in Paragraph 51(2) of the KrntJagdG is not consistent with Article 9(1)(c) of the
         Directive.
      
It should be added that the Republic of Austria has acknowledged that the species in question are also present in the territory
         concerned during the autumn and winter, but states that hunting conditions at that time of year are less favourable. However,
         a circumstance of that kind is irrelevant having regard to the protective legal framework established by the Directive.
      
Accordingly, Paragraph 51(2) of the KrntJagdG is also not consistent with the introductory part of Article 9(1) of the Directive,
         under which derogations from the provisions for the protection of birds may be granted only if there is no other satisfactory
         solution (see, to this effect, Case C-135/Commission v Spain [2005] ECR I-5261, paragraph 18).
      
Finally, in light of the line of argument put forward by the Republic of Austria as to the need to authorise hunting of capercaillie
         and black grouse so that the hunters may conserve and maintain their habitat, it is to be observed that while the protection
         of flora is admittedly one of the grounds of derogation set out in the fourth indent of Article 9(1)(a) of the Directive,
         protection of that habitat can be ensured regardless of hunting (see, to this effect, Commission v Finland, paragraphs and 40).
      
Indeed, as the Advocate General has observed in point of her Opinion, the Member States are under an obligation to ensure
         such protection, by virtue of Article of the Directive, both within and outside special protection areas for birds.
      
The Republic of Austria’s arguments must therefore be rejected in their entirety.
It is accordingly clear that hunting legislation in Carinthia regarding all the species covered by this complaint is not consistent
         with the Directive.
      
The Commission’s action is therefore well founded in this regard.
–       Province of Lower Austria
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission submits that Paragraph of the Nö JagdVO sets hunting seasons for a number of species which encompass the
         rearing season or the stages of reproduction of the species concerned. These species are the capercaillie (the hunting of
         which is authorised from to May in even-numbered years whereas, according to the Commission, it should be from October
         to February), the black grouse (the hunting of which is authorised from to May in odd-numbered years, instead of from
         September to March), the Rackelhahn (the hunting of which is authorised from January to December, instead of from
         October to March), the woodcock (the hunting of which is authorised from September to December and from March
         to April, instead of from September to February) and the wood pigeon (the hunting of which is authorised from August
         to January, instead of from September to January).
      
The Republic of Austria admits that the opening of the autumn hunting season for the wood pigeon should be set at September,
         as the Commission contends.
      
So far as concerns the hunting regime for capercaillie, black grouse and woodcock, the Republic of Austria refers to all its
         arguments relating to the transposition of Article 7(4) of the Directive in Carinthia (see paragraphs to of the present
         judgment).
      
It recalls that, as regards these species, the spring hunting season is in the mating season, which is prior to the reproduction
         and rearing periods. Consequently, the system of specific protection established by Article 7(4) of the Directive cannot apply.
      
In the Republic of Austria’s submission, the hunting seasons for the Rackelhahn cannot be covered by the present action, since
         this species was not referred to in the pre-litigation procedure. 
      
It also contends that cocks of this species are larger in size than black grouse cocks and accordingly disturb them when the
         mating display is performed. 
      
 Findings of the Court
In view of the defendant’s response to the complaint concerning the hunting season for the wood pigeon, it must be found to
         have failed to fulfil its obligations in this regard.
      
The Rackelhahn comes from the crossing of two species and, irrespective of whether it may be regarded as a species in its
         own right in biological terms, it can in any event be distinguished from the capercaillie and black grouse. 
      
Accordingly, the hunting regime for the Rackelhahn in Lower Austria should have been mentioned in the letter of formal notice
         given that, according to the Court’s case-law, this letter delimits the subject-matter of the dispute (see, to this effect,
         Case C-441/Commission v Germany [2006] ECR I‑3449, paragraphs and 60, and Case C‑150/Commission v Denmark [2007] ECR I-0000, paragraphs and 67).
      
The Commission’s action must therefore be considered inadmissible in this regard.
With regard to the complaint alleging that the woodcock is not sufficiently protected, it is to be observed that hunting of
         this species is authorised from March to April and from the end of summer to the beginning of winter.
      
In allowing the hunting of this species over more than five months, the regime laid down in Paragraph of the Nö JagdVO
         puts excessive pressure on the population concerned.
      
As is clear from paragraphs and of the present judgment, such a regime cannot in any event be covered by Article of the Directive. 
      
So far as concerns the capercaillie and black grouse, as is apparent from paragraphs and of the present judgment the
         springtime hunting falls within the mating season of these species which is a period in respect of which Article 7(4) of the
         Directive requires specific protective measures. 
      
While it is true that, for these two species, no autumn hunting is envisaged and springtime hunting is limited to one year
         in two, the Republic of Austria has not, however, provided specific information as to the way in which compliance with Article
         9(1)(c) of the Directive is ensured, in particular as regards the limitation of the birds taken to ‘small numbers’.
      
As follows from paragraphs and of the present judgment, the competent authorities of the Member State concerned have
         the task of ensuring, with sufficient legal precision and on the basis of recognised scientific data, that the quantitative
         ceiling is not in any event exceeded and, therefore, that the species covered are fully protected (see, to this effect, also
         Case C-79/Commission v Spain [2004] ECR I‑11619, paragraphs and 43).
      
Such detail does not, however, appear in the contested legislation.
This complaint on the part of the Commission is therefore well founded as regards all the species referred to with the exception
         of the Rackelhahn, in respect of which it is inadmissible.
      
–       Province of Upper Austria
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission states that, under Paragraph 1(1) of the Oö SchonzeitenVO, hunting is authorised during the rearing season
         or stages of reproduction as regards, first, cocks of the species capercaillie (hunting being authorised from to May
         whereas, according to the Commission, it should be from October to February), black grouse (hunting being authorised
         from to May, instead of from September to March) and Rackelhahn (hunting being authorised from to May, instead
         of from October to March) and, second, the woodcock (hunting being authorised from October to April, instead of
         from September to February). 
      
The Republic of Austria states that springtime hunting of capercaillie, black grouse and Rackelhahn takes place during the
         mating season and therefore does not fall within the scope of Article 7(4) of the Directive.
      
The Republic of Austria refers in this regard to its arguments reproduced in paragraphs to of the present judgment
         concerning the hunting regime in force in Carinthia.
      
It observes with regard to the woodcock that the hunting seasons laid down derogate from the Directive solely as regards the
         males, since in reality it is they alone that are hunted during the mating season. Consequently, the females are not disturbed
         at any stage of the period of reproduction. Furthermore, the specific biological characteristics of this species provide a
         guarantee that this hunting regime is compatible with the principles of wise use and of balanced control of the populations
         concerned.
      
 Findings of the Court
With regard to the complaint relating to protection of the capercaillie and black grouse, it is to be noted that, as follows
         from paragraphs and of the present judgment, the hunting season as set in Upper Austria for these two species corresponds
         to a period which must be covered by specific protection pursuant to Article 7(4) of the Directive. 
      
While it is true that only springtime hunting is authorised for those species, the Republic of Austria has not advanced evidence
         or arguments capable of establishing that this regime would meet the requirements set out in Article 9(1)(c) of the Directive
         and as explained in the case-law (see paragraphs and of the present judgment). In particular, the legislation at issue
         does not make it clear to what extent the regime would ensure that the birds taken are limited to ‘small numbers’. 
      
So far as concerns the complaint relating to the regime for hunting the Rackelhahn, a bird which results from the crossing
         of the capercaillie and the black grouse, it is to be remembered that the Directive, as provided in Article 1, has the objective
         of conserving all species of birds naturally occurring in the wild state in the European territory of the Member States to
         which the Treaty applies.
      
As the Advocate General has observed in point of her Opinion, a biological species is the totality of all individual beings
         which form a reproducing community.
      
In its defence, however, the Republic of Austria disputed that mating involving a Rackelhahn, whether male or female, can
         yield offspring in the wild, and it has not been contradicted by the Commission on this point.
      
The Commission has therefore not established that, as regards the Rackelhahn, a reproducing community exists that would allow
         it to be considered a species in its own right, thereby falling within the scope of the Directive.
      
The complaint relating to the regime for hunting the Rackelhahn in Upper Austria must therefore be dismissed as unfounded.
As regards the complaint relating to the regime for hunting the woodcock, this species may be hunted not only in the spring,
         but also in autumn and winter. 
      
Because of the extent of the hunting seasons which it lays down, such a regime is, as follows from paragraphs and of the present judgment, incompatible with the protective requirements of the Directive and cannot be justified on the basis
         of Article of the Directive. 
      
Finally, with regard to the distinction drawn by the Republic of Austria between males and females of the species concerned,
         it need merely be noted that there is no legal basis for this distinction in the Directive’s provisions relating to the scope
         of the protection that wild birds must enjoy. 
      
The Commission’s complaint must therefore be upheld as regards the hunting regime in force in Upper Austria for all the species
         referred to with the exception of the Rackelhahn.
      
–       Province of Salzburg 
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission states that the effect of Paragraph 54(1) of the Sbg JagdG in conjunction with Paragraph of the Sbg SchonzeitenVO
         is that hunting of a number of species is authorised during the period of reproduction or of rearing, that is to say periods
         during which hunting is in principle prohibited, without the conditions and criteria for derogation laid down in Article of the Directive being met. The species in question are the capercaillie (the hunting of which is authorised from to May whereas, according to the Commission, it should be from October to February), the black grouse (the hunting of which
         is authorised from May to June, instead of from September to March), the Rackelhahn (the hunting of which is authorised
         from May to June, instead of from October to March) and the woodcock (the hunting of which is authorised from March to April and from October to December, instead of from September to February).
      
The Commission notes that Paragraph 60(3a) of the Sbg JagdG confines itself to the setting of a minimum number and, as the
         case may be, a maximum number of birds to be shot. No possibility thus exists, when shooting plans are adopted, of assessing
         the grounds for derogation in the light of Article of the Directive.
      
So far as concerns hunting of the capercaillie, black grouse and Rackelhahn, the Republic of Austria essentially refers to
         its arguments relating to the regime for the protection of those species in Carinthia (see paragraphs to of the present
         judgment). 
      
The Republic of Austria explains that, when adopting the regulation relating to shooting plans, the competent authorities
         take account of the conditions and criteria in accordance with which it is permitted to derogate from the prohibitions laid
         down by the Directive, pursuant to Article 9(1) and (2) thereof.
      
It states that, as provided in Paragraph 60(3a) of the Sbg JagdG, the maximum numbers to be shot must be set so that a population
         that corresponds to the principles in Paragraph of the Sbg JagdG is achieved or conserved. The regulation relating to shooting
         plans is, moreover, adopted on the basis of precise particulars of damage recorded and of reports and estimates in respect
         of the population of the species concerned. The figures stated in the regulation are to be understood as maximum numbers to
         be shot. 
      
The Republic of Austria adds that the authorised acts relate only to the bird species referred to in Paragraph 59(1) of the
         Sbg JagdG, that is to say those which are not listed in Annex II to the Directive as species that may be hunted in Austria.
         However, no shooting plan has been drawn up in this connection, so that the said bird species are covered by a general prohibition
         on hunting. Their hunting may be authorised, in certain cases, only on the basis of Paragraph 104(4) of the Sbg JagdG, but
         solely outside the periods of protection established by the Directive.
      
 Findings of the Court
As is apparent from the findings set out in paragraphs and of the present judgment, hunting of the woodcock in springtime,
         over and above the hunting in autumn also authorised for this species, cannot be justified on the basis of Article 9(1)(c)
         of the Directive.
      
With regard to determining whether the conditions and criteria for derogation are satisfied in relation to hunting capercaillie
         and black grouse, for which only springtime hunting is authorised, it should be noted that Paragraph 59(1) of the Sbg JagdG
         applies only to species which are not listed in Annex II to the Directive as species which may be hunted in Austria. 
      
The capercaillie and black grouse are mentioned in that annex. Those two species are therefore not covered by the planning
         of birds to be shot. 
      
With regard to ascertaining whether the hunting of those species is capable of being justified under Article of the Directive,
         it must be found that the defendant has not established that the legislation of the Province of Salzburg is consistent with
         the ground of derogation laid down in Article 9(1)(c) of the Directive.
      
Paragraph 59(1) of the Sbg JagdG entrusts assessment of a shooting plan to the authority vested with the power to adopt regulations,
         without the exercise of that power being limited by binding quantitative levels.
      
Consequently, the action is well founded so far as concerns the hunting regime applicable to the woodcock, capercaillie and
         black grouse.
      
So far as concerns the provisions of the Province of Salzburg relating to hunting of the Rackelhahn, as is evident from paragraphs
         to of the present judgment it has not been established that that species falls within the scope of the Directive.
         
      
The complaint relating to hunting of the Rackelhahn in the Province of Salzburg must therefore be dismissed as unfounded.
It follows from the foregoing that the present complaint is well founded as regards the hunting regime of the Province of
         Salzburg in respect of all the species referred to with the exception of the Rackelhahn.
      
–       Province of Tyrol 
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission observes that Paragraph 1(1) of the DurchfVO Tiroler JagdG sets hunting seasons which encroach upon the reproduction
         and rearing periods so far as concerns the capercaillie (the hunting of which is authorised from to May in odd-numbered
         years whereas, according to the Commission, it should be from October to February) and the black grouse (the hunting
         of which is authorised from to May, instead of from September to March), thereby derogating from Article 7(4)
         of the Directive. 
      
The Commission points out that if hunting of the capercaillie and black grouse, which are species under particular threat
         in Austria, were to take place only by way of exception, in accordance with Article of the Directive, it would be necessary
         to ensure compliance with the conditions and criteria for derogation laid down in that provision. 
      
The Republic of Austria refers to its arguments in relation to Carinthia on the regime for springtime hunting of the species
         referred to, which takes place in their mating season (see paragraphs to of the present judgment).
      
It also states that it is difficult to hunt in Tyrol at the end of autumn or in winter and that, in any event, the populations
         of those species are not threatened in this region. 
      
 Findings of the Court
With regard to the scope of the protective regime laid down in Article 7(4) of the Directive, as is apparent from paragraphs
         and of the present judgment that regime extends to the mating season of the capercaillie and black grouse.
      
With regard to the Republic of Austria’s argument regarding the difficulty of engaging in hunting in Tyrol in the autumn and
         winter, suffice it to state that such a consideration cannot be linked to any basis for derogation provided for in Article
         of the Directive.
      
The action is thus well founded in relation to the hunting seasons for capercaillie and black grouse as set in Paragraph 1(1)
         of the DurchfVO Tiroler JagdG.
      
–       Province of Vorarlberg 
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission states that the hunting season set in Paragraph 27(1) of the Vlbg JagdVO is not compatible with the requirements
         laid down in Article 7(4) of the Directive as regards the black grouse. The season was set as being from to May whereas,
         according to the Commission, it should have been from September to March. It is thus during the mating season of the
         species concerned.
      
The Republic of Austria states that for species of game birds – with the exception of the black grouse – the Vlbg JagdVO sets
         hunting seasons consistent with the Directive. It refers in this regard to its arguments concerning transposition of the Directive
         in Carinthia (see paragraphs to of the present judgment).
      
 Findings of the Court
In assessing the merits of the complaint set out by the Commission, it need merely be stated that, as follows from paragraphs
         and of the present judgment, the Republic of Austria has not established that the national legislation covered by
         this complaint satisfies the conditions and criteria for derogation set out in Article of the Directive with regard to the
         specific protective requirements laid down in Article 7(4).
      
The Commission’s complaint relating to the hunting season for black grouse as set in Paragraph 27(1) of the Vlbg JagdVO is
         accordingly well founded.
      
–       Province of Vienna
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission states that Paragraph of the Wiener JagdG in conjunction with Paragraph 1(1) of the Wiener SchonzeitenVO
         sets a hunting season for the woodcock that encroaches upon the reproduction and rearing periods, which are in principle covered
         by a prohibition under Article 7(4) of the Directive, and that reference is not made to the relevant conditions regarding
         derogation which are laid down in Article of the Directive. 
      
The Republic of Austria contends that the hunting regime referred to by this complaint is consistent with the derogation provided
         for in Article 9(1)(c) of the Directive. 
      
 Findings of the Court
Having regard to the case-law recalled in paragraph of the present judgment, it is to be observed that, for the Province
         of Vienna, the Republic of Austria has not advanced evidence or arguments capable of establishing that the conditions and
         criteria set out in Article of the Directive are satisfied, in particular so far as concerns the limitation on birds taken
         to ‘small numbers’, in accordance with Article 9(1)(c), and the lack of another satisfactory solution, in accordance with
         the introductory part of Article 9(1).
      
Consequently, the action must be upheld in relation to the hunting season for the woodcock in the Province of Vienna as set
         by Paragraph of the Wiener JagdG in conjunction with Paragraph 1(1) of the Wiener SchonzeitenVO.
      
 Breach of Article of the Directive in Lower Austria 
–       Arguments of the parties
The Commission submits that Paragraph 20(4) of the Nö NSchG does not contain provisions which specify sufficiently the means
         of hunting prohibited by virtue of Article of the Directive, read in conjunction with Annex IV(a) thereto. There is, on
         the contrary, only a general reference to the means, arrangements or methods authorised for capture or killing. 
      
The Commission contends that, even if the competent authority is under an obligation to act in compliance with the Directive,
         an administrative practice that complies with a directive does not meet the requirements for transposing Community law appropriately.
         
      
The Republic of Austria submits that Paragraph 20(4) of the Nö NSchG, which permits protected animals to be killed on the
         basis of special authorisations, meets the requirements of Article of the Directive. 
      
It considers that, as a result of the legislative technique chosen with regard to the objective pursued by Paragraph 20(4)
         of the Nö NSchG, the protection required by the Directive is ensured. The competent authorities are obliged to prescribe in
         decisions granting special authorisation the means, arrangements or methods for capture or killing whose use is permitted.
         Those authorities must take their decisions in a manner consistent with the Directive and, given the principle that national
         law should be applied uniformly, also in observance of the prohibitions laid down in Paragraph of the Nö JagdG. 
      
–       Findings of the Court
As has been pointed out in paragraph of the present judgment, faithful transposition is particularly important in the case
         of the Directive where management of the common heritage is entrusted to the Member States in their respective territories
         (see Case 236/Commission v Netherlands [1987] ECR 3989, paragraph 5).
      
Consequently, the requirements for correct transposition of the Directive are not met by pleading a practice that complies
         with the Directive. 
      
In particular, in the case of the means, arrangements or methods used for capture or killing, the Member States have the task
         of drawing up, with binding legal force, the list of unlawful practices (see, to this effect, Case 236/Commission v Netherlands, paragraphs and 28). 
      
It is to be added that the prohibitions laid down by the Directive on using certain means of capture when hunting must result
         from legislative provisions. In view of the principle of legal certainty the relevant prohibitions must be reproduced in mandatory
         legal instruments (see, to this effect, Case C-339/Commission v Netherlands [1990] ECR I‑851, paragraph 22).
      
The fact that a practice incompatible with the Directive is not carried on does not release the Member State in question from
         its obligation to adopt laws or regulations in order to ensure that the provisions of the Directive are adequately transposed.
         In addition, the fact that in a Member State a particular means of hunting is unknown does not constitute a reason for not
         transposing that prohibition into national law (see Case C-339/Commission v Netherlands, paragraph 32).
      
Nor can the reference to Paragraph of the Nö JagdG be relevant, given that this Law covers only wild animal species that
         may be hunted, and not all the species of wild birds which fall within the scope of the Directive.
      
Article of the Directive has consequently not been correctly transposed in Lower Austria.
The Commission’s action is thus well founded in this regard.
 Breach of Article 9(1) and (2) of the Directive in Burgenland, Lower Austria, Upper Austria, the Province of Salzburg and
         Tyrol
      
–       Province of Burgenland
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission states that, under Paragraph 88a(1) of the Bgld JagdG, hunting of the European starling is permissible from
         July to November and that, under Paragraph 88a(2), where the appearance of birds of this species in very large numbers
         is anticipated, the need for that measure is established by implementing regulation. This authorisation to adopt a regulation
         does not set out sufficiently the conditions and criteria for derogation that are listed in Article of the Directive. 
      
The Republic of Austria submits that, given the considerable damage which the European starling causes to vines, the Province
         of Burgenland considered it necessary to have recourse to the derogating provision constituted by Article of the Directive
         and to adopt Paragraph 88a of the Bgld JagdG. There is no other satisfactory solution, given that conventional means of driving
         this species away have proved insufficient.
      
–       Findings of the Court
Any measure that derogates from the Directive’s protective provisions must be examined in light of the conditions and criteria
         set out in Article of the Directive. Consequently, the Member States cannot entitle the authority vested with the power
         to make regulations to adopt measures derogating from the protective rules prescribed by the Directive without defining in
         a precise manner the substantive and formal requirements, arising from that article, to which such derogations must be subject
         (see, to this effect, WWF Italia and Others, paragraphs and 28). 
      
Paragraph 88a of the Bgld JagdG neither specifies the means, arrangements or methods authorised for capture or killing nor
         lays down in a binding manner the specific manner in which action may be taken.
      
Under Paragraph 88a(2), it is sufficient for a regulation to establish the existence of a danger for viticulture resulting
         from the presence of European starlings. The regulation to be adopted is not required, on the other hand, to contain specific
         particulars having regard to the criteria laid down in Article 9(2) of the Directive. 
      
Thus, the regime established in Paragraph 88a of the Bgld JagdG regarding the combating of the European starling does not
         satisfy the detailed rules for derogation prescribed in Article of the Directive.
      
The Commission’s complaint is therefore well founded in this regard.
–       Province of Lower Austria
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission submits that the general authorisation granted in Paragraph 20(4) of the Nö NSchG regarding scientific or pedagogical
         activities does not list exhaustively the conditions and criteria to be satisfied in order to be able to derogate from the
         provisions on the protection of wild birds. Moreover, this authorisation is couched in such vague terms that it cannot in
         any event be justified under Article of the Directive. 
      
The Commission further submits that Paragraph 21(2) of that Law also permits derogation from the provisions relating to the
         protection of wild birds, for the purposes of agricultural or silvicultural use, without making this exception subject to
         the conditions and criteria laid down in Article of the Directive. 
      
The Republic of Austria asserts that the protection required by the Directive is ensured in Paragraph 20(4) of the Nö NSchG.
         When applying this provision, the competent authorities must act, first, in accordance with the Directive and, second, with
         a view to uniform application of national law and therefore taking account of the protective requirements laid down by hunting
         law. In any event, only very restrictive derogations are granted in practice. 
      
The Republic of Austria submits that, when use is made of the derogation provided for in Paragraph 20(4) of the Nö NSchG,
         there is also the possibility of applying, where appropriate, criteria more restrictive than those laid down in Article of the Directive. As regards Paragraph 21(2) of the Nö NSchG, this provision expressly lays down that the exemption clauses
         are inapplicable where protected flora, fauna or habitats are deliberately harmed.
      
The Republic of Austria adds that, even though derogations from the hunting regime and from the other restrictions and prohibitions
         laid down in Articles 5, and of the Directive must be founded on at least one of the grounds listed in Article 9(1), regard
         must also be had to the fact that the capture of birds in small numbers is possible provided that the other conditions set
         out in Article are observed. 
      
 Findings of the Court
The ability to derogate from the protective provisions relating to engaging in hunting and from the prohibitions set out in
         Articles 5, and of the Directive is subject, by virtue of Article 9, to a number of conditions and criteria.
      
Also, so far as concerns the fundamental conditions relating to the legal form of the transposition of the Directive, the
         Court has stated that, in order to secure the full implementation of the Directive in law and not only in fact, Member States
         must establish a specific legal framework in the area in question and that the fact that activities incompatible with the
         prohibitions contained in the Directive are unknown in a particular Member State cannot justify the absence of legal provisions
         (see Case C-339/Commission v Netherlands, paragraph 25). 
      
It should be added that the conditions and criteria which the Member States must meet in order to derogate from the prohibitions
         laid down in the Directive have to be reproduced in specific national provisions (see Case C-118/Associazione Italiana per il WWF andOthers [1996] ECR I‑1223, paragraph 22).
      
It follows that the relevant laws or regulations adopted by the Member States must themselves set out exhaustively the grounds
         allowing derogation, where appropriate, from the protective provisions laid down by the Directive.
      
Furthermore, as is pointed out in paragraph of the present judgment, administrative practices consistent with the Directive
         do not meet the requirements for correct transposition.
      
Accordingly, it must be found that, having regard to its wording, Paragraph 20(4) of the Nö NSchG cannot amount to a correct
         transposition of one of the grounds of derogation provided for in Article of the Directive.
      
As regards Paragraph 21(2) of the Nö NSchG, which excludes agricultural and silvicultural use of land from the prohibitions
         regarding the protection of birds, it is to be noted that this provision does not apply where harm to protected flora and
         fauna is caused deliberately.
      
However, the various prohibitions laid down in Article of the Directive which can apply to agricultural or silvicultural
         operations relate to deliberately caused harm. 
      
Consequently, the exceptions laid down in Paragraph 21(2) of the Nö NSchG cannot be subject to Article of the Directive.
It follows from the foregoing that the Commission’s complaint alleging that the legislation of the Province of Lower Austria
         infringes Article 9(1) and (2) of the Directive is well founded so far as concerns Paragraph 20(4) of the Nö NSchG. 
      
On the other hand, the complaint is unfounded in so far as it relates to Paragraph 21(2) of the Nö NSchG.
–       Province of Upper Austria
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission contends that Paragraph 60(3) of the Oö JagdG does not satisfy the conditions and criteria laid down in Article
         of the Directive because the legality of the action authorised by this national provision is not subject to the condition
         that there be no other satisfactory solution. 
      
The Republic of Austria asserts that this national provision is consistent with Community law, given that all substantive
         and formal requirements set out in Article of the Directive are met. The birds referred to in the national provision are
         indeed protected throughout the year and it is always necessary to obtain an authorisation in order to derogate from the system
         of protection established in Paragraph of the Oö JagdG. 
      
The Republic of Austria also states that it is apparent from the preparatory documents in respect of Paragraph 60(3) of the
         Oö JagdG that the legislature of Upper Austria itself examined the conditions and criteria laid down in Article of the Directive.
         
      
The legislature took the view that the powers granted to occupiers to prevent serious damage being caused to crops, cattle
         and other forms of property are justified, since no other satisfactory solution is generally available to occupiers when the
         animals covered enter residential or commercial buildings. 
      
 Findings of the Court
Paragraph 60(3) of the Oö JagdG allows protected birds to be captured or killed and appropriated in order to prevent damage
         ‘to other forms of property’. 
      
Such a ground of derogation does not correspond to the interests whose protection is envisaged in the third indent of Article
         9(1)(a) of the Directive. 
      
In addition, it is apparent from the fourth indent of Article 9(2) of the Directive that the Member State authorities entrusted
         with applying the Directive are required to designate a body which, for each derogating measure envisaged, examines whether
         the conditions required for authorising such a measure obtain, decides in particular on the means, arrangements or methods
         that may be used, and determines the limits of the measure and who may rely on it. 
      
Paragraph 60(3) of the Oö JagdG does not contain such details.
Nor does that provision specify the form of the controls that are provided for in the fifth indent of Article 9(2) of the
         Directive.
      
Finally, as regards the argument to the effect that the competent authorities interpret the national provision consistently
         with the Directive, it need only be recalled, as has already been stated in paragraph of the present judgment, that mere
         administrative practices, which by their nature are alterable at will by the authorities and are not given the appropriate
         publicity, cannot be regarded as constituting fulfilment in accordance with Community law of the obligation to transpose a
         directive owed by the Member States to which it is addressed.
      
Therefore, Paragraph 60(3) of the Oö JagdG is not consistent with Article 9(1) and (2) of the Directive.
The Commission’s action must consequently be upheld in this regard.
–       Province of Salzburg 
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission observes that, under Paragraph 34(1) of the Sbg NSchG, derogations from the protective provisions may be granted
         for the purpose of the production of beverages. It has not been established under which derogation authorised by the Directive
         such a regime could fall. 
      
The Commission also submits that under Paragraph 72(3) of the Sbg JagdG derogations from the prohibition on using traps to
         kill wild animals may be granted without taking account of the conditions and criteria laid down in Article of the Directive.
         Furthermore, a restrictive interpretation of Paragraph 72(3) of the Sbg JagdG is not sufficient in order for those conditions
         and criteria to be satisfied in a legally binding manner. 
      
As regards the production of beverages, referred to in Paragraph 34(1) of the Sbg NSchG, the Republic of Austria submits that
         that provision is not applicable to birds. The derogation in question is intended to allow the production of alcoholic beverages
         from certain plant species. Furthermore, that provision authorises derogations to be granted only if the conditions set out
         in Paragraph 34(3) are met. 
      
The Republic of Austria submits in relation to the use of traps pursuant to Paragraph 72(3) of the Sbg JagdG that the conditions
         for derogation are consistent with the requirements of Article of the Directive.
      
 Findings of the Court
First, Paragraph 34(1) of the Sbg NSchG specifies a ground of derogation connected with the production of beverages which
         is not included in the exhaustive list of grounds set out in Article 9(1) of the Directive.
      
Nor do Paragraph 34(1) and (3) contain any restriction as to the method of implementing the derogation for which Paragraph
         provides. 
      
Second, Paragraph 72(3) of the Sbg JagdG likewise fails to have regard to the fact that the list of the grounds of derogation
         in Article 9(1) of the Directive is exhaustive. Paragraph 72(3) permits the setting of traps inter alia when public interests
         of an importance comparable to that of the prevention of threats to human life or health cannot be protected in another manner.
         
      
Such a ground of derogation is not included in that list.
The present complaint put forward by the Commission must consequently be held well founded.
–       Province of Tyrol 
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission submits that Paragraph 4(3) of the Tiroler NSchVO provides that it is lawful to chase away the crow, the European
         starling and the blackbird from land cultivated for agricultural or silvicultural purposes and from private gardens, without
         reference being made to the conditions and criteria laid down in Article of the Directive. 
      
The Republic of Austria contends that Paragraph 4(3) of the Tiroler NSchVO does not infringe Article of the Directive, on
         the ground that it does not constitute a derogation from Articles 5, and of the Directive. In particular, under Article
         5(d) of the Directive, only disturbance which is significant having regard to the objectives of the Directive is prohibited.
         The chasing away of the three species that is permitted does not have a significant effect of this kind. 
      
The Republic of Austria also states that the system of protection prescribed in Articles 5, and of the Directive and the
         derogating regime laid down in Article 9(1) and (2) relate to deliberate disturbance. 
      
 Findings of the Court
The wording of Paragraph 4(3) of the Tiroler NSchVO excludes, without any limitation, three species of wild birds from the
         system of protection laid down by the Directive where birds of those species are on or near land cultivated for agricultural
         or silvicultural purposes or in or near domestic gardens.
      
This derogation is not accompanied by any reservation as to the manner in which it is to be implemented.
It should be added that, if the species concerned were in fact driven away from all the areas referred to, their habitats
         would be reduced to almost nothing. Accordingly, contrary to the Republic of Austria’s submissions, the resulting disturbance
         is liable to be significant having regard to the protective objectives pursued by the Directive. 
      
In light of these considerations, it is clear that Paragraph 4(3) of the Tiroler NSchVO does not comply with the conditions
         and criteria for derogation set out in Article of the Directive.
      
The complaint set out by the Commission with regard to the Paragraph 4(3) of the Tiroler NSchVO must therefore be upheld.
 Breach of Article of the Directive in Lower Austria
–       Arguments of the parties
The Commission submits that Paragraph 17(5) of the Nö NSchG makes the introduction of species of birds which do not occur
         naturally in the wild state in Lower Austria subject to the condition that this does not cause lasting harm to the native
         natural environment. This condition constitutes a criterion additional to those laid down in Article of the Directive.
      
The Republic of Austria observes that, when Paragraph 17(5) of the Nö NSchG is interpreted consistently with Article of
         the Directive, authorisation to introduce a non-native species into the wild is always refused if that is harmful to local
         fauna and flora. 
      
–       Findings of the Court
First of all, as has been stated in paragraph of the present judgment, the importance of complete and effective protection
         of wild birds throughout the Community, irrespective of the areas they stay in or pass through, causes any national legislation
         which delimits the protection of wild birds by reference to the concept of national heritage to be incompatible with the Directive.
      
Also, Article of the Directive, according to which Member States are to see that any introduction of species of bird which
         do not occur naturally in the wild state in the European territory of the Member States does not prejudice the local flora
         and fauna, establishes a particularly restrictive legal framework as regards the possibility of authorising the introduction
         of such species of bird.
      
Paragraph 17(5) of the Nö NSchG lays down a system of protection which departs in several respects from that set out in Article
         of the Directive. It must therefore be considered not to be consistent with Article 11.
      
With regard to the argument that, in any event, Paragraph 17(5) of the Nö NSchG would be interpreted by the competent national
         authorities in a manner consistent with the Directive, it need merely be noted that, as is apparent from paragraph of
         the present judgment, full implementation of the Directive cannot be guaranteed in such circumstances.
      
Consequently, this final complaint put forward by the Commission must be upheld.
It follows from all of the foregoing considerations that, by failing to transpose correctly
–       Article 1(1) and (2) of the Directive in Burgenland, Carinthia, Lower Austria, Upper Austria and Styria;
–       Article of the Directive in Burgenland, Carinthia, Lower Austria, Upper Austria and Styria;
–       Article 6(1) of the Directive in Upper Austria;
–       Article 7(1) of the Directive in Carinthia, Lower Austria and Upper Austria;
–       Article 7(4) of the Directive in the following provinces and regarding the following species:
–       in Carinthia as regards the capercaillie, black grouse, common coot, woodcock, wood pigeon and collared dove,
–       in Lower Austria as regards the wood pigeon, capercaillie, black grouse and woodcock,
–       in Upper Austria as regards the capercaillie, black grouse and woodcock,
–       in the Province of Salzburg as regards the capercaillie, black grouse and woodcock,
–       in Styria as regards the capercaillie, black grouse and woodcock,
–       in Tyrol as regards the capercaillie and black grouse,
–       in Vorarlberg as regards the black grouse, and
–       in the Province of Vienna as regards the woodcock;
–       Article of the Directive in Lower Austria;
–       Article 9(1) and (2) of the Directive in Burgenland, Lower Austria as regards Paragraph 20(4) of the Nö NSchG, Upper Austria,
         the Province of Salzburg, Tyrol and Styria;
      
–       Article of the Directive in Lower Austria,
the Republic of Austria has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC, Article EC and Article of the Directive.
         
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Republic of Austria has
         been essentially unsuccessful in its pleas relating to the grounds of infringement which remain at issue in the proceedings,
         the Republic of Austria should be ordered to pay the costs relating to those pleas. 
      
As regards the grounds of infringement set out in the application which were withdrawn by the Commission at a subsequent stage
         in the proceedings, it must be stated that the Commission ceased pursuing the complaints concerned as a result of amendments
         to the domestic legal instruments at issue. The withdrawal is accordingly attributable to the defendant, given that the instruments
         were brought into line with the requirements of Community law only belatedly. In accordance with Article 69(5) of the Rules
         of Procedure, the Republic of Austria should therefore also be ordered to bear the costs relating to these grounds of infringement.
         Consequently, the Republic of Austria should be ordered to pay all the costs of the present proceedings.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, by failing to transpose correctly
–       Article 1(1) and (2) of Council Directive 79/409/EEC of April on the conservation of wild birds, in Burgenland, Carinthia,
            Lower Austria, Upper Austria and Styria;
–       Article of Directive 79/in Burgenland, Carinthia, Lower Austria, Upper Austria and Styria;
–       Article 6(1) of Directive 79/in Upper Austria;
–       Article 7(1) of Directive 79/in Carinthia, Lower Austria and Upper Austria;
–       Article 7(4) of Directive 79/in the following provinces and regarding the following species:
–       in Carinthia as regards the capercaillie, black grouse, common coot, woodcock, wood pigeon and collared dove,
–       in Lower Austria as regards the wood pigeon, capercaillie, black grouse and woodcock,
–       in Upper Austria as regards the capercaillie, black grouse and woodcock,
–       in the Province of Salzburg as regards the capercaillie, black grouse and woodcock,
–       in Styria as regards the capercaillie, black grouse and woodcock,
–       in Tyrol as regards the capercaillie and black grouse,
–       in Vorarlberg as regards the black grouse, and
–       in the Province of Vienna as regards the woodcock;
–       Article of Directive 79/in Lower Austria;
–       Article 9(1) and (2) of Directive 79/in Burgenland, Lower Austria as regards Paragraph 20(4) of the Law of Lower Austria
            on Nature Protection (Niederösterreichisches Naturschutzgesetz), Upper Austria, the Province of Salzburg, Tyrol and Styria;
–       Article of Directive 79/in Lower Austria,
the Republic of Austria has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC, Article EC and Article of Directive
            79/409;
2.      Dismisses the action as to the remainder;
3.      Orders the Republic of Austria to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 