
Judgment of the Court (Third Chamber) of July —Kaimer and Others v Commission(Case C-264/P)
Appeal — Competition — Agreements, decisions and concerted practices — Penalty — Copper and copper alloy fittings sector — Probative value of statements made in the context of the leniency policy
1.                     Appeals — Grounds — Review by the Court of the assessment of the facts and evidence — Possible only where the clear sense
            of the evidence has been distorted — Assessment of whether the evidence has been distorted in the context of cartel cases
            (Art. 81(1) EC; Art. TFEU; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 58(1)) (see paras 22-24, 31)
2.                     Appeals — Grounds — Mistaken assessment of the facts — Inadmissibility — Review by the Court of the findings of fact — Possible
            only where the clear sense of the evidence has been distorted — Assessment made by the General Court of the probative value
            of the statements of a leniency applicant — Issue of fact (Art. 81(1) EC; Art. TFEU; Statute of the Court of Justice,
            Art. 58(1)) (see paras 45-47)
3.                     Appeals — Grounds — Necessity of a specific challenge to a point in the General Court’s reasoning (Art. TFEU; Statute
            of the Court of Justice, Art. 58(1); Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, Art. 112(1)(1)(c)) (see para. 61)
4.                     Appeals — Grounds — Plea submitted for the first time in the context of the appeal — Inadmissibility (Rules of Procedure of
            the Court of Justice, Art. 113(2)) (see para. 65)
Re:
Appeal brought against the judgment of the General Court (Eighth Chamber) of March in Case T-379/Kaimer and Others
 v 
Commission
, by which the General Court dismissed in part the appellants’ action for annulment of Commission Decision C(2006) final
                  of September relating to a proceeding under Article of the EC Treaty and Article of the EEA Agreement concerning
                  a cartel in the copper and copper alloy fittings sector or, in the alternative, for a reduction in the fine imposed on the
                  appellants — Distortion of the evidence — Error of assessment regarding the probative value of statements made in the context
                  of the leniency policy — Infringement of Articles and of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union
               
Operative part
The Court: 
1.
	Dismisses the appeal;
2.
	Orders Kaimer GmbH & Co. Holding KG, Sanha Kaimer GmbH & Co. KG and Sanha Italia Srl to pay the costs.
Top  
 