
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-284/Land Brandenburg
v
Ursula Sass
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Bundesarbeitsgericht)
(Social policy – Men and women – Article EC – Equal pay – Directive 76/207/EEC – Equal treatment – Maternity leave – Passage to a higher salary grade – Failure to take account of the whole of a period of maternity leave taken under the legislation of the former German Democratic
         Republic)
      
Summary of the Judgment
Social policy – Men and women – Access to employment and working conditions – Equal treatment – Collective agreement providing
            for classification in a higher salary grade on completion of a qualifying period – Account taken of periods of maternity leave
            – Refusal to take account, because of its duration, of the whole of a period of maternity leave taken under the legislation
            of the former German Democratic Republic – Not permissible
(Council Directive 76/207)
Directive 76/on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women as regards access to employment,
         vocational training and promotion, and working conditions precludes a collective agreement from excluding from a qualifying
         period for access to a higher salary grade the part of the period for which a female worker took maternity leave, under the
         legislation of the former German Democratic Republic, which exceeds the protected period provided for by the legislation of
         the Federal Republic of Germany to which that agreement refers, where the objectives and purpose of both periods of leave
         are the protection of women as regards pregnancy and maternity, as provided for by Article 2(3) of that directive.
      
(see para. 59, operative part)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)November 2004(1)
(Social policy  –  Men and women  –  Article EC  –  Equal pay  –  Directive 76/207/EEC  –  Equal treatment  –  Maternity leave  –  Passage to a higher salary grade  –  Failure to take account of the whole of a period of maternity leave taken under the legislation of the former German Democratic
                  Republic)
               
 In Case C-284/02,REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, from the Bundesarbeitsgericht (Germany), made by decision of March 2002, received at the Court on August 2002, in the proceedings:
            
Land Brandenburg
v
Ursula Sass,
THE COURT (First Chamber),,
 composed of: P. Jann, President of the Chamber, A. Rosas, (Rapporteur),  R. Silva de Lapuerta,  K. Lenaerts and S. von Bahr,
            Judges,
            
 Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed,Registrar:  F. Contet, Principal Administrator,
             having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on March 2004,after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
            
–
 Land Brandenburg, by J. Borck, Rechtsanwalt,
            
–
 Mrs Sass, by T. Becker, Rechtsanwalt,
            
–
 the Commission of the European Communities, by B. Martenczuk and N. Yerrell, acting as Agents,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on April 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article EC and Council Directive 76/207/EEC of
         February on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women as regards access to employment,
         vocational training and promotion, and working conditions (OJ L 39, p. 40).
         
            
 The reference was made in the course of proceedings between Mrs Sass and her employer, the Land of Brandenburg (‘Land Brandenburg’),
         regarding the latter’s failure to take account, in calculating the qualifying period (Bewährungszeit) for classification in
         a higher salary grade, of the entire period of maternity leave taken by Mrs Sass under the legislation of the former German
         Democratic Republic (‘the former GDR’).
         
I – 
Legal background 
 A – The Community legislation 
            
 Article EC lays down the principle of equal pay for male and female workers for equal work or work of equal value.
         
            
 Directive 76/is intended to ensure the elimination of any discrimination on grounds of sex, both as regards working conditions
         and as regards access to employment at all levels of the professional hierarchy, without prejudice to provisions concerning
         the protection of women, particularly as regards pregnancy and maternity. 
         
            
 Council Directive 92/85/EEC of October on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and
         health at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding (OJ L 348, p. 1) lays
         down certain minimum requirements for the protection of such workers.
         
            
 As regards maternity leave, Article of Directive 92/provides for a right to a continuous period of maternity leave of
         at least weeks including compulsory maternity leave of at least two weeks. Moreover, Article of that directive provides
         for maintenance of a payment to, and/or entitlement to an adequate allowance for, workers, in addition to the other rights
         arising from the employment contract during the period of leave under Article 8. 
         
            
 However, it must be observed that the Member States were not required to implement Directive 92/in their national law until
         October at the latest, that is to say, by a date after the events at issue in the case in the main proceedings.
         
 B – The national legislation
            
 The position of women following confinement was governed in the former GDR by the Arbeitsgesetzbuch der Deutschen Demokratischen
         Republik (Labour Code of the German Democratic Republic, ‘AGB-DDR’) of June (GBl. I, p. 85).
         
            
 Under Paragraph of the AGB-DDR, women were entitled to maternity leave for a period of weeks after confinement. For
         the duration of that leave women received a maternity allowance equivalent to their net average earnings from the social insurance
         fund.
         
            
 The position of women following confinement in the Federal Republic of Germany is governed by the Mutterschutzgesetz (‘MuSchG’).
         
            
 The first sentence of Paragraph 6(1) of the MuSchG prohibits the employment of women in the eight weeks following confinement.
         During that period of maternity leave working mothers receive an allowance from their employers as well as a maternity allowance.
         
            
 Paragraph 23a of the Bundes-Angestelltentarifvertrag-Ost (collective agreement for civil servants on a contractual basis in
         the public sector in East Germany) of December (‘BAT-O’) provides as follows regarding promotion following a qualifying
         period:
         ‘Employees … shall be classified in the next higher salary grade after completing the prescribed qualifying period.
          The following shall apply to the completion of the qualifying period:
          1.       The qualification requirement shall be satisfied when employees show themselves capable of meeting the requirements occurring
         during the activity entrusted to them during the prescribed qualifying period. The relevant activity in this context is that
         which corresponds to the salary grade in which employees are classified. …
          4.       The qualifying period must be completed without interruption. Interruptions of not more than six months in each case shall
         not be detrimental; irrespective of this, interruptions on the following grounds shall also not have a detrimental effect:
         …
         (c)     periods of protection pursuant to the [MuSchG]; 
         …
          However, the duration of interruptions, with the exception of
         …
         (e)     periods of protection pursuant to the the [MuSchG]
          shall not count towards the qualifying period.’
         
            
 The BAT-O was amended on May by the first collective agreement amending the BAT-O, which provides, in Paragraph 2,
         for the incorporation of the BAT salary scale according to the following criteria:
         ‘1.     Where job descriptions require qualifying periods, periods of activity, periods in which an occupation is pursued, etc., account
         shall be taken of those periods completed before July and recognised as periods of employment pursuant to Paragraph
         19(1) and (2) of the BAT-O and the pertinent transitional provisions which would have had to be taken into account if section
         VI and the BAT-O salary scale had already been in force before July 1991. …
          Where job descriptions permit account to be taken of periods completed outside the scope of the BAT-O, account shall be taken
         of such periods if they would have had to be taken into account pursuant to the first subparagraph had they been completed
         within the scope of the BAT-O.’
         
II – Factual background and the main proceedings
            
 Mrs Sass, a German national, has been employed since July as a production manager at the Hochschule für Film und Fernsehen
         ‘Konrad Wolf’ (Konrad Wolf Film and Television College) in Potsdam. 
         
            
 According to the case-file, Mrs Sass’ employment relationship was governed by the AGB-DDR at the time of the birth of her
         second child in January 1987. Following her confinement and in accordance with Paragraph of that law, Mrs Sass took maternity
         leave from January to June 1987, in other words  for a period of weeks. 
         
            
 Again according to the case-file, following the reunification of Germany, responsibility for Mrs Sass’ employment relationship
         was transferred to Land Brandenburg. By virtue of an agreement between the parties to that effect the employment relationship
         was therefore governed by the BAT-O. The period of employment completed by Mrs Sass since the date she took up employment,
         that is to say, since July 1982, was taken into account at the time of that transfer.
         
            
 Until May Mrs Sass received the salary commensurate with salary grade IIa of the BAT-O. With effect from May she was reclassified in the higher salary grade, namely grade Ib, case 2. Land Brandenburg counted the first weeks of the
         maternity leave which Mrs Sass had taken under Paragraph of the AGB-DDR towards the qualifying period of years required
         for classification in a higher salary grade under the BAT-O, but not the subsequent weeks. According to the case-file,
         that was because the relevant provision, namely Paragraph 23a(4), third sentence, of the BAT-O only referred to the periods
         of protection provided for by the MuSchG, that is to say, eight weeks, but not the period of maternity leave provided for
         by the AGB-DDR. 
         
            
 Mrs Sass brought an action before the national court of first instance claiming that the whole of the maternity leave, in
         other words weeks, should have been taken into account. She claims that Land Brandenburg’s interpretation of Paragraph
         23a of the BAT-O gave rise to unlawful discrimination against women. She claimed that it should be ordered to pay her the
         difference in salary for the weeks between February 1998, the date on which she would have been entitled to an increase
         in salary if the whole of the period of maternity leave were included in the qualifying period, and May 1998, that is to
         say DEM 841.16, with interest at 4% on the net amount from March 1999.
         
            
 Land Brandenburg contends that the claim should be dismissed. Under the BAT-O only the protected periods provided for by the
         MuSchG, and not the longer maternity leave provided for by Paragraph of the AGB-DDR, should be included in the qualifying
         period.
         
            
 The lower courts granted the claim. The referring court, while taking the view that the BAT-O was consistent with Community
         law, accepts that Mrs Sass is in a worse position than a male colleague because, having taken maternity leave which is exclusively
         available to women, she will not attain the higher salary grade until weeks later than that male colleague does.
         
            
 Against that background,  the referring court decided to stay proceedings and refer the following question to the Court of
         Justice for a preliminary ruling:
         ‘Do Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC) and Directive 76/207/EEC prohibit, in a provision of a collective agreement
         under which periods during which an employment relationship is in abeyance do not count towards the qualifying period, the
         exclusion of the period during which the employment relationship was in abeyance because the employee concerned, on the expiry
         of the eligible eight-week period of protection pursuant to Paragraph of the [MuSchG] …, claimed maternity leave pursuant
         to Paragraph 244(1) of the [AGB-DDR], until the end of the 20th week after confinement?’ 
         
III – Findings of the Court
            
 By its question, the referring court is essentially asking whether Article EC and/or Directive 76/preclude a collective
         agreement such as the BAT-O from excluding from a qualifying period the part of the period for which a female worker took
         maternity leave which was longer than the protected period of eight weeks provided for by the legislation of the Federal Republic
         of Germany to which that agreement refers.
         
            
 Mrs Sass proposes that that question should be answered in the affirmative. Land Brandenburg and the Commission of the European
         Communities contend that it should not. The Commission, in particular, takes the view that Community law is not applicable
         to the case.
         
            
 In that connection, it must be pointed out first that, since the treaty of August on the establishment of German unity
         came into force on October (BGBl. II, p. 889), Community law was applicable on December when the BAT-O
         was adopted. Therefore, the provisions adopted following German reunification to regulate the position of workers who were
         now subject to the legislation of the Federal Republic of Germany must be in line with the relevant Community legislation.
         
         
            
 Second, it must be borne in mind that the Court has already ruled, in connection with Article EC, that since it is mandatory
         in nature, the prohibition on discrimination between men and women applies not only to the action of public authorities but
         also extends to all agreements which are intended to regulate paid labour collectively, as well as to contracts between individuals
         (see, in particular, Case 43/Defrenne v Sabena [1976] ECR 455, paragraph 39; Case C-184/Nimz [1991] ECR I-297, paragraph 11; and Case C-333/Lewen [1999] ECR I-7243, paragraph 26).  As the BAT-O is intended to govern the relations of contract staff with public authorities,
         the same must apply in the context of Directive 76/(see, to that effect, Case C-1/Gerster [1997] ECR I-5253, paragraph 18).
         
            
 Thus the draughtsmen of the BAT-O would have been able to consider the position of women undergoing a transition in their
         employment relationship because of the reunification of Germany as compared with that of male workers also from the former
         GDR.
         
            
 Mrs Sass is therefore quite right to rely on Community law to assert her rights.
         
            
 In order to give a valid answer to the question raised in this case to the referring court it must first be ascertained whether
         the failure to take into account the whole of a period of maternity leave taken under the legislation of the former GDR in
         calculating the qualifying period laid down by the BAT-O, is covered by Article EC or, rather, by Directive 76/207.
         
            
 It is clear from the case-file that the dispute in the main proceedings concerns the qualifying periods to be completed in
         order to be classified in a higher salary grade and the types of interruptions which can be included in such periods by way
         of derogation from the general rule that the qualifying period must be uninterrupted and that authorised periods of interruption
         are not, in any event, included in it.
         
            
 The outcome desired by Mrs Sass is an early promotion to the higher salary grade. The key question, for the purposes of achieving
         that outcome, is whether the whole of her maternity leave can be included in the qualifying period for classification in a
         higher grade, in this case a higher salary grade. Thus, it must be held that, in the present case, the higher salary is simply
         a consequence of the inclusion of that maternity leave in the qualifying period.
         
            
 Accordingly, the provisions at issue in the dispute in the main proceedings lay down the rules concerning a worker’s passage
         to a higher grade following a qualifying period. It follows that the question referred in the case seeks to clarify the conditions
         of access to a higher level of the professional hierarchy and, therefore, falls within the scope of Directive 76/207.
         
            
 It must be observed that, having regard to the principle of equal treatment, that directive recognises the legitimacy of both
         the protection of a woman’s biological condition during and after pregnancy and the protection of the special relationship
         between a woman and her child over the period which follows pregnancy and childbirth (see Case 184/Hofmann [1984] ECR 3047, paragraph 25, and Case C-342/Merino Gómez [2004] ECR I-0000, paragraph 32). 
         
            
 To that end, Article 2(3) of the directive allows national provisions which guarantee women specific rights on account of
         pregnancy and maternity. Maternity leave is covered by that article (see Case C-136/Thibault [1998] ECR I-2011, paragraph 24). 
         
            
 Moreover, the exercise of rights granted to a woman under that Article cannot be made subject to unfavourable treatment regarding
         conditions to be fulfilled in order for her to attain a higher grade in the professional hierarchy. From that point of view,
         Directive 76/is intended to bring about equality in substance rather than in form (see, to that effect, Merino Gómez, paragraph 37, and Thibault, paragraph 26).
         
            
 It follows from the foregoing that a female worker is protected in her employment relationship against any unfavourable treatment
         on the ground that she is or has been on maternity leave.
         
            
 A woman who is treated unfavourably because of absence on maternity leave suffers discrimination on the ground of her pregnancy
         and of that leave. Such conduct constitutes discrimination on the grounds of sex within the meaning of Directive 76/(Case
         C-342/Gillespie and Others [1996] ECR I‑475, paragraph 22; Thibault, paragraphs and 32; and Case C-147/Alabaster, [2004] ECR I-0000, paragraph 47).
         
            
 Against that background, it must be held that Mrs Sass is in a worse position than a male colleague who started work in the
         former GDR on the same day as she did because, having taken maternity leave, she will not attain the higher salary grade until
         weeks after he does.
         
            
 However, the referring court takes as the premiss for its reasoning that the disadvantage suffered by Mrs Sass is not based
         on sex but on the fact that her employment relationship was in abeyance for the weeks in question.
         
            
 In that regard, it must be pointed out that a woman is still linked to her employer by a contract of employment during maternity
         leave (see Gillespie and Others, paragraph 22; Thibault, paragraph 29, and Alabaster, paragraph 47). The way in which a female worker is paid during such leave does not affect that conclusion.
         
            
 The Commission, however, relies on Directive 92/85, in cases where the issue is discrimination on the ground of sex, in order
         to consider the possible effects on rights deriving from a contract of employment of a period of maternity leave longer than
         the minimum period laid down by that directive. In that connection it cites Case C-411/Boyle and Others [1998] ECR I‑6401, paragraph 79, and appears to draw the conclusion that, as the rights of a female worker are liable to
         be affected by a period of maternity leave longer than the minimum laid down by Article of the directive, the weeks which
         Mrs Sass freely decided to take under Paragraph of the AGB-DDR were simply a benefit available to her.
         
            
 That argument cannot be upheld.
         
            
 First, it must be borne in mind that Directive 92/did not have to be implemented by the Member States in their national
         law until October at the latest, in other words by a date after the time of the events in the main proceedings.
         
            
 Second, even if it were permissible to base an argument on that directive, it must be observed that, under its Article 11,
         it provides that, in order to guarantee the protection of pregnant workers, workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding,
         the rights connected with the employment contract must be ensured ‘in the case referred to in Article 8’. Article provides
         for ‘a continuous period of maternity leave of a least weeks’.
         
            
 Therefore, the fact that a piece of legislation grants women maternity leave of more than weeks does not preclude that
         leave from being considered to be maternity leave as referred to in Article of Directive 92/and, therefore, a period
         during which the rights connected with the employment contract must, under Article 11, be ensured.
         
            
 Moreover, the question referred in this case cannot be decided on the basis of whether or not such leave is mandatory. In
         that regard it must be pointed out that, according to Directive 92/85, the prohibition on working relates only to a period
         of at least weeks out of a maternity leave of at least weeks. 
         
            
 Accordingly, the fact that Mrs Sass chose to take the whole weeks’ leave provided for by the AGB-DDR, while the weeks’
         leave provided for by the MuSchG entails a prohibition on working, does not preclude her entire maternity leave from being
         considered to be statutory leave intended to protect a women who has given birth.
         
            
 As regards the judgment in Boyle and Others it must be held that, contrary to the contentions of the Commission, that judgment does not in any way prejudge the answer
         to the question referred in the present case since Boyle concerned additional leave granted by an employer rather than statutory leave.
         
            
 It follows from all the foregoing that, although the national legislation provides for maternity leave to protect a woman’s
         biological condition and the special relationship between a woman and her child over the period which follows pregnancy and
         childbirth, Community law requires that taking such statutory protective leave should interrupt neither the employment relationship
         of the woman concerned nor the application of the rights derived from it and cannot lead to discrimination against that woman.
         
            
 The BAT-O took as its sole reference point the national legislation of the Federal Republic of Germany while the leave at
         issue was taken under the legislation of the former GDR.
         
            
 Finally, therefore, the nature of the leave actually taken by Mrs Sass must be considered in order to determine whether it
         can be regarded as equivalent to a period of protection like that provided for by the MuSchG, intended to protect a woman
         who has given birth.
         
            
 If so, that leave should have been taken into account in the calculation of the qualifying period in the same way as a period
         of protection would be, that is to say, in its entirety. If it were not taken into account, Mrs Sass would be subject to unfavourable
         treatment because of her absence on maternity leave and, therefore, would suffer discrimination on the grounds of sex within
         the meaning of Directive 76/in that she will not attain the higher salary grade until weeks after a male colleague
         who started work in the former GDR on the same day as she did.
         
            
 In that connection, it is significant that it is clear from the answers of the German Government to the written questions
         of the Court that the purpose of the weeks’ maternity leave provided for by Article of the MuSchG and that of the weeks’
         maternity leave provided for by Paragraph of the AGB-DDR taken by Mrs Sass are largely the same. According to that government,
         both of those regimes were intended to ensure the physical recovery of the mother following the birth and to allow her to
         care for her child herself.
         
            
 As the Court has repeatedly held, the objective of Directive 76/and Article 2(3) thereof in particular, is precisely that
         two-fold protection for women (see, in particular, the case-law cited in paragraph of this judgment).
         
            
 Accordingly, it appears that the weeks’ maternity leave provided for by Paragraph of the AGB-DDR had the same objectives
         and the same purpose as the period of protection of weeks, provided for by Article of the MuSchG, and, therefore, the
         weeks’ leave must be considered to be statutory leave intended for the protection of women who have given birth and must
         also count towards a qualifying period for access to a higher salary grade.
         
            
 However, it must be borne in mind that it is not for the Court of Justice to interpret national legislation, as only the national
         court has jurisdiction to do so. In the case of a breach of Directive 76/by legislative provisions introducing discrimination
         contrary to that directive, the national courts are required to set aside that discrimination, using all the means at their
         disposal, and in particular by applying those provisions for the benefit of the class placed at a disadvantage (Case C-187/Kutz-Bauer [2003] ECR I-2741, paragraph 75, and Case C-77/Steinicke [2003] ECR I-9027, paragraph 72). 
         
            
 Accordingly, it is for the national court to ascertain whether, in the light of the facts of the main proceedings, the leave
         taken by Mrs Sass and the period of protection provided for by the BAT-O are equivalent to each other, in terms of their objectives
         and their purpose, so that the whole of the statutory leave taken under the legislation of the former GDR can be counted towards
         the qualifying period required by the BAT-O.
         
            
 However, it must be made clear that neither the mandatory nature of the leave nor the way in which a woman is paid during
         that leave can be a decisive criterion in an examination of the objectives and purpose of each of the two regimes. 
         
            
 Accordingly, if the national court reaches the conclusion that the maternity leave provided for by Paragraph of the AGB-DDR
         is such statutory leave intended to protect women who have given birth, the whole of that leave must be counted towards the
         qualifying period to be completed in order to be classified in a higher salary grade, to prevent a women who has taken such
         leave from being placed in a worse position, because of her pregnancy and her maternity leave, than a male colleague who started
         work in the former GDR on the same day as she did.
         
            
 Having regard to the foregoing considerations, the answer to the question referred should be that Directive 76/precludes
         a collective agreement such as the BAT-O from excluding from a qualifying period the part of the period for which a female
         worker took maternity leave, under the legislation of the former GDR, which exceeds the protected period of eight weeks provided
         for by the legislation of the Federal Republic of Germany to which that agreement refers, where the objectives and purpose
         of both periods of leave are the protection of women as regards pregnancy and maternity, as provided for by Article 2(3) of
         that directive. It is for the national court to ascertain whether those conditions are fulfilled.
         
Costs
            
 Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
         
 On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber), rules as follows:
         Council Directive 76/207/EEC of February on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women
               as regards access to employment, vocational training and promotion, and working conditions precludes a collective agreement
               such as the Bundes-Angestelltentarifvertrag-Ost (collective agreement for civil servants on a contractual basis in the public
               sector in East Germany) from excluding from a qualifying period the part of the period for which a female worker took maternity
               leave, under the legislation of the former German Democratic Republic, which exceeds the protected period of eight weeks provided
               for by the legislation of the Federal Republic of Germany to which that agreement refers, where the objectives and purpose
               of both periods of leave are the protection of women as regards pregnancy and maternity, as provided for by Article 2(3) of
               that directive. It is for the national court to ascertain whether those conditions are fulfilled. Signatures.
      
 –
            
Language of the case: German.
Top  
 