
Case C-435/In the proceedings 
C
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Korkein hallinto-oikeus)
(Judicial cooperation in civil matters – Jurisdiction, recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and matters of parental responsibility – Regulation (EC) No 2201/– Substantive and temporal scope – Definition of ‘civil matters’ – Decision concerning the taking into care and placement of children outside the family home – Public law measures for child protection)
Opinion of Advocate General Kokott delivered on September Judgment of the Court (Grand Chamber), November Summary of the Judgment
1.     Judicial cooperation in civil matters – Jurisdiction, recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and
            matters of parental responsibility – Regulation No 2201/(Council Regulation No 2201/2003, Arts 1(1) and 2(7))
2.     Judicial cooperation in civil matters – Jurisdiction, recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and
            matters of parental responsibility – Regulation No 2201/(Act of Accession of 1994, Joint Declaration No 28; Council Regulation No 2201/2003)
1.     Article 1(1) of Regulation No 2201/concerning jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial
         matters and matters of parental responsibility, repealing Regulation No 1347/2000, as amended by Regulation No 2116/2004,
         is to be interpreted to the effect that a single decision ordering a child to be taken into care and placed outside his original
         home in a foster family is covered by the term ‘civil matters’ for the purposes of that provision, where that decision was
         adopted in the context of public law rules relating to child protection.
      
The term ‘civil matters’ within the meaning of that provision, must be interpreted autonomously. Only the uniform application
         of Regulation No 2201/in the Member States, which requires that the scope of that regulation be defined by Community
         law and not by national law, is capable of ensuring that the objectives pursued by that regulation, one of which is equal
         treatment for all children concerned, are attained. According to the fifth recital of Regulation No 2201/2003, that objective
         can only be safeguarded if all decisions on parental responsibility fall within the scope of that regulation. Parental responsibility
         is given a broad definition in Article 2(7) of the regulation, inasmuch as it includes all rights and duties relating to the
         person or the property of a child which are given to a natural or legal person by judgment, by operation of law or by an agreement
         having legal effect. It is irrelevant in that respect whether parental responsibility is affected by a protective measure
         taken by the State or by a decision which is taken on the initiative of the person or persons with rights of custody.
      
(see paras 46-50, 53, operative part 1)
2.     Regulation No 2201/concerning jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and
         matters of parental responsibility, repealing Regulation No 1347/2000, as amended by Regulation No 2116/2004, is to be interpreted
         as meaning that harmonised national legislation on the recognition and enforcement of administrative decisions on the taking
         into care and placement of persons, adopted in the context of Nordic Cooperation, may not be applied to a decision to take
         a child into care that falls within the scope of that regulation. 
      
Cooperation between the Nordic States on the recognition and enforcement of administrative decisions on the taking into care
         and placement of persons does not appear amongst the exceptions listed exhaustively in Regulation No 2201/2003.
      
Nor is that conclusion invalidated by Joint Declaration No on Nordic Cooperation, annexed to the Treaty concerning the
         conditions of accession of the Republic of Austria, the Republic of Finland and the Kingdom of Sweden and the adjustments
         to the Treaties on which the European Union is founded. According to that declaration, those States which are members of Nordic
         Cooperation and members of the Union have undertaken to continue that cooperation in compliance with Community law. Accordingly,
         that cooperation must respect the principles of the Community legal order. In that regard, a national court which is called
         upon, within the exercise of its jurisdiction, to apply provisions of Community law is under a duty to give full effect to
         those provisions, if necessary refusing of its own motion to apply any conflicting provision of national legislation.
      
(see paras 57, 61, 63-66, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
November (*)
      
(Judicial cooperation in civil matters – Jurisdiction, recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and the matters of parental responsibility
         – Regulation (EC) No 2201/– Substantive and temporal scope – Definition of ‘civil matters’ – Decision concerning the taking into care and placement of children outside the family home – Public law measures for child protection)
      
In Case C‑435/06,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Korkein hallinto-oikeus (Finland), made by decision of October
         2006, received at the Court on October 2006, in the proceedings
      
C
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Rosas and A. Tizzano, Presidents of Chambers, R. Schintgen,
         J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur), R. Silva de Lapuerta, J.‑C. Bonichot, T. von Danwitz and  A. Arabadjiev, Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Ms C, by M. Fredman, asianajaja,
–       the Finnish Government, by A. Guimaraes‑Purokoski, acting as Agent,
–       the German Government, by M. Lumma, acting as Agent,
–       the French Government, by G. de Bergues and A.‑L. During, acting as Agents,
–       the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster, acting as Agent,
–       the Slovak Government, by J. Čorba, acting as Agent,
–       the Swedish Government, by A. Kruse, acting as Agent,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by M. Wilderspin and. P. Aalto, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2007,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Council Regulation (EC) No 2201/of November concerning jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and the matters of parental
         responsibility, repealing Regulation (EC) No 1347/(OJ L 338, p. 1), as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 2116/of December (OJ L 367, p. 1) (‘Regulation No 2201/2003’).
      
The reference was made in the context of an appeal brought by Ms C, the mother of the children A and B, against the decision
         of the Oulun hallinto-oikeus (Administrative Court of Oulu, Finland) confirming the decision of the Finnish police ordering
         the handing over of her children to the Swedish authorities.
      
 Legal context
 Community law
Joint Declaration No on Nordic Cooperation, annexed to the Treaty concerning the conditions of accession of the Republic
         of Austria, the Republic of Finland and the Kingdom of Sweden and the adjustments to the Treaties on which the European Union
         is founded (OJ C 241, p. and OJ L 1, p. 1), provides:
      
‘The Contracting Parties record that Sweden, Finland and Norway, as members of the European Union, intend to continue, in
         full compliance with Community law and the other provisions of the Treaty on European Union, Nordic Cooperation amongst themselves
         as well as with other countries and territories.’
      
Recital in the preamble to Regulation No 2201/is worded as follows:
‘In order to ensure equality for all children, this Regulation covers all decisions on parental responsibility, including
         measures for the protection of the child, independently of any link with a matrimonial proceeding.’
      
Article of that regulation provides:
‘1.      This Regulation shall apply, whatever the nature of the court or tribunal, in civil matters relating to:
…
(b)      the attribution, exercise, delegation, restriction or termination of parental responsibility.
2.      The matters referred to in paragraph 1(b) may, in particular, deal with:
(a)      rights of custody and rights of access;
…
(d)      the placement of the child in a foster family or in institutional care;
…’
Under Article of Regulation No 2201/2003:
‘For the purposes of this Regulation:
(1)      the term “court” shall cover all the authorities in the Member States with jurisdiction in the matters falling within the
         scope of this Regulation pursuant to Article 1;
      
…
(4)      the term “judgment” shall mean … a judgment relating to parental responsibility, pronounced by a court of a Member State,
         whatever the judgment may be called, including a decree, order or decision;
      
…
(7)      the term “parental responsibility” shall mean all rights and duties relating to the person or the property of a child which
         are given to a natural or legal person by judgment, by operation of law or by an agreement having legal effect. The term shall
         include rights of custody and rights of access;
      
…
(9)      the term “rights of custody” shall include rights and duties relating to the care of the person of a child, and in particular
         the right to determine the child’s place of residence;
      
…’
Article 8(1) of that regulation provides:
‘The courts of a Member State shall have jurisdiction in matters of parental responsibility over a child who is habitually
         resident in that Member State at the time the court is seised.’
      
Under Article 16(1)(a) of the regulation:
‘A court shall be deemed to be seised:
(a)      at the time when the document instituting the proceedings or an equivalent document is lodged with the court, provided that
         the applicant has not subsequently failed to take the steps he was required to take to have service effected on the respondent.’
      
Article of Regulation No 2201/is worded as follows:
‘1.      Subject to the provisions of Articles 60, 63, and paragraph of this Article, this Regulation shall, for the Member States,
         supersede conventions existing at the time of entry into force of this Regulation which have been concluded between two or
         more Member States and relate to matters governed by this Regulation.
      
2.      (a)   Finland and Sweden shall have the option of declaring that the Convention of February between Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
         Norway and Sweden comprising international private law provisions on marriage, adoption and guardianship, together with the
         Final Protocol thereto, will apply, in whole or in part, in their mutual relations, in place of the rules of this Regulation.
         Such declarations shall be annexed to this Regulation and published in the Official Journal of the European Union. They may be withdrawn, in whole or in part, at any moment by the said Member States.
      
…’
According to Article of that regulation:
‘1.      The provisions of this Regulation shall apply only to legal proceedings instituted, to documents formally drawn up or registered
         as authentic instruments and to agreements concluded between the parties after its date of application in accordance with
         Article 72.
      
2.      Judgments given after the date of application of this Regulation in proceedings instituted before that date but after the
         date of entry into force of [Council] Regulation (EC) No 1347/[of May on jurisdiction and the recognition and
         enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and in matters of parental responsibility for children of both spouses (OJ
         L 160, p. 19)] shall be recognised and enforced in accordance with the provisions of Chapter III of this Regulation if
         jurisdiction was founded on rules which accorded with those provided for either in Chapter II or in Regulation … No 1347/or in a convention concluded between the Member State of origin and the Member State addressed which was in force when the
         proceedings were instituted.
      
…’
In accordance with Article thereof, Regulation No 2201/‘entered into force on August 2004’ and applied from March
         2005, with the exception of Articles 67, 68, and 70, which applied from August 2004.
      
 The national legal systems
The Swedish Care of Young Persons (Special Provisions) Act (lag med särskilda bestämmelser om vård av unga, SFS No 52)
         lays down measures for the protection of children, such as taking into care and placement against the will of the parents.
         If the health or development of the child is at risk, the social welfare board of the municipality may request the Länsrätt
         (County Administrative Court) to adopt appropriate measures. In urgent cases, that board may itself order those measures,
         subject to their confirmation by the Länsrätt.
      
Under Paragraph 1(1) of the Finnish Law on handing over persons to Iceland, Norway, Sweden or Denmark for the enforcement
         of a decision on taking into care or treatment (laki huoltoa tai hoitoa koskevan päätöksen täytäntöönpanoa varten tapahtuvasta
         luovuttamisesta Islantiin, Norjaan, Ruotsiin tai Tanskaan (761/1970), ‘Law 761/1970’), any person subject to a care or treatment
         measure pursuant to a decision of the authorities in Iceland, Norway, Sweden or Denmark, may, on request with a view to its
         enforcement, be transferred from the Republic of Finland to the State concerned.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
On February 2005, the Social Welfare Board of the town of L (Sweden) ordered the immediate taking into care of the children
         A and B, who were living in that town, with a view to placing them with a foster family. A, born in 2001, and B, born in 1999,
         both have Finnish nationality; A also has Swedish nationality.
      
On March 2005, Ms C, accompanied by her children A and B, took up residence in Finland. Her move to that Member State was
         declared on March 2005. The Finnish authorities registered her new residence on March 2005, with effect from March
         2005.
      
The decision of the Social Welfare Board of the town of L was confirmed on March by the Länsrätten i K län (County
         Administrative Court of K) (Sweden) before which the case had been brought for that purpose on February 2005. That judicial
         confirmation procedure is required under Swedish law in all cases where a child is taken into care without the consent of
         the parents.
      
Having accepted that the case fell within the jurisdiction of the Swedish Courts, the Kammarrätten i M (Administrative Court
         of Appeal of M) (Sweden) dismissed the appeal brought by Ms C against the decision of the Länsrätten i K län.
      
The jurisdiction of the Swedish courts was confirmed, on June 2006, by the Regeringsrätten (Supreme Administrative Court)
         (Sweden).
      
On the same day that the Länsrätten i K län delivered its decision, the Swedish police had requested the Finnish police of
         the town of H, where the two children were staying with their grandmother, to assist them in the enforcement of that decision.
         That request was submitted pursuant to Law 761/1970.
      
By decision of March 2005, the Finnish police ordered the handing over of the children A and B to the Swedish authorities.
         Ms C brought an appeal against that decision before the Oulun hallinto-oikeus, which that court dismissed.
      
Ms C subsequently appealed to the Korkein hallinto-oikeus (Supreme Administrative Court) which considered that an interpretation
         of the scope of Regulation No 2201/was necessary for it to decide the dispute in the main proceedings.
      
Pointing out that decisions on the taking into care and placement of children are governed, in Finland, by public law, the
         Korkein hallinto-oikeus raised the question whether such decisions fell within the definition of ‘civil matters’ in that regulation.
         Moreover, given that, in Finland, child protection necessitates the adoption of not just one decision, but a whole series
         of decisions, that court also raised the question whether the regulation covers both the taking into care and the placement
         of children or solely the placement decision.
      
Against that background, the Korkein hallinto-oikeus decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following questions to the
         Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      (a) Does … Regulation … No 2201/… apply, in a case such as the present, to the enforcement of a public law decision in
         connection with child welfare, relating to the immediate taking into care of a child and his or her placement in a foster
         family outside the home, taken as a single decision, in its entirety;
      
(b)      or solely to that part of the decision relating to placement outside the home in a foster family, having regard to the provision
         in Article 1(2)(d) of the regulation;
      
(c)      and, in the latter case, is … Regulation [No 2201/2003] applicable to a decision on placement contained in one on taking into
         care, even if the latter decision, on which the placement decision is dependent, is itself subject to legislation, based on
         the mutual recognition and enforcement of judgments and administrative decisions that has been harmonised in cooperation between
         the Member States concerned?
      
2.      If the answer to Question 1(a) is in the affirmative, is it possible, given that … Regulation [No 2201/2003] takes no account
         of the legislation harmonised by the Nordic Council on the recognition and enforcement of public law decisions on placement,
         as described above, but solely of a corresponding private law convention, nevertheless to apply this harmonised legislation
         based on the direct recognition and enforcement of administrative decisions as a form of cooperation between administrative
         authorities to the taking into care of a child?
      
3.      If the answer to Question 1(a) is in the affirmative and that to Question is in the negative, does … Regulation [No 2201/2003]
         apply ratio temporis to a case, taking account of Articles and 64(2) of … [R]egulation [No 2201/2003] and the abovementioned harmonised Nordic
         legislation on public law decisions on taking into care, if in Sweden the administrative authorities took their decision both
         on immediate taking into care and on placement with a foster family on February and submitted their decision on immediate
         taking into care to the Länsrätt for confirmation on February 2005, and that court accordingly confirmed the decision on
         March 2005?’
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 Question 1(a)
By this question, the national court asks essentially whether Article 1(1) of Regulation No 2201/is to be interpreted,
         first, as applying to a single decision which orders the immediate taking into care and placement of a child outside the original
         home in a foster family and, second, whether that decision falls within the definition of ‘civil matters’ for the purposes
         of that provision, where it was adopted in the context of rules of public law relating to child protection.
      
As regards the decision to take a child into care, it is necessary to determine whether that decision relates to parental
         responsibility and whether, consequently, it comes within the scope of Regulation No 2201/2003.
      
In that respect, it should be noted that, according to Article 1(1)(b) thereof, Regulation No 2201/is to apply, whatever
         the nature of the court or tribunal, in civil matters relating to the attribution, exercise, delegation, restriction or termination
         of parental responsibility. Moreover, under Article 2(1) of that regulation, the term ‘court’ is to cover all the authorities
         in the Member States with jurisdiction in the matters falling within the scope of the regulation.
      
Under Article 2(7) of that same regulation, ‘parental responsibility’ encompasses all rights and duties relating to the person
         or the property of a child which are given to a natural or legal person by judgment, by operation of law or by an agreement
         having legal effect, including rights of custody and rights of access.
      
Taking a child into care does not feature expressly amongst the matters which, according to Article 1(2) of the regulation,
         relate to parental responsibility.
      
That fact cannot, however, exclude a decision to take a child into care from the scope of Regulation No 2201/2003.
The use of the words ‘in particular’ in Article 1(2) of that regulation implies that the list contained in that provision
         is only to be used as a guide.
      
Moreover, it is clear from Recital in the preamble to Regulation No 2201/that, in order to ensure equality for all
         children, that regulation covers all decisions on parental responsibility, including measures for the protection of the child.
      
A decision to take a child into care, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, is inherently a public act the aim of
         which is to satisfy the need to protect and assist young persons.
      
In addition, it appears from the documents submitted to the Court that, in Finland, taking a child into care has the effect
         of conferring on the social welfare boards of that Member State the power to determine the child’s place of residence. That
         measure is liable to affect the exercise of rights of custody which, according to Article 2(9) of Regulation No 2201/2003,
         specifically include the right to determine that place of residence. Therefore, that power concerns parental responsibility,
         since, according to Article 1(2)(a) of that regulation, rights of custody constitute one of the matters relating to that responsibility.
      
As regards placement, it should be noted that, in accordance with Article 1(2)(d) of Regulation No 2201/2003, the placement
         of the child in a foster family or in institutional care is one of the matters relating to parental responsibility.
      
As the Advocate General stated at point of her Opinion, taking into care and placement are closely linked acts in the sense,
         first, that the decision to take into care can be adopted separately only as an interim measure and, secondly, that the placement
         of a child against the will of the parents is possible only after that child has been taken into care by the competent authority.
      
In those circumstances, the exclusion of a decision to take a child into care from the scope of Regulation No 2201/would
         be likely to undermine the effectiveness of that regulation in Member States in which the protection of children, including
         their placement, requires the adoption of several decisions. Moreover since, in other Member States, such protection is afforded
         by means of a single decision, there is a risk that the equal treatment of the children concerned would be compromised.
      
It must be ascertained whether Regulation No 2201/applies to decisions to take into care and place a child that are governed
         by public law.
      
Article 1(1) of Regulation No 2201/sets out the principle that the scope of that regulation is confined to ‘civil matters’
         without, however, defining the content and scope of that term.
      
In the context of the Convention of September on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial
         Matters (OJ L 304, p. 36), as amended by the Convention of October on the Accession of the Kingdom of Denmark,
         Ireland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (OJ L 304, p. 1, and – amended version – p. 77),
         by the Convention of October on the Accession of the Hellenic Republic (OJ L 388, p. 1) and by the Convention
         of May on the Accession of the Kingdom of Spain and the Portuguese Republic (OJ L 285, p. 1) and by the Convention
         of November on the Accession of the Republic of Austria, the Republic of Finland and the Kingdom of Sweden (OJ C 15, p. 1) (‘the Brussels Convention’), the Court has been called upon to interpret the term ‘civil and commercial matters’
         included in the first sentence of the first paragraph of Article of that convention.
      
The Court has repeatedly held that, in order to ensure, as far as possible, that the rights and obligations which derive from
         the Brussels Convention for the Contracting States and the persons to whom it applies are equal and uniform, the terms of
         the provision should not be interpreted as a mere reference to the internal law of one or other of the States concerned. ‘Civil
         and commercial matters’ must be regarded as an independent concept to be interpreted by referring, first, to the objectives
         and scheme of the Brussels Convention and, second, to the general principles which stem from the corpus of the national legal
         systems (see Case C‑292/Lechouritou and Others [2007] ECR I‑0000, paragraph and the case‑law cited).
      
The Swedish Government accepts, like the appellant in the main proceedings, the other Member States which submitted observations
         and the Commission of the European Communities, that ‘civil matters’ within the meaning of Article 1(1) of Regulation No 2201/must also be interpreted autonomously in Community law, but contends that a decision to take into care and place a child,
         which involves the exercise of public powers, does not fall within the scope of that regulation.
      
In support of that argument, the Swedish Government relies on the case‑law of the Court according to which, although certain
         actions between a public authority and a person governed by private law may come within the scope of the Brussels Convention,
         it is otherwise where the public authority is acting in the exercise of its public powers (Case C‑167/Henkel [2002] ECR I‑8111, paragraphs and 30, and Case C‑266/Préservatrice foncière TIARD [2003] ECR I-4867, paragraph 22).
      
According to the Swedish Government, it is difficult to imagine a decision arising more manifestly from the exercise of public
         powers than a decision requiring that a child be taken into care, which could, in certain circumstances, even result in that
         child being deprived of his liberty.
      
That interpretation of Article 1(1) of Regulation No 2201/cannot be accepted.
Since the term ‘civil matters’ is to be interpreted with regard to the objectives of Regulation No 2201/2003, if decisions
         on the taking into care and placement of a child, which in some Member States are governed by public law, were for that reason
         alone to be excluded from the scope of that regulation, the very purpose of mutual recognition and enforcement of decisions
         in matters of parental responsibility would clearly be compromised. In that context, it should be noted that it is apparent
         from Articles 1(1) and 2(1) of Regulation No 2201/that neither the judicial organisation of the Member States nor the
         conferral of powers on administrative authorities can affect the scope of that regulation or the interpretation of ‘civil
         matters’.
      
Consequently, the term ‘civil matters’ must be interpreted autonomously.
Only the uniform application of Regulation No 2201/in the Member States, which requires that the scope of that regulation
         be defined by Community law and not by national law, is capable of ensuring that the objectives pursued by that regulation,
         one of which is equal treatment for all children concerned, are attained.
      
According to Recital in the preamble to Regulation No 2201/2003, that objective can only be safeguarded if all decisions
         on parental responsibility fall within the scope of that regulation.
      
Parental responsibility is given a broad definition in Article 2(7) of the regulation, inasmuch as it includes all rights
         and duties relating to the person or the property of a child which are given to a natural or legal person by judgment, by
         operation of law or by an agreement having legal effect.
      
As the Advocate General pointed out at point of her Opinion, in this regard it does not matter whether parental responsibility
         is affected by a protective measure taken by the State or by a decision which is taken on the initiative of the person or
         persons with rights of custody.
      
The term ‘civil matters’ must be interpreted as capable of extending to measures which, from the point of view of the legal
         system of a Member State, fall under public law.
      
That interpretation is, moreover, supported by Recital in the preamble to Regulation No 2201/2003, according to which that
         regulation is not intended to apply ‘to matters relating to social security, public measures of a general nature in matters
         of education or health …’ Those exceptions confirm that the Community legislature did not intend to exclude all measures falling
         under public law from the scope of the regulation.
      
In the light of the foregoing considerations, the answer to Question 1(a) must be that Article 1(1) of Regulation No 2201/is to be interpreted to the effect that a single decision ordering that a child be taken into care and placed outside his
         original home in a foster family is covered by the term ‘civil matters’, for the purposes of that provision, where that decision
         was adopted in the context of public law rules relating to child protection.
      
 Question 1(b) and (c)
These questions were raised by the national court only in the event that, in its answer to Question 1(a), the Court interpreted
         the term ‘civil matters’ within the meaning of Article 1(1) of Regulation No 2201/as not including a single decision
         ordering that a child be taken into care and placed outside his original home in a foster family, where that decision was
         adopted in the context of public law rules relating to child protection.
      
In the light of the answer to Question 1(a), it is not necessary to answer Questions 1(b) and (c).
 Question By this question, the national court asks essentially whether Regulation No 2201/is to be interpreted as meaning that
         harmonised national legislation on the recognition and enforcement of administrative decisions on taking into care and placement
         of persons, adopted in the context of cooperation between the Nordic States, can be applied to a decision to take a child
         into care which falls within the scope of that legislation, where the latter does not make provision for it.
      
In that regard, it should be pointed out that, according to settled case‑law, a national court which is called upon, within
         the exercise of its jurisdiction, to apply provisions of Community law is under a duty to give full effect to those provisions,
         if necessary refusing of its own motion to apply any conflicting provision of national legislation (see, inter alia, Case
         106/Simmenthal [1978] ECR 629, paragraphs to 24; Case C‑213/Factortame and Others [1990] ECR I‑2433, paragraphs to 21; and Case C‑119/Lucchini [2007] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 61).
      
In accordance with Article 59(1) thereof, Regulation No 2201/is to supersede, for the Member States, the conventions
         concluded between them which relate to matters governed by the regulation.
      
Under Article 59(2)(a) of the regulation ‘Finland and Sweden shall have the option of declaring that the Convention of February
         between Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden comprising international private law provisions on marriage, adoption
         and guardianship, together with the Final Protocol thereto, will apply, in whole or in part, in their mutual relations, in
         place of the rules of this Regulation.’
      
This is the only provision derogating from the rule set out in paragraph of this judgment. It is, as such, to be interpreted
         strictly.
      
Cooperation between the Nordic States on the recognition and enforcement of administrative decisions on the taking into care
         and placement of persons does not appear amongst the exceptions listed exhaustively in Regulation No 2201/2003.
      
Harmonised national legislation, such as Law 761/1970, cannot therefore be applied to a decision to take into care and place
         a child that falls within the scope of Regulation No 2201/2003.
      
That conclusion is not invalidated by Joint Declaration No on Nordic Cooperation.
According to that declaration, those States which are members of Nordic Cooperation and members of the Union have undertaken
         to continue that cooperation, in compliance with Community law.
      
Accordingly, that cooperation must respect the principles of the Community legal order.
The answer to Question must therefore be that Regulation No 2201/is to be interpreted as meaning that harmonised national
         legislation on the recognition and enforcement of administrative decisions on the taking into care and placement of persons,
         adopted in the context of Nordic Cooperation, may not be applied to a decision to take a child into care that falls within
         the scope of that regulation.
      
 Question By this question, the national court asks essentially whether Regulation No 2201/is to be interpreted as applying ratione temporis in a case such as that in the main proceedings.
      
It is clear from Articles 64(1) and of Regulation No 2201/that the regulation applies only to legal proceedings instituted,
         to documents formally drawn up or registered as authentic instruments and to agreements concluded between the parties after
         March 2005.
      
Moreover, Article 64(2) of that regulation provides that ‘[j]udgments given after the date of application of this Regulation
         in proceedings instituted before that date but after the date of entry into force of Regulation … No 1347/shall be recognised
         and enforced in accordance with the provisions of Chapter III of this Regulation if jurisdiction was founded on rules which
         accorded with those provided for either in Chapter II or in Regulation … No 1347/or in a convention concluded between
         the Member State of origin and the Member State addressed which was in force when the proceedings were instituted’.
      
In a case such as that in the main proceedings, Regulation No 2201/applies only if the three cumulative conditions listed
         in the preceding paragraph of this judgment are fulfilled.
      
As regards the first of those conditions, it should be noted that, according to the national court, which alone has jurisdiction
         to assess the facts of the case in the main proceedings, the decision the enforcement of which is at issue in the main proceedings
         is that of the Länsrätten i K län of March 2005. It was therefore delivered after the date on which Regulation No 2201/came into force.
      
With regard to the second condition laid down, it appears from the order for reference that the procedure for taking the children
         A and B into care was initiated ‘in autumn 2004’, in other words before Regulation No 2201/applied but after the entry
         into force of Regulation No 1347/2000, which, pursuant to Article thereof, was on March 2001. It is for the national
         court to verify whether that was actually the case.
      
As regards the third condition referred to in paragraph of this judgment, the following observations must be made.
In accordance with Article 8(1) of Regulation No 2201/2003, the courts of a Member State are to have jurisdiction in matters
         of parental responsibility over a child who is habitually resident in that Member State at the time the court is seised.
      
By decision of June 2006, the Regeringsrätten confirmed, on the basis of national law, the jurisdiction of the Swedish
         courts in the case. That court was of the view that, at the date when the social welfare board initiated an inquiry into the
         family situation of the children A and B, they were resident in Sweden, within the geographical jurisdiction of the Länsrätten
         i K län.
      
It follows that, for the purposes of Article 64(2) of Regulation No 2201/2003, the rules of jurisdiction applied on the basis
         of national law accord with those provided for by that regulation. Consequently, the third condition laid down is fulfilled.
      
In view of the foregoing, the answer to Question must be that, subject to the factual assessment, which is a matter for
         the national court alone, Regulation No 2201/must be interpreted as applying ratione temporis in a case such as that in the main proceedings.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article 1(1) of Council Regulation (EC) No 2201/of November concerning jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement
            of judgments in matrimonial matters and the matters of parental responsibility, repealing Regulation (EC) No 1347/2000, as
            amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 2116/of December 2004, is to be interpreted to the effect that a single decision
            ordering a child to be taken into care and placed outside his original home in a foster family is covered by the term ‘civil
            matters’ for the purposes of that provision, where that decision was adopted in the context of public law rules relating to
            child protection.
2.      Regulation No 2201/2003, as amended by Regulation No 2116/2004, is to be interpreted as meaning that harmonised national legislation
            on the recognition and enforcement of administrative decisions on the taking into care and placement of persons, adopted in
            the context of Nordic Cooperation, may not be applied to a decision to take a child into care that falls within the scope
            of that regulation.
3.      Subject to the factual assessment which is a matter for the national court alone, Regulation No 2201/2003, as amended by Regulation
            No 2116/2004, is to be interpreted as applying ratione temporis in a case such as that in the main proceedings.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Finnish.
      
Top  
 