
Case C-279/CEPSA Estaciones de Servicio SA
v
LV Tobar e Hijos SL
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Audiencia Provincial de Madrid)
(Competition – Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Agreements between undertakings – Article EC – Regulation (EEC) No 1984/– Articles to – Regulation No 2790/– Article 4(a) – Exclusive supply contract for petroleum products between a service‑station operator and an oil company – Exemption)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Competition – Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Agreements between undertakings – Meaning – Agreement for the
            exclusive distribution of motor-vehicle and other fuels concluded between a supplier and a service-station operator 
(Art. 81(1) EC)
2.        Competition – Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Prohibited – Block exemption – Exclusive purchasing agreements
            – Regulation No 1984/– Agreement for the exclusive distribution of motor-vehicle and other fuels concluded between a supplier
            and a service-station operator – Maximum duration – Conditions 
(Commission Regulation No 1984/83, as amended by Regulation No 1582/97, Arts and 12(1)(c))
3.        Competition – Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Prohibited – Block exemption – Exclusive purchasing agreements
            – Agreement concluded under Regulation No 1984/– Provisions applicable after the entry into force of Regulation No 2790/(Commission Regulations No 1984/83, as amended by Regulation No 1582/97, and No 2790/1999, Arts 3(1), 5(a), and 12)
4.        Competition – Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Prohibited – Block exemption – Exclusive purchasing agreements
            – Regulation No 1984/83– Agreement for the exclusive distribution of motor-vehicle and other fuels concluded between a supplier
            and a service-station operator – Fixing of retail price by the supplier – Not included 
(Commission Regulations No 1984/83, as amended by Regulation No 1582/97, Arts 10, 11, and 13, and No 2790/1999)
5.        Competition – Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Prohibited – Block exemption – Vertical agreements – Regulation
            No 2790/– Fixing of a maximum sale price – Conditions 
(Commission Regulation No 2790/1999, Arts and 4(a))
6.        Competition – Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Agreements between undertakings – Automatic nullity
(Art. 81(1) and (2) EC)
1.        An exclusive supply contract for petroleum products between a service‑station operator and a supplier is capable of falling
         within the scope of Article 81(1) EC where, first, it constitutes an agreement between undertakings because the service‑station
         operator assumes, in a non‑negligible proportion, one or more financial and commercial risks linked to the sale of those products
         to third parties, so that he is regarded as an independent economic operator and where, second, that contract contains clauses
         capable of infringing competition, such as that relating to the fixing of the retail price, which is explicitly prohibited
         by Article 81(1)(a) EC, to the extent to which all the other conditions for the application of that provision are satisfied.
         
      
If the service‑station operator does not assume such risks or assumes only a negligible share of them, he does not become
         an independent economic operator when selling fuel to third parties, since the relationship between the operator and the supplier
         is then identical to that between an agent and his principal. In that hypothesis, only the obligations imposed on the service-station
         operator concerning the sale of the goods to third parties on behalf of the supplier, including the fixing of the retail price,
         fall outside the scope of Article 81(1) EC. By contrast, the obligations imposed on the operator in the context of services
         as an intermediary offered by the operator to the supplier, which concern their relationship as independent economic operators,
         are capable of falling within the scope of that provision. That is the case with exclusivity and non‑competition clauses,
         which are capable of infringing the competition rules in so far as they entail locking up the market concerned. 
      
(see paras 35, 40-42, 44, operative part 1)
2.        An exclusive supply contract for petroleum products between a service‑station operator and a supplier is capable of benefiting
         from a block exemption provided for in Regulation No 1984/on the application of Article 85(3) of the Treaty (now Article
         81(1) EC) to categories of exclusive purchasing agreements, as amended by Regulation No 1582/97, if it complies with the maximum
         duration of years referred to in Article 12(1)(c) and if the supplier grants the service‑station operator, in return for
         exclusivity, substantial commercial advantages which contribute to an improvement in distribution, facilitate the establishment
         or modernisation of the service station and lower the distribution costs. 
      
(see paras 49, 54, 60, operative part 2)
3.        If the period of performance of an exclusive purchasing agreement concluded under Regulation No 1984/extends beyond the
         expiry date of that regulation, on December 1999, the exemption provided for in that regulation continues to apply until
         May pursuant to Regulation No 2790/on the application of Article 81(3) EC to categories of vertical agreements
         and concerted practices. Such an agreement then benefits from the exemption provided for in Regulation No 2790/from its
         date of application, on June 2000, on condition that the market share held by the supplier does not exceed 30% of the relevant
         market on which it sells the contract goods or services and that the duration of the direct or indirect non-compete obligations
         is not indefinite or does not exceed five years, since a non-compete obligation which is tacitly renewable beyond a period
         of five years is to be deemed to have been concluded for an indefinite duration. However, a transitional period, during which
         the prohibition laid down in Article 81(1) EC does not apply, runs until December in respect of agreements in force
         on May which satisfied the conditions for exemption provided for in Regulation No 1984/83, but not those provided
         for in Regulation No 2790/1999. 
      
(see paras 56-60)
4.        Articles to of Regulation No 1984/on the application of Article 85(3) of the Treaty (now Article 81(1) EC) to categories
         of exclusive purchasing agreements, as amended by Regulation No 1582/97, must be interpreted as precluding the application
         of the block exemption to an exclusive supply contract which provides for the fixing of the retail price by the supplier,
         since such an obligation is not amongst those listed exhaustively in Article of Regulation No 1984/and which, in addition
         to an exclusivity clause, can be imposed on the reseller. 
      
The questions whether, first, it is possible for the supplier to amend unilaterally the clause governing the fixing of the
         price in order to bring it into line with the competition rules and, second, whether, in that case, the contract may become
         valid, are matters to be decided under the national law applicable to such a contract. If a unilateral amendment is permissible,
         the conditions for exemption must be examined in the light of the legislation in force at the time of such an amendment. 
      
(see paras 63, 65, 67-68, 75-76, operative part 3)
5.        The exemption provided for in Article of Regulation No 2790/on the application of Article 81(3) EC to categories of
         vertical agreements and concerted practices is not to apply, according to Article 4(a) of that regulation, to vertical agreements
         which have as their object the restriction of the buyer’s ability to determine its sale price, without prejudice to the possibility
         of the supplier’s imposing a maximum sale price or recommending a sale price, provided that they do not amount to a fixed
         or minimum sale price as a result of pressure from, or incentives offered by, any of the parties.
      
As regards the fixing of a maximum sale price, it is for the referring court to examine whether it is genuinely possible for
         the reseller to lower that sale price, taking account of all the contractual obligations in their economic and legal context,
         and the conduct of the parties to the main proceedings. In particular, it is necessary to ascertain whether the retail price
         is not, in reality, fixed by indirect or concealed means, such as the fixing of the margin of the reseller, threats, intimidation,
         warnings, penalties or incentives.
      
(see paras 69-71)
6.        The automatic nullity provided for in Article 81(2) EC affects a contract in its entirety only if the clauses which are incompatible
         with Article 81(1) EC are not severable from the contract itself. Otherwise, the consequences of the nullity, in respect of
         all the other parts of the contract, are not a matter for Community law.
      
(see paras 78-80, operative part 4)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
September (*)
      
(Competition – Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Agreements between undertakings – Article EC – Regulation (EEC) No 1984/– Articles to – Regulation No 2790/– Article 4(a) – Exclusive supply contract for petroleum products between a service‑station operator and an oil company – Exemption)
In Case C‑279/06,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Audiencia Provincial de Madrid (Spain), made by decision
         of June 2006, received at the Court on June 2006, in the proceedings 
      
CEPSA Estaciones de Servicio SA
v
LV Tobar e Hijos SL,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of A. Rosas, President of the Chamber, U. Lõhmus (Rapporteur), J. Klučka, A. Ó Caoimh and P. Lindh, Judges,
Advocate General: P. Mengozzi,
Registrar: C. Strömholm, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on June 2007,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        CEPSA Estaciones de Servicio SA, by A. Martínez Sánchez, J. Folguera Crespo and F. Lorente Hurtado, abogados,
–        LV Tobar e Hijos SL, by A. Hernández Pardo, M. Gaitán Luján and S. Beltrán Ruiz, abogados,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by K. Mojzesowicz, E. Gippini Fournier and F. Castillo de la Torre, acting as
         Agents,
      
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2008,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling relates to the interpretation of Article EC and Articles to of Commission
         Regulation (EEC) No 1984/of June on the application of Article [81](3) of the Treaty to categories of exclusive
         purchasing agreements (OJ L 173, p. 5), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1582/of July (OJ L 214, p. 27) (‘Regulation No 1984/83’). 
      
The reference has been made in the course of proceedings between CEPSA Estaciones de Servicio SA (‘CEPSA’), appellant in the
         main proceedings, and LV Tobar e Hijos SL (‘Tobar’), respondent in the main proceedings, regarding the non‑performance by
         Tobar of the exclusive purchasing agreement concluded between those two companies. 
      
 Community legislation
Regulation No 1984/excluded from the scope of Article 85(1) of the EC Treaty (now Article 81(1) EC) certain categories
         of exclusive purchasing agreements and concerted practices regarded as normally satisfying the conditions laid down in paragraph
         of that article, on the ground that they led in general to an improvement in distribution. 
      
Recitals 5, 6, 13, and in the preamble to that regulation were worded as follows: 
      
‘(5)      … the exclusive purchasing agreements defined in this Regulation lead in general to an improvement in distribution; … they
         enable the supplier to plan the sales of his goods with greater precision and for a longer period and ensure that the reseller’s
         requirements will be met on a regular basis for the duration of the agreement; … this allows the parties to limit the risk
         to them of variations in market conditions and to lower distribution costs;
      
(6)      … such agreements also facilitate the promotion of the sales of a product and lead to intensive marketing because the supplier,
         in consideration for the exclusive purchasing obligation, is as a rule under an obligation to contribute to the improvement
         of the structure of the distribution network, the quality of the promotional effort or the sales success; … at the same time,
         they stimulate competition between the products of different manufacturers; … the appointment of several resellers, who are
         bound to purchase exclusively from the manufacturer and who take over sales promotion, customer services and carrying of stock,
         is often the most effective way, and sometimes the only way, for the manufacturer to penetrate a market and compete with other
         manufacturers already present; …;
      
…
(13)      … [beer supply contracts and service‑station contracts] are generally distinguished by the fact that, on the one hand, the
         supplier confers on the reseller special commercial or financial advantages by contributing to his financing, granting him
         or obtaining for him a loan on favourable terms, equipping him with a site or premises for conducting his business, providing
         him with equipment or fittings, or undertaking other investments for his benefit and that, on the other hand, the reseller
         enters into a long-term exclusive purchasing obligation which in most cases is accompanied by a ban on dealing in competing
         products;
      
…
(15)      … the commercial and financial advantages conferred by the supplier on the reseller make it significantly easier to establish,
         modernise, maintain and operate premises used for the sale and consumption of drinks and service stations; …;
      
…
(17)      … the exclusive purchasing obligation for lubricants and related petroleum‑based products can be accepted only on condition
         that the supplier provides for the reseller or finances the procurement of specific equipment for the carrying out of lubrication
         work; …’
      
The special provisions in respect of agreements concluded with service-station operators (‘service‑station agreements’) were
         laid down in Articles to of Regulation No 1984/83. 
      
Under Article of that regulation:
      
‘Pursuant to Article 85(3) of the Treaty and subject to Articles to of this Regulation, it is hereby declared that Article
         85(1) of the Treaty shall not apply to agreements to which only two undertakings are party and whereby one party, the reseller,
         agrees with the other, the supplier, in consideration for the according of special commercial or financial advantages, to
         purchase only from the supplier, an undertaking connected with the supplier or another undertaking entrusted by the supplier
         with the distribution of his goods, certain petroleum-based motor-vehicle fuels or certain petroleum-based motor-vehicle and
         other fuels specified in the agreement for resale in a service station designated in the agreement.’
      
Article of that regulation provided: 
      
‘Apart from the obligation referred to in Article 10, no restriction on competition shall be imposed on the reseller other
         than: 
      
(a)      the obligation not to sell motor-vehicle fuel and other fuels which are supplied by other undertakings in the service station
         designated in the agreement;
      
(b)      the obligation not to use lubricants or related petroleum-based products which are supplied by other undertakings within the
         service station designated in the agreement where the supplier or a connected undertaking has made available to the reseller,
         or financed, a lubrication bay or other motor-vehicle lubrication equipment;
      
(c)      the obligation to advertise goods supplied by other undertakings within or outside the service station designated in the agreement
         only in proportion to the share of these goods in the total turnover realised in the service station; 
      
(d)      the obligation to have equipment owned by the supplier or a connected undertaking or financed by the supplier or a connected
         undertaking serviced by the supplier or an undertaking designated by him.’
      
Article of Regulation No 1984/set out the clauses and contractual obligations which precluded the application of Article
         10, including the fact that the agreement had been concluded for an indefinite duration or for a period of more than years.
         
      
Article of that regulation provided that Articles 2(1) and (3), 3(a) and (b), and were to apply mutatis mutandis to service‑station agreements. 
      
Regulation No 1984/expired on December 1999. On January Commission Regulation (EC) No 2790/of December
         on the application of Article 81(3) of the Treaty to categories of vertical agreements and concerted practices (OJ L 336, p. 21) entered into force.
      
Article 3(1) of Regulation No 2790/provides:
      
‘Subject to paragraph of this Article, the exemption provided for in Article shall apply on condition that the market
         share held by the supplier does not exceed 30% of the relevant market on which it sells the contract goods or services.’
      
Article of that regulation provides that the exemption from the prohibition laid down in Article 81(1) EC ‘shall not apply
         to vertical agreements which, directly or indirectly, in isolation or in combination with other factors under the control
         of the parties, have as their object:
      
(a)      the restriction of the buyer’s ability to determine its sale price, without prejudice to the possibility of the supplier’s
         imposing a maximum sale price or recommending a sale price, provided that they do not amount to a fixed or minimum sale price
         as a result of pressure from, or incentives offered by, any of the parties;
      
…’
Under Article 5(a) of that regulation, the exemption provided for in Article thereof does not apply to any direct or indirect
         non-compete obligation, the duration of which is indefinite or exceeds five years. A non-compete obligation which is tacitly
         renewable beyond a period of five years is to be deemed to have been concluded for an indefinite duration. 
      
Pursuant to Article of Regulation No 2790/1999, the exemption provided for in inter alia Regulation No 1984/was to continue
         to apply until May 2000. The prohibition laid down in Article 81(1) EC did not apply, during the period from June to December 2001, in respect of agreements already in force on May which did not satisfy the conditions for exemption
         provided for in Regulation No 2790/but which satisfied those provided for in Regulation No 1984/83.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
On February 1996, the parties to the main proceedings concluded a ‘contract with a service station for use of brand name
         and image, technical and commercial assistance and supply on a commission‑agent basis’ (‘the contract at issue in the main
         proceedings’). 
      
Pursuant to that contract, Tobar undertook to purchase exclusively from CEPSA motor‑vehicle and other fuels, as well as lubricants
         and other related products (‘petroleum products’), for resale in its service station in accordance with the retail prices,
         conditions and sales and business methods stipulated by that supplier. The contract was concluded for a period of years,
         which could be extended for successive five‑year periods by express agreement in writing on notice of at least six months.
         The exclusive purchasing obligation in respect of those products was accompanied by a non‑competition clause which prohibited
         Tobar from selling or promoting competing products or from participating in such campaigns, both inside its service station
         and in the surrounding area. 
      
Tobar was required to pay CEPSA the price of the petroleum products within nine days from the date of their delivery to the
         service station. Tobar was also required to take out and present, on the date of the first delivery, a bank guarantee for
         a total amount equivalent to days’ supply, which could be enforced by CEPSA if Tobar should fail to pay on time. If enforcement
         of that guarantee were necessary, Tobar would then be required to pay for supplies in advance. Tobar received, by way of remuneration,
         the market commission in force for each service station. The payments to CEPSA, determined on the basis of the number of litres
         delivered to the service station, were made by deducting from the retail price fixed by CEPSA, including value added tax (‘VAT’),
         the amount of the commission, including VAT. 
      
As regards the clauses relating to the allocation of costs and risks, it is apparent from the order for reference that Tobar
         was obliged to assume the risks associated with the petroleum products as soon as they were received from the supplier in
         the storage tanks, including the risk of discrepancies in volume, and to keep them in the conditions necessary to ensure that
         they underwent no loss or deterioration. Tobar was liable, both to the supplier and to third parties, for any loss, contamination
         or adulteration which might affect the quality of those products and for any damage caused by them. Moreover, Tobar guaranteed
         and was responsible for customers who had signed up, through Tobar, for the use of the CEPSA CARD credit card or who had been
         allowed direct credit. It also contributed to the financing of a small proportion of the costs relating to use of the CEPSA
         loyalty card.
      
For its part, CEPSA bore the cost of transporting the petroleum products and the cost of installing and maintaining its brand
         image in the service station. It transferred to Tobar the fuel tanks and pumps which Tobar was obliged to use only to sell
         CEPSA’s products and which it had to hand back to CEPSA at the end of the contract. However, Tobar was required to provide
         a ‘guarantee on first demand’ in favour of CEPSA to cover the value of the technical installations. 
      
On November CEPSA sent a letter to Tobar authorising it, henceforth, to lower the sale prices of the petroleum products
         but without reducing CEPSA’s receipts.
      
In the course of 2003, after sending several letters to CEPSA, Tobar ceased obtaining supplies from CEPSA and concealed CEPSA’s
         logo on the service‑station installations. 
      
During the course of 2004, Tobar brought an action against CEPSA for annulment of the contract at issue in the main proceedings,
         claiming that it was incompatible with Article EC, and that its purpose was unlawful by reason of the fact that the determination
         of the sale price of the petroleum products was left to the sole discretion of CEPSA. Tobar also applied for damages.
      
CEPSA contested the merits of that action and counterclaimed, demanding performance of that contract or its rescission if
         its performance was impossible, whilst demanding compensation for the loss suffered. 
      
On July 2005, the Juzgado de Primera Instancia No de Madrid (Court of First Instance No 3, Madrid) (Spain) annulled that
         contract on the ground that it was not compatible with Article 81(1) EC or with Regulations No 1984/and No 2790/1999. CEPSA
         appealed against that judgment to the referring court. 
      
In those circumstances, the Audiencia Provincial de Madrid (Provincial Court, Madrid) (Spain) decided to stay the proceedings
         and to refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling: 
      
‘(1)      (a)   Is Article 81(1) EC to be construed as meaning that an exclusive supply contract under a brand name concluded in by a
         distributor of petroleum products and the operator of a service station requiring the latter to sell exclusively the supplier’s
         motor-vehicle and other fuels for a fixed period, and to undertake not to sell such products supplied by other distributors,
         falls within the ambit of that provision in so far as that obligation involves a no‑competition agreement, even though that
         contract might, given its commercial significance, be regarded as an agency contract? 
      
(b)      If the contract does fall within the ambit of Article 81(1), is it possible to claim the benefit of exemption from the prohibition
         if it satisfies the requirements of Regulation No 1984/83, especially those relating to duration? 
      
(c)      If that should be the case, does the fact that Articles and of that regulation permit the duration of the no‑competition
         agreement to exceed five years as consideration for the granting of commercial or financial advantages by the supplier to
         the service‑station operator, require those commercial or financial advantages to be substantial or is it enough that they
         are not insignificant? Can those provisions be interpreted as meaning that such commercial or financial advantages have been
         conferred in exclusive supply contracts under a brand name in which the supplier of petroleum products bears the costs of
         installing and maintaining its brand image in the service station, or transfers fuel-tanks and -pumps which the service‑station
         operator may not use without the authorisation in writing of the sole supplier for products not supplied by the latter and
         which it must hand back when it ceases to use them as authorised, and the value of which is covered by the guarantee on first
         demand that the service‑station operator has provided in favour of the supplier?
      
(d)      If that exemption should not be applicable, does the automatic nullity provided for by Article 81(2) EC affect the contract
         in its entirety? 
      
(2)      (a)   Is Article 81(1) EC to be interpreted as meaning that an exclusive supply contract under a brand name, such as that in the
         present case, in so far as it provides that the service‑station operator must sell motor‑vehicle and other fuels supplied
         by the exclusive supplier at the retail price fixed by the supplier, is in theory caught by the prohibition of restriction
         of competition because it fixes sale prices, taking account of its economic significance and in particular of the risks assumed
         by the service-station operator and its contribution to the costs connected with the supply of goods under the contract or
         of the sales promotion of those goods, given the following relevant points: 
      
(i)      The service-station operator undertakes to sell exclusively the supplier’s lubricants, vehicle products and motor-vehicle
         and other fuels, in accordance with the retail prices, conditions and sales and business methods stipulated by the supplier
         for a period of years, which may be extended for successive periods each of five years by express agreement in writing
         on notice of at least six months. 
      
(ii)      The service-station operator assumes the risk associated with the motor-vehicle and other fuels as soon as they are received
         from the supplier in the storage tanks, including the risk of discrepancies in volume. From the moment of receipt the operator
         assumes the obligation to keep the products in the conditions necessary to ensure that they undergo no loss or deterioration
         and is liable, where applicable, to the supplier and to third parties for any loss, contamination or adulteration which may
         affect the products and for any damage arising as a result thereof. 
      
(iii) The service-station operator is required to pay the supplier the cost of the motor-vehicle and other fuels nine days after
         the date of their delivery to the service station, on presentation on the date of the first supply of a bank guarantee for
         the total price of the supply, equivalent to days. If it should fail to pay, apart from the possibility that the supplier
         might enforce the guarantee presented by the service-station operator, the latter would be required to pay for supplies before
         they were delivered to the service station. Payment is made by the service-station operator to the supplier by deducting from
         the retail price fixed by the distributor, including VAT, the amount of “commission” due to the service-station operator,
         plus the corresponding VAT. The fuel supplied is sold on average in a period of much less than the nine days provided for
         payment by the applicant (respondent in these proceedings) to the defendant (appellant in these proceedings). The distributor
         debits or credits the service station monthly, depending on the upward or downward variation in the prices fixed for the fuel
         delivered. The cost of transport is borne by the supplier. 
      
(iv)      The operator of the service station guarantees and is responsible for those customers who have signed up for the use of the
         credit card created and managed by the group of companies to which the supplier belongs, charges the sales made by means of
         the card one month after they are made, finances a small part of the cost of customers’ use of the fuel distributor’s loyalty
         card and assumes the risk of non-payment by those customers who have been allowed direct credit. 
      
(v)      The supplier of the petroleum products bears the costs of installing and maintaining its brand image in the service station,
         and also transfers the fuel-tanks and pumps which the operator of the service station may not use, without the supplier’s
         authorisation in writing, to sell products not supplied by that supplier, and which are valued precisely at the amount of
         the bank guarantee that the service‑station operator has presented in favour of the supplier? 
      
(b)      If so, on a proper construction of Regulation [No 1984/83], and in particular of Articles to thereof, do those provisions
         catch within their scope a contract of that kind with the result that the prohibition laid down in Article 81(1) EC is not
         applicable if the contract satisfies the requirements for exemption contained in those articles of the regulation? 
      
(c)      In that case, is Article of that regulation to be construed as meaning that, if the contract at issue imposes more than
         one restriction on competition, and, moreover, if it stipulates no competition by providing for exclusive supply by one supplying
         undertaking, sale prices are fixed by the supplier? Does the authorisation given by the [supplier] to the service‑station
         [operator] to lower its sale price without affecting [that supplier’s] receipts, which took place in November 2001, make it
         possible to regard the contract as valid?’ 
      
 The questions referred 
 Preliminary observations 
By its reference for a preliminary ruling, the referring court submits two questions to the Court, each one of those questions
         being subdivided into several parts, which envisage different hypotheses according to how the contract at issue in the main
         proceedings is categorised. The first question is submitted in the event that that contract is to be categorised as an agency
         contract, whilst the second question is based on the premiss that that contract is concluded between two autonomous undertakings.
         
      
The referring court essentially asks whether the prohibition laid down in Article 81(1) EC and, possibly, the block exemption
         established by Regulation No 1984/are applicable in the light of the facts of the case in the main proceedings. However,
         by its Questions 1(a) and 2(a), that court does not seek to obtain from the Court of Justice an interpretation of the concept
         of agreements between undertakings within the meaning of Article 81(1) EC in order to be able to assess, subsequently, whether
         the contract at issue in the main proceedings falls within the scope of that provision, but requests the Court to carry out
         that assessment itself. 
      
It must be recalled that under Article EC, which is based on a clear separation of functions between national courts and
         tribunals and the Court of Justice, the latter is empowered to rule on the interpretation or validity of Community provisions
         only on the basis of the facts which the national court or tribunal puts before it, and that it is, however, for the national
         court or tribunal to apply the rules of Community law to a specific case. Consequently, the Court has no jurisdiction to give
         a ruling on the facts in the main proceedings or to apply the rules of Community law which it has interpreted to national
         measures or situations, since those questions are matters for the exclusive jurisdiction of the national court or tribunal
         (see, inter alia, Case C‑318/Fornasar and Others [2000] ECR I‑4785, paragraph 32, and Case C‑421/Traunfellner [2003] ECR I‑11941, paragraph 21).
      
It is apparent from the order for reference that the request for interpretation submitted to the Court is based on the claims
         of the parties to the main proceedings, the merits of which have not yet been established by the national court. Similarly,
         in their written and oral submissions made to the Court, the parties to the main proceedings expressed significant disagreement
         as to the facts of the dispute before the referring court. 
      
In this respect, it must also be recalled that, within the framework of proceedings under Article EC, the Court cannot
         resolve a dispute concerning the facts. Such a dispute, like any other assessment of the facts involved, is within the province
         of the national court (see Case 36/Denkavit Futtermittel [1979] ECR 3439, paragraph 12, and Joined Cases C‑211/03, C‑299/and C‑316/to C‑318/HLH Warenvertrieb and Orthica [2005] ECR I‑5141, paragraph 96).
      
However, it is for the Court to provide the referring court with an answer which will be of use to it and enable it to determine
         the case before it (see, inter alia, Case C‑98/Freeport [2007] ECR I‑8319, paragraph 31).
      
Since the categorisation of the contract at issue in the main proceedings in the light of the rules on competition is essential
         for the purpose of deciding the case before the referring court, it is for the Court to recall, first, the criteria relevant
         for such a categorisation (Questions 1(a) and 2(a)). Second, it is necessary to analyse whether the block exemption is capable
         of applying to that contract, in the light of the contract’s clauses relating to the duration of its performance (Questions
         1(b) and (c) and Question 2(b)) and the fixing of the retail price (Question 2(c)). Third, the question arises as to possible
         nullity of the contract pursuant to Article 81(2) EC (Question 1(d)).
      
 The existence of an agreement between undertakings within the meaning of Article 81(1) EC 
By its Questions 1(a) and 2(a), the referring court asks whether Article 81(1) EC must be interpreted as applying to an exclusive
         supply contract for petroleum products having the characteristics of that at issue in the main proceedings, first, in the
         event that that contract is regarded as having been concluded between two independent undertakings, by reason of the fact
         that the retail price of those products is fixed by the supplier, and, second, in the event that that contract is to be regarded
         as a genuine agency contract, by reason of the fact that it provides for an exclusive supply clause. 
      
In this respect, it must be recalled that a similar question was already submitted to the Court in Case C‑217/Confederación Española de Empresarios de Estaciones de Servicio [2006] ECR I‑(‘CEEES’). In that case, just as in the case which has given rise to the present reference for a preliminary ruling, the contractual
         relationship between service‑station operators and their supplier, namely CEPSA, was at issue. According to the actual wording
         of the order for reference, the contract at issue in the main proceedings is identical to those which were the subject of
         the referred question examined by the Court in CEEES.
      
The Court held, at paragraph of CEEES, that vertical agreements such as the agreements between CEPSA and service-station operators were covered by Article of
         the Treaty only where the operator is regarded as an independent economic operator and there is, consequently, an agreement
         between two undertakings.
      
The decisive factor for the purposes of determining whether a service-station operator is an independent economic operator
         is to be found in the agreement concluded with the principal and, in particular, in the clauses of that agreement, implied
         or express, relating to the assumption of the financial and commercial risks linked to sales of goods to third parties. The
         question of risk must be analysed on a case‑by-case basis, taking account of the real economic situation rather than the legal
         categorisation of the contractual relationship in national law (CEEES, paragraph 46).
      
The Court also set out the criteria to enable the national court to assess, in the light of the factual circumstances of the
         case before it, the actual allocation of the financial and commercial risks between the service‑station operators and the
         fuel supplier.
      
As regards, first, the risks linked to the sale of the goods, the service‑station operator is presumed to bear them when he
         takes possession of the goods, at the time he receives them from the supplier, when he assumes directly or indirectly the
         costs linked to the distribution of the goods, particularly the transport costs, when he maintains stocks at his own expense,
         when he assumes responsibility for any damage caused to the goods, such as loss or deterioration, and for damage caused by
         the goods sold to third parties, or when he bears the financial risk linked to the goods in the event that he is required
         to pay the supplier the amount corresponding to the quantity of fuel delivered instead of that actually sold (see CEEES, paragraphs to 58).
      
Second, as regards the risks linked to investments specific to the market, namely those required to enable the service-station
         operator to negotiate or conclude contracts with third parties, it is necessary to establish whether that operator makes investments
         in premises or equipment, such as a fuel tank, or in advertising campaigns. If so, such risks are transferred to the operator
         (CEEES, paragraphs and 59).
      
It must, however, be pointed out that the fact that the operator bears only a negligible share of the risks does not render
         Article EC applicable (see, to that effect, CEEES, paragraph 61), since such an operator does not become an independent economic operator when selling fuel to third parties.
         In that case, the relationship between the operator and the supplier is identical to that between an agent and his principal.
      
It also follows from paragraphs and of CEEES that, even in the case of an agency contract, only the obligations imposed on the intermediary concerning the sale of the
         goods to third parties on behalf of the principal, including the fixing of the retail price, fall outside the scope of Article
         EC. By contrast, exclusivity and non‑competition clauses which concern the relationship between the agent and the principal
         as independent economic operators are capable of infringing the competition rules in so far as they entail locking up the
         market concerned. The prohibition laid down in Article 81(1) EC is therefore applicable to those clauses.
      
If an examination of the risks leads to the conclusion that there is an agreement between undertakings within the meaning
         of Article EC, as regards the sale of goods to third parties, the fixing of the retail price of those goods constitutes
         a restriction of competition expressly provided for in Article 81(1)(a) EC which brings that agreement within the scope of
         the prohibition laid down in that provision to the extent to which all the other conditions for the application of that provision
         are satisfied, namely that that agreement has as its object or effect to restrict appreciably competition within the common
         market and is capable of affecting trade between Member States (see, to that effect, Case C‑230/Cabour [1998] ECR I‑2055, paragraph 48).
      
Moreover, as regards in particular exclusive purchasing agreements, the case‑law of the Court of Justice should be recalled,
         according to which, even if those agreements do not have as their object the restriction of competition within the meaning
         of Article EC, it is nevertheless necessary to ascertain whether they have the effect of preventing, restricting or distorting
         competition. The effects of an exclusive purchasing agreement have to be assessed in the economic and legal context in which
         the agreement occurs and where it may combine with other agreements to have a cumulative effect on competition. It is therefore
         necessary to analyse the effects of such an agreement, taken together with other agreements of the same type, on the opportunities
         of national competitors or those from other Member States to gain access to the relevant market or to increase their market
         share (see Case C‑234/Delimitis [1991] ECR I‑935, paragraphs to 15, and Case C‑214/Neste [2000] ECR I‑11121, paragraph 25).
      
In the light of the foregoing considerations, the answer to Question 1(a) and 2(a) must be that an exclusive supply contract
         for petroleum products is capable of falling within the scope of Article 81(1) EC where the service‑station operator assumes,
         in a non‑negligible proportion, one or more financial and commercial risks linked to the sale of those products to third parties
         and where that contract contains clauses capable of infringing competition, such as that relating to the fixing of the retail
         price. If the service‑station operator does not assume such risks or assumes only a negligible share of them, only the obligations
         imposed on the operator in the context of services as an intermediary offered by the operator to the principal, such as the
         exclusivity and non‑competition clauses, are capable of falling within the scope of that provision. It is for the referring
         court to ascertain, moreover, whether the contract at issue in the main proceedings has the effect of preventing, restricting
         or distorting competition within the meaning of Article EC. 
      
 The maximum duration of the agreement provided for in Regulation No 1984/By its Question 1(b) and (c), and by its Question 2(b), the referring court essentially asks whether an exclusive supply agreement,
         such as that at issue in the main proceedings, is capable, in the event that if falls within the scope of Article EC, of
         benefiting from a block exemption such as provided for in Regulation No 1984/83, subject to its compliance with the conditions
         laid down by that regulation and, in particular, the maximum duration of the agreement and the granting of commercial and
         financial advantages. 
      
That court raises the question, in particular, first, whether, in order to comply with the maximum duration condition, Article
         of Regulation No 1984/must be interpreted as meaning that it requires, for the application of the exemption to service‑station
         agreements, that the advantages granted to the service‑station operator by the supplier are substantial or whether it is enough
         that they are not insignificant and, second, whether the advantages granted by the contract at issue in the main proceedings
         are sufficient in this respect.
      
It should be recalled, as a preliminary point, that Regulation No 1984/provided for the application of Article 85(3) of
         the Treaty to certain categories of exclusive purchasing agreements concluded between two undertakings for the resale of products
         capable of being caught by Article 85(1) of the Treaty. 
      
As stated at paragraph of this judgment, in the case of a genuine agency relationship, only the exclusivity and non‑competition
         clauses concerning the relationship between the agent and the principal as independent economic operators are capable of falling
         within Article EC. By contrast, the obligations concerning the sale of goods to third parties on behalf of the principal,
         although capable, at least as regards some of them, of infringing the competition rules if they were concluded between two
         independent undertakings, must not be taken into account when examining the applicability of that regulation. In the case
         of a distribution contract between two independent undertakings, it is necessary to examine the contract in its entirety in
         order to decide whether the block exemption is applicable. 
      
Article 12(1)(c) of Regulation No 1984/provided that, by derogation from the maximum duration of five years, which is generally
         applicable to exclusive purchasing agreements of short and medium duration in all sectors of the economy, the maximum duration
         applicable to service‑station agreements was ten years. As regards the special conditions applicable to those agreements,
         Article of that regulation provided that the reseller was to agree with the supplier to purchase only from the supplier,
         such an exclusive purchasing obligation being concluded ‘in consideration for the according of special commercial or financial
         advantages’. 
      
It should be noted that the Spanish version of that article did not specify the nature of those commercial or financial
         advantages, unlike all the other language versions, which used the term ‘specific’ or ‘special’ to describe those advantages.
         However, according to settled case‑law, the different language versions of a provision of Community law must be uniformly
         interpreted and, in the case of divergence between those versions, the relevant provision must be interpreted by reference
         to the purpose and general scheme of the rules of which it forms part (see Case C‑1/Borgmann [2004] ECR I‑3219, paragraph 25; Case C‑227/Commission v Spain [2004] ECR I‑8253, paragraph 45, and judgment of March in Case C‑332/Commission v Spain, not published in the ECR, paragraph 52).
      
As regards the scheme and purpose of the Community rules at issue, it was apparent from recital in the preamble to Regulation
         No 1984/that service‑station agreements are generally distinguished by the fact that the supplier confers on the reseller
         special commercial or financial advantages by contributing to his financing, granting him or obtaining for him a loan on favourable
         terms, equipping him with a site or premises for conducting his business, providing him with equipment or fittings, or undertaking
         other investments for his benefit.
      
Moreover, recital in the preamble to that regulation stated that the commercial and financial advantages conferred by the
         supplier on the reseller make it significantly easier to establish, modernise, maintain and operate premises used for service
         stations. Recital in the preamble stated, by way of example, that an exclusive purchasing obligation for lubricants and
         related petroleum-based products can be accepted only on condition that the supplier provides for the reseller or finances
         the procurement of specific equipment for the carrying out of lubrication work. 
      
The purpose of the exemption from the prohibition laid down in Article 81(1) EC is also apparent from the third indent of
         Article 81(3) EC, according to which the provisions of that paragraph are inapplicable to any agreement ‘which contributes
         to improving the production or distribution of goods or to promoting technical or economic progress, while allowing consumers
         a fair share of the resulting benefit’. Recitals and in the preamble to Regulation No 1984/stated, furthermore, as
         regards in particular exclusive purchasing agreements, that such agreements lower distribution costs, limit the risk of variations
         in market conditions, facilitate the promotion of the sales of a product, improve the structure of the distribution network
         and the quality of the sales service and are the most effective way, and sometimes the only way, to penetrate a market.
      
It follows that the concept of ‘special commercial or financial advantages’, referred to in Article of Regulation No 1984/83,
         must be interpreted as meaning that those advantages are indeed specific to the contractual relationship, but that they must
         also be substantial in order to justify an exclusivity of supply of years. Those advantages must be such as to lead to
         an improvement in distribution, to facilitate the establishment or modernisation of the service station and to lower the distribution
         costs. 
      
As regards the question whether the commercial or financial advantages, such as those granted to Tobar in the case in the
         main proceedings, are capable of justifying the duration of the exclusivity of supply of years, it is necessary to recall
         the case‑law referred to in paragraph of this judgment, according to which any assessment of the facts is within the province
         of the national court. It is therefore for the referring court to appraise the significance of the investments made by CEPSA,
         taking account of the guidance set out in paragraphs to of this judgment. 
      
It must, however, be pointed out that it is apparent from the order for reference that the scope ratione temporis of Regulation No 1984/does not entirely cover the period of performance of the contract at issue in the main proceedings,
         since that contract was concluded on February for a duration of years and it was only in the course of that
         Tobar ceased to perform its contractual obligations. Regulation No 1984/expired on December 1999, but the exemption
         provided for in that regulation continued to apply until May pursuant to Regulation No 2790/1999, which provided,
         furthermore, for a transitional period until December 2001, during which the prohibition laid down in Article 81(1) EC
         did not apply in respect of agreements in force on May which did not satisfy the conditions for exemption provided
         for in that regulation but which did satisfy those provided for in Regulation No 1984/83. Accordingly, in order to give a
         useful answer to the referring court, it is necessary also to examine the applicable conditions for exemption pursuant to
         Regulation No 2790/1999.
      
Regulation No 2790/1999, which is applicable to categories of vertical agreements and concerted practices, does not contain
         any special provisions relating to service‑station agreements. In accordance with Article 3(1), the exemption provided for
         in that regulation is to apply on condition that the market share held by the supplier does not exceed 30% of the relevant
         market on which it sells the contract goods or services. Unlike Regulation No 1984/83, Regulation No 2790/provides, in
         Article 5(a), that the exemption provided for in Article is not to apply to any of the direct or indirect non-compete obligations,
         ‘the duration of which is indefinite or exceeds five years’ and that ‘a non-compete obligation which is tacitly renewable
         beyond a period of five years is to be deemed to have been concluded for an indefinite duration’. 
      
If the referring court were to arrive at the conclusion that the duration of the exclusive supply agreement satisfies the
         condition on maximum duration laid down in Article 12(1)(c) of Regulation No 1984/83, it would still remain for that court
         to ascertain whether that agreement also satisfied the maximum duration allowed under Regulation No 2790/1999, namely five
         years. 
      
In this respect, it is important to determine whether the exclusivity agreement satisfied the conditions for exemption provided
         for in Regulation No 2790/from June onwards, the date on which that regulation became applicable. If it were necessary
         to reply in the negative, a transitional period until December would be applicable to that agreement only if it satisfied
         the conditions for exemption provided for in Regulation No 1984/83.
      
It follows from the provisions of Regulation No 2790/that the exemption provided for in that regulation is applicable
         from June to agreements the duration of which does not exceed five years. However, Article 12(2) of Regulation No 2790/provides for a transitional period until December in respect of agreements in force on May which do not satisfy
         the conditions for exemption provided for in that regulation but which do satisfy the conditions for exemption provided for
         in Regulation No 1984/83. It is for the referring court to ascertain, in the present case, according to whether the contract
         at issue in the main proceedings did or did not satisfy the conditions for exemption of Regulation No 1984/83, from which
         date the exclusivity clause must be examined under Regulation No 2790/1999.
      
Further, it is for that court to assess whether the clause of the contract at issue in the main proceedings providing for
         the extension of the contact for successive five‑year periods by express agreement in writing on notice of at least six months
         cannot, under Article 5(a) of Regulation No 2790/1999, be regarded as providing that that contract was concluded for an indefinite
         duration, which would mean that it would be excluded from the benefit of the block exemption.
      
On the basis of the foregoing considerations, the answer to Questions 1(b) and (c) and 2(b) must be that an exclusive supply
         contract, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, is capable of benefiting from a block exemption provided for in Regulation
         No 1984/if it complies with the maximum duration of years referred to in Article 12(1)(c) of that regulation and if
         the supplier grants the service‑station operator, in return for exclusivity, substantial commercial advantages which contribute
         to an improvement in distribution, facilitate the establishment or modernisation of the service station and lower the distribution
         costs. It is for the referring court to assess whether those conditions are satisfied in the case in the main proceedings.
         
      
 The fixing of the retail price 
By its Question 2(c), the referring court essentially asks whether Articles to of Regulation No 1984/must be interpreted
         as precluding the application of the block exemption to an exclusive supply contract by reason of the fact that that contract
         provides for the fixing of the retail price by the supplier. If so, it wishes to know whether the authorisation to lower that
         sale price without affecting the supplier’s receipts renders the exemption applicable again. 
      
It must be recalled at the outset, as has been stated at paragraph of this judgment, that, in the case of a contractual
         relationship between two undertakings, the application of the block exemption is precluded if, in addition to an exclusive
         supply clause, the contract concluded between those undertakings contains a clause providing for the fixing of the retail
         price by the supplier. 
      
Article of Regulation No 1984/listed exhaustively the obligations which, apart from an exclusivity clause, could be
         imposed on a reseller, but which did not include the fixing of the retail price. Under recital in the preamble to that regulation,
         ‘further restrictive obligations and in particular those which limit the reseller’s … freedom to determine his prices … cannot
         be exempted under this regulation’. Consequently, the fixing by CEPSA of the retail price of the petroleum products would
         constitute a restriction on competition not covered by the exemption provided for in Article of that regulation (see CEEES, paragraph 64).
      
However, it is apparent from the order for reference that on November CEPSA sent Tobar a letter authorising it to lower
         its sale prices without affecting the supplier’s receipts. In its written and oral submissions, CEPSA states that such authorisation
         existed from the time of the conclusion of the contract at issue in the main proceedings and that Tobar had in actual fact
         made use of that authorisation even before that letter was sent. Tobar strongly disputes that claim and submits that it is
         impossible validly to amend that contract by way of a unilateral act. 
      
In such a situation, in the light of the division of jurisdiction between the national courts and the Court of Justice, it
         is for the referring court to assess the manner in which the retail price was fixed in the case in the main proceedings, as
         well as to determine whether it is possible, in national law, to amend unilaterally the clause governing the fixing of that
         price. 
      
If the referring court should conclude that such a unilateral amendment is possible under national law, it would then be necessary
         to examine the conditions for exemption in force on the date on which CEPSA gave its authorisation. 
      
In November 2001, Regulation No 2790/was applicable to agreements which did not qualify for the transitional period provided
         for in Article 12(2) of Regulation No 2790/by reason of the fact that they did not satisfy the conditions for exemption
         laid down in Regulation No 1984/83. According to Article 4(a) of Regulation No 2790/1999, the exemption provided for in Article
         thereof was not to apply to vertical agreements which have as their object the ‘restriction of the buyer’s ability to determine
         its sale price, without prejudice to the possibility of the supplier’s imposing a maximum sale price or recommending a sale
         price, provided that they do not amount to a fixed or minimum sale price as a result of pressure from, or incentives offered
         by, any of the parties’. 
      
It follows that it is necessary to ascertain whether the fixing of the maximum sale price does not remain, in reality, a fixed
         or minimum sale price, account being taken of all the contractual obligations and the conduct of the parties in the main proceedings.
         
      
Since the Court is not in a position to assess the discretion that Tobar had to determine the retail price of the petroleum
         products, following the authorisation granted to that company by CEPSA’s letter of November 2001, it is for the referring
         court to examine whether that authorisation made it genuinely possible for the reseller to lower that sale price, taking account
         of the actual effect of all the clauses of the contract at issue in the main proceedings in their economic and legal context.
         In particular, it is necessary to ascertain whether such a retail price is not, in reality, fixed by indirect or concealed
         means, such as the fixing of the margin of the service‑station operator, threats, intimidation, warnings, penalties or incentives.
         
      
If the referring court were to conclude that Tobar was, in reality, required to charge the fixed or minimum sale price imposed
         by CEPSA, that contract could not qualify for the block exemption established by Regulation No 2790/1999. However, where an
         agreement does not satisfy all the conditions provided for by an exempting regulation, it will be caught by the prohibition
         provided for in Article 81(1) EC only if its object or effect is to restrict appreciably competition within the common market
         and it is capable of affecting trade between Member States (see, to that effect, Cabour, cited above, paragraph 48). In that latter case, and in the absence of individual exemption pursuant to Article 81(3) EC,
         the price agreement would be automatically void under Article 81(2) EC. 
      
By contrast, if the unilateral amendment of the contract at issue in the main proceedings meant that the clause relating to
         the retail price of the petroleum products was to be brought into line with the competition rules, that contract would then
         qualify for the block exemption, subject to its satisfying all the conditions laid down in Regulation No 2790/1999. However,
         as the Advocate General rightly points out at point of his Opinion, such an amendment cannot result in the retroactive
         validity of that contract from the point of view of the block exemption under Regulation No 1984/83. 
      
It follows from settled case‑law that, once the conditions for the application of Article 81(1) EC are met and so long as
         the agreement concerned does not justify the grant of an exemption under Article 81(3) EC, the nullity referred to in Article
         81(2) EC can be relied on by anyone. Since that nullity is absolute, it is capable of having a bearing on all the effects,
         either past or future, of the agreement concerned (Joined Cases C‑295/to C‑298/Manfredi and Others [2006] ECR I‑6619, paragraph and the case‑law cited).
      
The question whether the nullity of the clause relating to the fixing of the retail price of the petroleum products means
         that the contract at issue in the main proceedings becomes automatically void in its entirety is the subject of Question 1(d),
         which is answered in paragraphs to of this judgment. However, should the referring court find that that contract was
         automatically void in its entirety, the question whether it may become valid following the amendment of the clause relating
         to the sale price is, as the Commission of the European Communities rightly submits, a matter to be decided under national
         contract law. 
      
It follows that the answer to Question 2(c) must be that Articles to of Regulation No 1984/must be interpreted as
         precluding the application of the block exemption to an exclusive supply contract which provides for the fixing of the retail
         price by the supplier. It is for the referring court to ascertain whether, under national law, the contractual clause relating
         to that sale price can be amended by unilateral authorisation of the supplier, such as that at issue in the main proceedings,
         and whether a contract which is automatically void may become valid following an amendment of that contractual clause which
         has the effect of bringing that clause into line with Article 81(1) EC.
      
 The consequences of possible nullity of the agreement under Article 81(2) EC 
By its Question 1(d), the referring court asks whether the automatic nullity provided for by Article 81(2) EC affects the
         contract at issue in the main proceedings in its entirety or only those clauses which are incompatible with Article 81(1)
         EC. 
      
In this regard, it must be borne in mind that, according to the settled case‑law of the Court, the automatic nullity of an
         agreement within the meaning of Article 81(2) EC only applies to those parts of the agreement affected by the prohibition
         laid down in Article 81(1) EC or to the agreement as a whole if it appears that those parts are not severable from the agreement
         itself (see, in particular, Case 56/LTM [1966] ECR 235, at 250, and Delimitis, cited above, paragraph 40).
      
If those parts are severable from the agreement, the consequences, for all other parts of the agreement or for other obligations
         flowing from it, of the nullity are not a matter for Community law. It is therefore for the referring court to determine,
         in accordance with the national law applicable, the extent and consequences, for the contractual relation as a whole, of the
         nullity of certain contractual clauses under Article 81(2) EC (see, inter alia, Case 10/VAG France [1986] ECR 4071, paragraphs and 15; Cabour, cited above, paragraph 51, and Joined Cases C‑376/and C‑377/Brünsteiner and Autohaus Hilgert [2006] ECR I‑11383, paragraph 48).
      
The answer to Question 1(d) must therefore be that the automatic nullity provided for in Article 81(2) EC affects a contract
         in its entirety only if the clauses which are incompatible with Article 81(1) EC are not severable from the contract itself.
         Otherwise, the consequences of the nullity, in respect of all the other parts of the contract, are not a matter for Community
         law. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the referring court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      An exclusive supply contract for motor‑vehicle and other fuels, as well as lubricants and other related products, is capable
            of falling within the scope of Article 81(1) EC where the service‑station operator assumes, in a non‑negligible proportion,
            one or more financial and commercial risks linked to the sale of those products to third parties and where that contract contains
            clauses capable of infringing competition, such as that relating to the fixing of the retail price. If the service‑station
            operator does not assume such risks or assumes only a negligible share of them, only the obligations imposed on the operator
            in the context of services as an intermediary offered by the operator to the principal, such as the exclusivity and non‑competition
            clauses, are capable of falling within the scope of that provision. It is for the referring court to ascertain, moreover,
            whether the contract concluded on February between CEPSA Estaciones de Servicio SA and LV Tobar e Hijos SL has the
            effect of preventing, restricting or distorting competition within the meaning of Article EC. 
2.      An exclusive supply contract, such as that referred to in the preceding paragraph of this operative part, is capable of benefiting
            from a block exemption provided for in Commission Regulation (EEC) No 1984/of June on the application of Article
            [81](3) of the Treaty to categories of exclusive purchasing agreements, as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1582/of July 1997, if it complies with the maximum duration of years referred to in Article 12(1)(c) of that regulation and
            if the supplier grants the service‑station operator, in return for exclusivity, substantial commercial advantages which contribute
            to an improvement in distribution, facilitate the establishment or modernisation of the service station and lower the distribution
            costs. It is for the referring court to assess whether those conditions are satisfied in the case in the main proceedings.
3.      Articles to of Regulation No 1984/83, as amended by Regulation No 1582/97, must be interpreted as precluding the application
            of the block exemption to an exclusive supply contract which provides for the fixing of the retail price by the supplier.
            It is for the referring court to ascertain whether, under national law, the contractual clause relating to that sale price
            can be amended by unilateral authorisation of the supplier, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, and whether a contract
            which is automatically void may become valid following an amendment of that contractual clause which has the effect of bringing
            that clause into line with Article 81(1) EC.
4.      The automatic nullity provided for in Article 81(2) EC affects a contract in its entirety only if the clauses which are incompatible
            with Article 81(1) EC are not severable from the contract itself. Otherwise, the consequences of the nullity, in respect of
            all the other parts of the contract, are not a matter for Community law. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Spanish.
      
Top  
 