
Case C-212/Government of the French Community
and
Walloon Government
v
Flemish Government
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Cour d’arbitrage, now the Cour constitutionnelle (Belgium))
(Care insurance scheme established by a federated entity of a Member State – Exclusion of persons residing in part of the national territory other than that falling within the competence of that entity
         – Articles EC, EC and EC – Regulation (EEC) No 1408/71)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Social security for migrant workers – Community legislation – Scope ratione materiae 
      
(Council Regulation No 1408/71, Art. 4)
2.        Preliminary rulings – Jurisdiction of the Court – Limits – Purely internal situations
(Arts EC, EC and EC)
3.        Social security for migrant workers – Competence of federated entities of a Member State to organise their social security
            systems – Limits 
(Arts EC and EC)
4.        Social security for migrant workers – Competence of federated entities of a Member State to organise their social security
            systems – Limits 
(Arts EC and EC)
1.        Benefits provided under a care insurance scheme giving the right, objectively and on the basis of a statutorily defined position,
         to reimbursement by a care insurance fund of the costs incurred in respect of the provision of help and non-medical services
         by any person whose autonomy is reduced by reason of serious and prolonged disability, fall within the scope ratione materiae of Regulation No 1408/71. 
      
Benefits intended to improve the state of health and quality of life of persons reliant on care have as their essential purpose
         the supplementing of sickness insurance benefits and must accordingly be regarded as ‘sickness benefits’ for the purpose of
         Article 4(1)(a) of that regulation.
      
Furthermore, such a care insurance scheme, governed by provisions of domestic law applicable to part only of the territory
         of a Member State, cannot be excluded from the ambit of Regulation No if it is funded, at the very least in part, by
         contributions paid by the persons insured, and is not mentioned in Annex II, Section III, to that regulation.
      
(see paras 19-23, operative part 1)
2.        Community law cannot be applied to purely internal situations. It is not possible to raise against that conclusion the principle
         of citizenship of the Union set out in Article EC, which includes, in particular, according to Article EC, the right
         of every citizen of the Union to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States. Citizenship of the Union
         is not intended to extend the material scope of the Treaty to internal situations which have no link with Community law. Nevertheless,
         interpretation of provisions of Community law may possibly be of use to the national court, having regard too to situations
         classed as purely internal, in particular if the law of the Member State concerned were to require every national of that
         State to be allowed to enjoy the same rights as those which a national of another Member State would derive from Community
         law in a situation considered to be comparable by that court.
      
(see paras 38-40)
3.        On a proper construction of Articles EC and EC, legislation of a federated entity of a Member State, such as that governing
         care insurance, limiting affiliation to a social security scheme and entitlement to the benefits provided by that scheme to
         persons either residing in the territory coming within that entity’s competence or pursuing an activity in that territory
         but residing in another Member State, is contrary to those provisions, in so far as such limitation affects nationals of other
         Member States or nationals of the Member State concerned who have made use of their right to freedom of movement within the
         European Community.
      
Those articles of the Treaty militate against any national measure which, even though applicable without discrimination on
         grounds of nationality, is capable of hindering or rendering less attractive the exercise by Community nationals of the fundamental
         freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty. For a measure to restrict freedom of movement, it is not necessary for it to be based on
         the nationality of the persons concerned or even for it to have the effect of bestowing an advantage on all national workers
         or of operating to the detriment solely of nationals of other Member States, but not of national workers. It is enough that
         the measure should benefit certain categories of persons pursuing occupational activity in the Member State in question.
      
In addition, the articles of the Treaty relating to the free movement of goods, persons, services and capital are fundamental
         provisions for the Community and any restriction, even minor, of that freedom is prohibited.
      
(see paras 45, 50, 52, 60, operative part 2)
4.        On a proper construction of Articles EC and EC, those provisions militate against legislation of a federated entity
         of a Member State limiting affiliation to a social security scheme and entitlement to the benefits provided by that scheme
         only to persons residing in that entity’s territory, in so far as such limitation affects nationals of other Member States
         working in that entity’s territory or nationals of the Member State concerned who have made use of their right to freedom
         of movement within the European Community.
      
(see para. 63, operative part 3)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
April (*)
      
(Care insurance scheme established by a federated entity of a Member State – Exclusion of persons residing in part of the national territory other than that falling within the competence of that entity
         –Articles EC, EC and EC – Regulation (EEC) No 1408/71)
      
In Case C‑212/06,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, by the Cour d’arbitrage, now the Cour constitutionnelle (Belgium),
         made by decision of April 2006, received at the Court on May 2006, in the proceedings
      
Government of the French Community,
and Walloon Government 
v
Flemish Government,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Rosas, K. Lenaerts, A. Tizzano (Rapporteur), G. Arestis,
         Presidents of Chambers, A. Borg Barthet, M. Ilešič, J. Malenovský and J. Klučka, Judges,
      
Advocate General: E. Sharpston,
Registrar: M.-A. Gaudissart, Head of Unit,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on March 2007,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        the Government of the French Community, by J. Sambon and P. Reyniers, avocats,
–        the Walloon Government, by M. Uyttendaele, J.-M. Bricmont and J. Sautois, avocats,
–        the Flemish Government, by B. Staelens and H. Gilliams, advocaten,
–        the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster and P. van Ginneken, acting as Agents,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by V. Kreuschitz and J.-P. Keppenne, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on June gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles EC, EC and EC, and of Regulation
         (EEC) No 1408/of the Council of June on the application of social security schemes to employed persons, to self-employed
         persons and to members of their families moving within the Community, as amended and updated by Council Regulation (EC) No
         118/of December (OJ L 28, p. 1), as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 307/of February (OJ L 38, p. 1) (‘Regulation No 1408/71’).  
      
The reference was made in the context of proceedings between several federated entities of the Kingdom of Belgium.  In those
         proceedings, the Government of the French Community and the Walloon Government, on the one hand, and the Flemish Government,
         on the other, are in dispute over the conditions for affiliation to the care insurance scheme established by the Flemish Community
         for persons whose autonomy is reduced by serious and prolonged disability.  
      
 Legal context
 The relevant provisions of Community law
The scope ratione personae of Regulation No 1408/is defined in Article 2(1) thereof, which provides: 
      
‘This Regulation shall apply to employed or self-employed persons and to students who are or have been subject to the legislation
         of one or more Member States and who are nationals of one of the Member States or who are stateless persons or refugees residing
         within the territory of one of the Member States, as well as to the members of their families and their survivors.’ 
      
Article defines the scope ratione materiae of that regulation as follows:
      
‘This Regulation shall apply to all legislation concerning the following branches of social security:
(a)      sickness and maternity benefits;
…
2.      This Regulation shall apply to all general and special social security schemes, whether contributory or non-contributory,
         and to schemes concerning the liability of an employer or ship owner in respect of the benefits referred to in paragraph 1.
      
…
2b      This Regulation shall not apply to the provisions in the legislation of a Member State concerning special non-contributory
         benefits, referred to in Annex II, Section III, the validity of which is confined to part of its territory.
      
…’
Article of Regulation No 1408/71, headed ‘Equality of treatment’, provides:
      
‘1.      Subject to the special provisions of this Regulation, persons resident in the territory of one of the Member States to whom
         this Regulation applies shall be subject to the same obligations and enjoy the same benefits under the legislation of any
         Member State as the nationals of that State.’
      
Lastly, Article of the Regulation determines the legislation applicable to migrant workers in the field of social security.
         It is worded as follows:
      
‘1.      Subject to Articles 14c and 14f, persons to whom this Regulation applies shall be subject to the legislation of a single Member
         State only.  That legislation shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of this Title.
      
2.      Subject to the provisions of Articles to 17:
(a)      a person employed in the territory of one Member State shall be subject to the legislation of that State even if he resides
         in the territory of another Member State or if the registered office or place of business of the undertaking or individual
         employing him is situated in the territory of another Member State;
      
(b)      a person who is self‑employed in the territory of one Member State shall be subjected to the legislation of that State even
         if he resides in the territory of another Member State;
      
…’.
 The relevant provisions of domestic law
By decree of the Flemish Parliament on the organisation of care insurance (Decreet houdende de organisatie van de zorgverzekering)
         of March (Moniteur belge of May 1999, p. 19149, ‘the Decree of March 1999’), the Flemish Community introduced a scheme of care insurance in
         order to improve the state of health and living conditions of persons whose autonomy is reduced by serious and prolonged disability.
         This scheme confers entitlement, subject to certain conditions and up to a maximum amount, to have an insurance fund take
         responsibility for the paying of certain costs occasioned by a state of dependence for health reasons, such as expenses involved
         in home help services or in the purchase of equipment or products needed by the insured person. 
      
The Decree of March has been amended on several occasions, in order in particular to take account of objections raised
         by the Commission of the European Communities and leading to the opening of infringement proceedings in 2002.  In essence,
         the Commission challenged the compatibility with Regulation No 1408/of the condition of residence in the Dutch-speaking
         region or in the bilingual region of Brussels-Capital to which affiliation to that care insurance scheme and the payment of
         the services for which it provided were made subject in the original version of the decree.
      
The criterion of residence was, therefore, adapted by the Decree of the Flemish Parliament amending the Decree of March
         on the organisation of care insurance (Decreet van de Vlaamse Gemeenschap houdende wijziging van het decreet van maart
         houdende de organisatie van de zorgverzekering) of April (Moniteur Belge of June 2004, p. 43593, ‘the Decree of April 2004’).  That decree, which had retroactive effect to October 2001, chiefly
         extended the scope ratione personae of the care insurance scheme to persons working in the territory of those regions and residing in a Member State other than
         the Kingdom of Belgium.  It also excluded from that ambit persons residing in those regions but subject to the social security
         system of another Member State.  As a result of the adoption of those amendments, the Commission decided on April to
         take no further action in the infringement procedure in question.
      
Article of the Decree of March 1999, as amended by the Decree of April 2004, defines as follows the classes of persons
         who must or may be affiliated to the care insurance scheme:
      
‘§1.      Any person residing within the Dutch-speaking region must join a care insurance scheme approved by this Decree.   
…
§2.      Any person residing within the bilingual region of Brussels-Capital may on a voluntary basis join a care insurance scheme
         approved by this Decree. 
      
§2bis Any person referred to in paragraphs and to whom, on the basis of the rules governing the law applicable under Regulation
         (EEC) No 1408/71, the social security scheme of another Member State of the European Union or of another State party to the
         European Economic Area applies as of right shall not fall within the scope of this Decree.
      
§2ter  Any person not residing in Belgium to whom, on the basis of the rules governing the applicable law under Regulation (EEC)
         No 1408/71, the social security scheme in Belgium applies as of right because of his employment in the Dutch-speaking region
         must join a care insurance scheme approved by this decree.  The provisions of this decree concerning persons referred to in
         paragraph shall apply by analogy.
      
Any person not residing in Belgium to whom, on the basis of the rules governing the applicable law under Regulation (EEC)
         No 1408/71, the social security scheme in Belgium applies as of right because of his employment in the bilingual region of
         Brussels-Capital may elect to join a care insurance scheme approved by this decree.  The provisions of this decree concerning
         persons referred to in paragraph shall apply by analogy.’ 
      
Article of the Decree of March 1999, as most recently amended by the Decree of the Flemish Parliament amending the Decree
         of March on the organisation of care insurance (Decreet van de Vlaamse Gemeenschap houdende wijziging van het decreet
         van maart houdende de organisatie van de zorgverzekering), of November (Moniteur Belge of January 2005, p. 2153, which too has retrospective effect from October 2001, lays down as follows the conditions
         for reimbursement by the care insurance scheme:
      
‘The user must fulfil the following conditions in order to be able to claim reimbursement of the costs of non-medical assistance
         and services by a care insurance scheme:  
      
…
3.      At the time of reimbursement, he must be legally resident in a Member State of the European Union or in a State party to the
         Agreement on the European Economic Area; 
      
…
5.      for at least five years before reimbursement, he must have resided without interruption either in the Dutch-speaking region
         or the bilingual region of Brussels-Capital or, as a person covered by a social insurance scheme, in a Member State of the
         European Union or a State party to the Agreement on the European Economic Area;  …’ 
      
…’.
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
This case originates from the third action for annulment brought by the applicant Governments against the Decree of March
         1999, the two earlier actions having been rejected in part and in whole by the Cour d’arbitrage (Court of Arbitration).  In
         those earlier cases, the Cour d’arbitrage stated, in particular, in its judgment No 33/of March 2001, that the care
         insurance scheme introduced by that Decree concerned ‘aid to persons’, a matter falling, by virtue of Article 128(1) of the
         Belgian Constitution, within the powers of the Communities, and did not, therefore, trespass on the exclusive powers of the
         federal State in the sphere of social security.
      
The decision for reference makes it clear that the dispute in the main proceedings turns, more specifically, on Article of the Decree of March in the version contained in the Decree of April (‘the Decree of March 1999, as amended’).
         In their actions, brought before the referring court on December 2004, the applicant Governments pleaded infringement of
         Regulation No 1408/and of various provisions of the EC Treaty, claiming that to exclude from that scheme persons who, although
         working in the Dutch-speaking region or in the bilingual region of Brussels-Capital, reside in national territory, but outwith
         the territory for which those regions are respectively competent, amounts to a restrictive measure hindering the free movement
         of persons.   
      
In those circumstances, the Cour d’arbitrage has decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court
         for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Does a care insurance scheme which: 
(a)      has been established by an autonomous Community of a federal Member State of the European Community, 
(b)      applies to persons who are resident in the part of the territory of that federal State for which that autonomous Community
         is competent, 
      
(c)      provides for reimbursement, under that scheme, of the costs incurred for non-medical assistance and service to persons with
         serious, long-term reduced autonomy, affiliated to the scheme, in the form of a fixed contribution to the related costs and
         
      
(d)      is financed by members’ annual contributions and by a grant paid out of the budget for expenditure of the autonomous Community
         concerned, 
      
constitute a scheme falling within the scope ratione materiae of … Regulation … No 1408/…, as defined in Article thereof?
      
(2)      If the first question referred for a preliminary ruling is to be answered in the affirmative: must the regulation cited above,
         in particular Articles 2, and thereof and, in so far as they are applicable, Articles 18, 19, 20, and 28, be interpreted
         as precluding an autonomous Community of a federal Member State of the European Community from adopting provisions which,
         in the exercise of its powers, allow only persons residing in the territory for which that autonomous Community is competent
         and, in relation to citizens of the European Union, persons employed in the territory and who are resident in another Member
         State to be insured under and covered by a social security scheme within the meaning of that regulation, to the exclusion
         of persons, whatever their nationality, who reside in a part of the territory of the federal State for which another autonomous
         Community is competent?
      
(3)      Must Articles EC, EC and EC be interpreted as precluding an autonomous Community of a federal Member State of the
         European Community from adopting provisions which, in the exercise of its powers, allow only persons residing in the territory
         for which that autonomous Community is competent and, in relation to citizens of the European Union, persons employed in that
         territory and who are resident in another Member State to be insured under and covered by a social security scheme within
         the meaning of that regulation, to the exclusion of persons, whatever their nationality, who reside in a part of the territory
         of the federal State for which another autonomous Community is competent?
      
(4)      Must Articles EC, EC and EC be interpreted as not permitting the scope of such a system to be limited to persons
         who are resident in the territorial components of a federal Member State of the European Community which are covered by that
         system?’
      
 Concerning the questions referred
 The first question
By its first question the national court seeks in substance to ascertain whether the benefits provided under a scheme such
         as the care insurance scheme established by the Decree of March fall within the ambit ratione materiae of Regulation No 1408/71.
      
For the purpose of answering that question, it is to be borne in mind that the Court has consistently held that the distinction
         between benefits excluded from the scope of Regulation No 1408/and those which fall within its scope is based essentially
         on the constituent elements of each benefit, in particular its purposes and the conditions on which it is granted, and not
         on whether it is classified as a social security benefit by national legislation (see, inter alia, Case 249/Hoeckx [1985] ECR 973, paragraph 11; Case C-111/Commission v Luxembourg [1993] ECR I-817, paragraph 28, and Case C-332/Celozzi [2007] ECR I-563, paragraph 16).
      
On this point, the Court has also stated on numerous occasions that a benefit may be regarded as a social security benefit
         in so far as it is granted, without any individual and discretionary assessment of personal needs, to recipients on the basis
         of a legally defined position and provided that it relates to one of the risks expressly listed in Article 4(1) of Regulation
         No 1408/(see, inter alia, Hoeckx , paragraphs to 14; Commission v Luxembourg, paragraph 29, and Celozzi, paragraph 17).
      
In the case in the main proceedings, as is made apparent in all the observations submitted to the Court, it is not disputed
         that a scheme such as the care insurance scheme established by the Decree of March satisfies those conditions.
      
First, the provisions of that decree make it plain that such a scheme gives a right, objectively and on the basis of a statutorily
         defined position, to reimbursement by a care insurance fund of the costs incurred in respect of the provision of help and
         non-medical services by any person whose autonomy is reduced by reason of serious and prolonged disability.  
      
Secondly, the Court has earlier held that benefits intended to improve the state of health and quality of life of persons
         reliant on care, such as those at issue in the main proceedings, have as their essential purpose the supplementing of sickness
         insurance benefits and must accordingly be regarded as ‘sickness benefits’ for the purpose of Article 4(1)(a) of Regulation
         No 1408/(Case C-160/Molenaar [1998] ECR I-843, paragraphs to 24; Case C-215/Jauch [2001] ECR I-1901, paragraph 28, and Case C‑286/Hosse [2006] ECR I-1771, paragraph 38).
      
Furthermore, as the Walloon Government observes, care insurance cannot be excluded from the ambit of Regulation No 1408/on the basis of Article 4(2)b thereof, which covers certain kinds of non-contributory benefits, provided that they are governed
         by provisions of domestic law applicable to part only of the territory of a Member State.
      
As a matter of fact, in contrast to the requirements laid down by the derogation provided for by Article 4(2)b, the care insurance
         scheme at issue in the main proceedings is contributory in kind, for it is funded, at the very least in part, by contributions
         paid by the persons insured, and is not mentioned in Annex II, Section III, to Regulation No 1408/71. 
      
In consequence, the answer to be given to the first question is that benefits provided under a scheme such as the care insurance
         scheme established by the Decree of March 1999, as amended, fall within the scope ratione materiae of Regulation No 1408/71.
      
 Concerning the second and third questions
By those two questions, which may appropriately be examined together, the national court seeks in essence to ascertain whether,
         on a proper construction of Articles EC, EC and EC, legislation of a federated entity of a Member State limiting
         affiliation to a scheme such as the care insurance scheme at issue in the main proceedings and entitlement to the benefits
         provided by that scheme to persons residing in the territory coming within that entity’s competence and to persons pursuing
         an activity in that territory and residing in another Member State, with the result that persons are excluded who work in
         that territory but reside in the territory of another federated entity of the same State, is contrary to those provisions.
      
 Admissibility
The Flemish Government claims, principally, that those questions are neither helpful nor necessary to the settling of the
         dispute in the main proceedings, with the result that they must be declared inadmissible.
      
It states that before the national court the applicant Governments opposed the implementation of that care insurance scheme,
         denying that the Flemish Community was competent in that sphere, while the interpretation of Community law which they favour
         in respect of the second and third questions leads to the opposite result, that is to say, the extension of the care insurance
         benefits in question to persons residing in the French-speaking region.
      
In addition, according to the Flemish Government, the Cour d’arbitrage has itself already answered those questions in its
         decision to refer, by considering that the care insurance scheme at issue in the main proceedings does not infringe the exclusive
         competence of the federal authority in the sphere of economic union within Belgium, having regard to the amount and the limited
         effects of the benefits in question.  For the same reasons, the scheme cannot be said to restrict freedom of movement of persons
         within the meaning of the Treaty.
      
In that respect, it is to be borne in mind that, according to settled case-law, in the context of cooperation between the
         Court and national courts as provided for by Article EC, it is solely for the national courts before which actions are
         brought, and which must bear the responsibility for the subsequent decision, to determine in the light of the special features
         of each case both the need for a preliminary ruling in order to enable them to deliver judgment and the relevance of the questions
         which they submit to the Court.  Consequently, where the questions referred involve the interpretation of Community law, the
         Court is, in principle, obliged to give a ruling (see, inter alia, Case C-379/PreussenElektra [2001] ECR I‑2099, paragraph 38; Case C-18/Korhonen  and Others [2003] ECR I‑5321, paragraph 19, and Case C‑295/Asemfo [2007] ECR I‑2999, paragraph 30).
      
It follows that the presumption that questions referred by national courts for a preliminary ruling are relevant may be rebutted
         only in exceptional cases, where it is quite obvious that the interpretation which is sought of the provisions of Community
         law referred to in the questions bears no relation to the actual facts of the main action or to its purpose (Case C‑415/Bosman [1995] ECR I‑4921, paragraph 61, and Case C‑355/Beck and Bergdorf [1999] ECR I‑4977, paragraph 22).
      
Such is not, however, the case in the dispute in the main proceedings.  It is enough to find that it is made clear in the
         decision making the reference that the reply to the second and third questions asked by the Cour d’arbitrage will be of use
         to it in determining whether the condition of residence, on which entitlement to the care insurance scheme depends, infringes,
         as the applicant Governments argue in the actions in the main proceedings, certain provisions of Community law concerning
         freedom of movement of persons.
      
The second and third questions referred for a preliminary ruling must therefore be declared admissible.
      
 Substance
The Flemish Government maintains that those questions concern only a purely internal situation quite unconnected to Community
         law, viz., that of the non-application of the Decree of March 1999, as amended, to persons both residing and working in
         Belgium.
      
In this respect, it must be borne in mind that it is settled case-law that the Treaty rules governing freedom of movement
         for persons and the measures adopted to implement them cannot be applied to activities which have no factor linking them with
         any of the situations governed by Community law and which are confined in all relevant respects within a single Member State
         (see, inter alia, with regard to freedom of establishment and freedom of movement for workers, respectively, Case 20/Gauchard [1987] ECR 4879, paragraphs and 13, and Case C‑18/Terhoeve [1999] ECR I‑345, paragraph 26, and the decisions there cited).  The same holds good in respect of the provisions of Regulation
         No 1408/(see, to that effect, Case C‑153/Petit [1992] ECR I‑4973, paragraph 10, and Joined Cases C‑95/to C‑98/and C‑180/Khalil and Others [2001] ECR I‑7413, paragraph 70).
      
On the other hand, as the Court has also stated, any national of a Member State, irrespective of his place of residence and
         his nationality, who has exercised the right to freedom of movement for workers and who has been employed in another Member
         State, falls within the scope of those provisions (see in particular, to that effect, Case C‑419/Scholz [1994] ECR I‑505, paragraph 9; Terhoeve, paragraph 27, and Case C‑212/Hartmann [2007] ECR I‑6303, paragraph 17).
      
In the circumstances of this case, it is established that the second and third questions referred by the national court concern
         all persons, whether they have made use of one of the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty or not, working in the
         Dutch-speaking region or the bilingual region of Brussels-Capital, who are not, however, eligible for the care insurance scheme
         at issue in the main proceedings because they live in part of the national territory situated outside those two regions.
      
In those circumstances, two kinds of situations must be distinguished in the light of the principles recalled in paragraphs
         and above.
      
First, application of the legislation at issue in the main proceedings leads, inter alia, to the exclusion from the care insurance
         scheme of Belgian nationals working in the territory of the Dutch-speaking region or in that of the bilingual region of Brussels-Capital
         but who live in the French- or German-speaking region and have never exercised their freedom to move within the European Community.
         
      
Community law clearly cannot be applied to such purely internal situations.
      
It is not possible, as the Government of the French Community suggests, to raise against that conclusion the principle of
         citizenship of the Union set out in Article EC, which includes, in particular, according to Article EC, the right of
         every citizen of the Union to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States.  The Court has on several
         occasions held that citizenship of the Union is not intended to extend the material scope of the Treaty to internal situations
         which have no link with Community law (Joined Cases C‑64/and C‑65/Uecker and Jacquet [1997] ECR I‑3171, paragraph 23; Case C‑148/Garcia Avello [2003] ECR I‑11613, paragraph 26, and Case C‑403/Schempp [2005] ECR I‑6421, paragraph 20).
      
It may nevertheless be remarked that interpretation of provisions of Community law might possibly be of use to the national
         court, having regard too to situations classed as purely internal, in particular if the law of the Member State concerned
         were to require every national of that State to be allowed to enjoy the same rights as those which a national of another Member
         State would derive from Community law in a situation considered to be comparable by that court (see, to that effect, Case
         C‑250/Mauri [2005] ECR I‑1267, paragraph 21, and Case C‑451/Servizi Ausiliari Dottori Commercialisti [2006] ECR I‑2941, paragraph 29).
      
Second, the legislation at issue in the main proceedings may also exclude from the care insurance scheme employed or self-employed
         workers falling within the ambit of Community law, that is to say, both nationals of Member States other than the Kingdom
         of Belgium working in the Dutch-speaking region or in the bilingual region of Brussels-Capital but who live in another part
         of the national territory, and Belgian nationals in the same situation who have made use of their right to freedom of movement.
      
So far as that second category of worker is concerned, it falls therefore to be considered whether the provisions of Community
         law, interpretation of which is sought by the national court, preclude legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings,
         inasmuch as it applies to nationals of Member States other than the Kingdom of Belgium or to Belgian nationals who have exercised
         their right of free movement within the European Community.  
      
In this respect it is important to bear in mind that, although Member States retain the power to organise their social security
         schemes, they must none the less, when exercising that power, observe Community law and, in particular, the provisions of
         the EC Treaty on freedom of movement for workers (Case C-135/Elsen [2000] ECR I-10409, paragraph 33). 
      
It is also settled case-law that all the provisions of the Treaty on freedom of movement for persons are intended to facilitate
         the pursuit by Community nationals of occupational activities of all kinds throughout the Community, and preclude measures
         which might place Community nationals at a disadvantage when they wish to pursue an economic activity in the territory of
         another Member State (Joined Cases 154/and 155/Wolf and Others [1988] ECR 3897, paragraph 13; Terhoeve, paragraph 37, and Case C‑318/Commission v Germany [2007] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 114).  In that context, nationals of the Member States have in particular the right, which they
         derive directly from the Treaty, to leave their State of origin to enter the territory of another Member State and reside
         there in order there to pursue an economic activity (see, inter alia, Bosman, paragraph 95, and Terhoeve, paragraph 38).
      
As a result, Articles EC and EC militate against any national measure which, even though applicable without discrimination
         on grounds of nationality, is capable of hindering or rendering less attractive the exercise by Community nationals of the
         fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty (see, to that effect, Case C‑19/Kraus [1993] ECR I‑1663, paragraph 32; Case C‑285/Burbaud [2003] ECR I‑8219, paragraph 95, and Case C‑442/CaixaBank France [2004] ECR I‑8961, paragraph 11).
      
In the light of those principles, measures which have the effect of causing workers to lose, as a consequence of the exercise
         of their right to freedom of movement, social security advantages guaranteed them by the legislation of a Member State have
         in particular been classed as obstacles (see, inter alia, Joined Cases C‑45/and C‑46/Lepore and Scamuffa [1993] ECR I‑6497, paragraph 21; Case C‑165/van Munster [1994] ECR I‑4661, paragraph 27, and Hosse, paragraph 24).
      
Legislation such as that as issue in the main proceedings is such as to produce those restrictive effects, inasmuch as it
         makes affiliation to the care insurance scheme dependent on the condition of residence in either a limited part of national
         territory, viz., the Dutch-speaking region and the bilingual region of Brussels-Capital, or in another Member State.
      
Migrant workers, pursuing or contemplating the pursuit of employment or self-employment in one of those two regions, might
         be dissuaded from making use of their freedom of movement and from leaving their Member State of origin to stay in Belgium,
         by reason of the fact that moving to certain parts of Belgium would cause them to lose the opportunity of eligibility for
         the benefits which they might otherwise have claimed.  In other words, the fact that employed or self-employed workers find
         themselves in a situation in which they suffer either the loss of eligibility care insurance or a limitation of the place
         to which they transfer their residence is, at the very least, capable of impeding the exercise of the rights conferred by
         Articles EC and EC. 
      
It is of little importance in this regard, contrary to what the Flemish Government in substance maintains, that the differentiation
         at issue is based solely on the place of residence on national territory and not on any condition of nationality, with the
         result that it affects in the same way all workers, employed or self-employed, resident in Belgium.
      
For a measure to restrict freedom of movement, it is not necessary for it to be based on the nationality of the persons concerned
         or even for it to have the effect of bestowing an advantage on all national workers or of operating to the detriment solely
         of nationals of other Member States, but not of nationals of the State in question (see, to that effect, Case C‑281/Angonese [2000] ECR I‑4139, paragraph 41, and Case C‑388/Commission v Italy [2003] ECR I‑721, paragraph 14).  It is enough that the measure should benefit, as in the case of the care insurance scheme
         at issue in the main proceedings, certain categories of persons pursuing occupational activity in the Member State in question
         (see, by analogy, as regards freedom to provide services, Case C‑353/Commission v Netherlands [1991] ECR I‑4069, paragraph 25, and C‑250/United Pan-Europe Communications Belgium and Others [2007] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 37).
      
In addition, as Advocate General Sharpston has pointed out in paragraphs to of her Opinion, the restrictive effects
         of the legislation in question in the main proceedings are not to be considered too indirect and uncertain for it to be impossible
         to regard that legislation as constituting an obstacle contrary to Articles EC and EC.  In particular, unlike the case
         giving rise to the judgment in Case C‑190/Graf [2000] ECR I-493, referred to by the Flemish Government at the hearing, possible entitlement to the insurance care benefits
         at issue depends, not on a future and hypothetical event for the employed or self-employed worker concerned, but on a circumstance
         linked, ex hypothesi, to the exercise of the right to freedom of movement, namely, the choice of transfer of residence.
      
Likewise, as regards the Flemish Government’s argument that that legislation could in any case have only a marginal effect
         on freedom of movement, in view of the limited nature of the amount of benefits in question and the number of persons concerned,
         it need merely be observed that, according to the Court’s case-law, the articles of the Treaty relating to the free movement
         of goods, persons, services and capital are fundamental Community provisions and any restriction, even minor, of that freedom
         is prohibited (see, in particular, Case C-49/Corsica Ferries France [1989] ECR 4441, paragraph 8, and Case C‑169/Commission v  France [2000] ECR I‑1049, paragraph 46).
      
In any event, it is not inconceivable, given such factors as the ageing of the population, that the prospect of being able
         or unable to receive dependency benefits such as those offered by the care insurance scheme at issue in the main proceedings
         should be taken into consideration by the persons concerned in exercising their right to freedom of movement.
      
It follows that domestic legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings entails an obstacle to freedom of movement
         for workers and to freedom of establishment, prohibited in principle by Articles EC and EC.
      
According to well-established case-law, national measures capable of hindering the exercise of fundamental freedoms guaranteed
         by the Treaty or of making it less attractive may be allowed only if they pursue a legitimate objective in the public interest,
         are appropriate to ensuring the attainment of that objective, and do not go beyond what is necessary to attain the objective
         pursued (see, inter alia, Case C‑9/De Lasteyrie du Saillant [2004] ECR I-2409, paragraph 49, and Case C-104/Commission v Sweden [2007] ECR I‑671, paragraph 25).
      
There is, however, nothing in either the file sent to the Court by the referring court or the observations of the Flemish
         Government capable of justifying the application, to persons working in the Dutch-speaking region or the bilingual region
         of Brussels-Capital, of a requirement of residence either in one of those two regions or in another Member State, for the
         purpose of eligibility for the care insurance scheme at issue in the main proceedings.   
      
Here the Flemish Government refers exclusively to the requirements inherent in the division of powers within the Belgian federal
         structure and, particularly, to the fact that the Flemish Community could exercise no competence in relation to care insurance
         in respect of persons residing in the territory of other linguistic communities of the Kingdom of Belgium.
      
That line of argument cannot be accepted.  As the Advocate General, in paragraphs to of her Opinion, and the Commission
         have noted, the Court has consistently held that a Member State cannot plead provisions, practices or situations prevailing
         in its domestic legal order, including those resulting from the constitutional organisation of that State, to justify the
         failure to observe obligations arising under Community law (see, inter alia, Case C‑87/Commission v Italy [2004] ECR I‑5975, paragraph 38, Case C‑102/Commission v Austria [2006], not published in the European Court Reports, paragraph 9).
      
It is therefore to be declared that a condition of residence such as that laid down in the Decree of March 1999, as amended,
         is contrary to Articles EC and EC.  That being so, there is no need to raise the question of an infringement of Regulation
         No 1408/71, in particular of Article 3(1) thereof (see, by analogy, Terhoeve, paragraph 41).  Nor is there any need to give a ruling on the existence of a restriction liable to be prohibited by Article
         EC, of which Articles EC and EC constitute the specific expression so far as concerns freedom of movement for workers
         and freedom of establishment.
      
Having regard to all the foregoing, the reply to be given to the second and third questions is that, on a proper construction
         of Articles EC and EC, legislation of a federated entity of a Member State, such as that governing the care insurance
         scheme established by the Flemish Community by the Decree of March 1999, as amended, limiting affiliation to a social security
         scheme and entitlement to the benefits provided by that scheme to persons either residing in the territory coming within that
         entity’s competence or pursuing an activity in that territory but residing in another Member State, is contrary to Articles
         EC and EC, in so far as such limitation affects nationals of other Member States or nationals of the Member State concerned
         who have made use of their right to freedom of movement within the European Community.
      
 Concerning the fourth question
The fourth question deals with the consequences following from a finding by the national court of the incompatibility of the
         legislation in question in the main proceedings with Community law, the effect of which would be, according to that court,
         to re-establish the scheme in force before the Decree of April was adopted.  More specifically, it seeks to ascertain
         whether a scheme limiting eligibility for care insurance only to persons living in the Dutch-speaking region and the bilingual
         region of Brussels-Capital is contrary to Articles EC, EC and EC.   
      
On this point, it suffices to state that the considerations set out in paragraphs to above in response to the second
         and third questions hold good, with all the greater reason, with regard to legislation entailing an additional restriction
         compared with the scheme applicable following the adoption of the Decree of April 2004, given that that legislation excluded
         from its ambit all persons working in the Dutch-speaking region or the bilingual region of Brussels-Capital but having their
         residence in another Member State, including therefore persons resident in another Member State. 
      
The reply to be given to the fourth question is therefore that on a proper construction of Articles EC and EC, legislation
         of a federated entity of a Member State limiting affiliation to a social security scheme and entitlement to the benefits provided
         by that scheme to persons residing in that entity’s territory is contrary to those articles, in so far as such limitation
         affects nationals of other Member States working in that entity’s territory or nationals of the Member State concerned who
         have made use of their right to freedom of movement within the European Community.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court.  Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the
         costs of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Benefits provided under a scheme such as the care insurance scheme established by the Decree of the Flemish Parliament on
            the organisation of care insurance (Decreet houdende de organisatie van de zorgverzekering) of March 1999, in the version
            contained in the Decree of the Flemish Parliament amending the Decree of March (Decreet van de Vlaamse Gemeenschap
            houdende wijziging van het decreet van maart houdende de organisatie van de zorgverzekering) of April 2004, fall
            within the scope ratione materiae of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/of the Council of June on the application of social security schemes to employed persons,
            to self-employed persons and to members of their families moving within the Community, as amended and updated by Council Regulation
            (EC) No 118/of December 1996, as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 307/of February 1999.
2.      On a proper construction of Articles EC and EC, legislation of a federated entity of a Member State, such as that governing
            the care insurance scheme established by the Flemish Community by the decree of March 1999, as amended by the Decree of
            the Flemish Parliament of April 2004, limiting affiliation to a social security scheme and entitlement to the benefits
            provided by that scheme to persons either residing in the territory coming within that entity’s competence or pursuing an
            activity in that territory but residing in another Member State, is contrary to those provisions, in so far as such limitation
            affects nationals of other Member States or nationals of the Member State concerned who have made use of their right to freedom
            of movement within the European Community.
3.      On a proper construction of Articles EC and EC, legislation of a federated entity of a Member State limiting affiliation
            to a social security scheme and entitlement to the benefits provided by that scheme only to persons residing in that entity’s
            territory is contrary to those provisions, in so far as such limitation affects nationals of other Member States working in
            that entity’s territory or nationals of the Member State concerned who have made use of their right to freedom of movement
            within the European Community.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 