
Case C-448/cp-Pharma Handels GmbH
v
Bundesrepublik Deutschland
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Verwaltungsgericht Köln)
(Reference for a preliminary ruling – Validity of Regulation (EC) No 1873/– Veterinary medicinal products – Regulation (EEC) No 2377/– Maximum residue limits of veterinary medicinal products in foodstuffs of animal origin – Progesterone – Restrictions on use – Directive 96/22/EC)
Summary of the Judgment
Agriculture – Uniform legislation – Maximum residue limits of veterinary medicinal products in foodstuffs of animal origin
            – Determination procedure – Regulation No 2377/(Council Regulation No 2377/90, Annex II; Commission Regulation No 1873/2003; Council Directive 96/22)
Having regard both to the extent of the Commission’s discretion and to all the factual circumstances in light of which Regulation
         No 1873/amending Annex II to Regulation No 2377/laying down a Community procedure for the establishment of maximum
         residue limits of veterinary medicinal products in foodstuffs of animal origin was adopted, it does not appear that the approach
         followed by the Commission, by restricting inclusion of progesterone in Annex II to that regulation to a specific method of
         administration, taking account both of considerations of protection of human health and of requirements based on the principle
         of proportionality, disregarded the limits of the Commission’s discretion. 
      
Although it is true that Article of Regulation No 2377/does not expressly provide for the possibility of including a
         substance in Annex II thereto for only some of its methods of administration, that fact cannot prevent the Commission from
         nevertheless making such an inclusion. That approach may appear particularly appropriate where, on the one hand, the substance
         in question cannot be included in Annex I or III to that regulation, but where, on the other, certain limitations on the methods
         of administration of that substance can make it possible to ensure that the presence of residues in animal tissue does not
         constitute a risk for human health, so that a total prohibition on marketing that substance following its inclusion in Annex
         IV to that regulation would be disproportionate.
      
That conclusion is in no way called into question by the provisions of Directive 96/concerning the prohibition on the use
         in stockfarming of certain substances having a hormonal or thyrostatic action and of Beta-agonists, as amended by Directive
         2003/74, which allow Member States to authorise the administration of progesterone by intramuscular injection. The conditions
         under which Article of that directive allows Member States to authorise the administration of progesterone to farm animals
         include that of compliance with the requirements relating to placing on the market laid down in Directive 81/851, which was
         repealed subsequently by Directive 2001/on the Community code relating to veterinary medicinal products. That provision,
         read in conjunction with Article of Directive 2001/82, permits Member States to authorise administration of progesterone
         to farm animals only if that substance is included in Annex I, II or III to Regulation No 2377/in accordance with the provisions
         thereof. 
      
(see paras 31, 34, 42-43, 45)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Reference for a preliminary ruling – Validity of Regulation (EC) No 1873/– Veterinary medicinal products – Regulation (EEC) No 2377/– Maximum residue limits of veterinary medicinal products in foodstuffs of animal origin – Progesterone – Restrictions on use – Directive 96/22/EC)
In Case C‑448/06,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Verwaltungsgericht Köln (Germany), made by decision of October 2006, received at the Court on November 2006, in the proceedings
      
cp-Pharma Handels GmbH
v
Bundesrepublik Deutschland,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of P. Jann, President of the Chamber, A. Tizzano (Rapporteur), A. Borg Barthet, M. Ilešič and E. Levits, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Mazák,
Registrar: J. Swedenborg, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on October 2007,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        cp-Pharma Handels GmbH, by R. Köhne, Rechtsanwalt,
–        the Greek Government, by S. Charitaki and S. Papaioannou, acting as Agents,
–        the Polish Government, by E. Ośniecka-Tamecka, acting as Agent,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by B. Stromsky and B. Schima, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 2008,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the validity of Commission Regulation (EC) No 1873/of October amending Annex II to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2377/laying down a Community procedure for the establishment of maximum
         residue limits of veterinary medicinal products in foodstuffs of animal origin (OJ L 275, p. 9).
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings between cp-Pharma Handels GmbH (‘cp-Pharma’) and Bundesrepublik Deutschland
         (Federal Republic of Germany) with regard to a decision of the competent German authority revoking the marketing authorisation
         for the medicinal product ‘progesterone for veterinary use’ in the form of a solution administered by intramuscular injection
         which had been granted to that company.
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation 
The provisions concerning the establishment of maximum residue limits
–       Regulation (EEC) No 2377/The first and third recitals in the preamble to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2377/of June laying down a Community
         procedure for the establishment of maximum residue limits of veterinary medicinal products in foodstuffs of animal origin,
         as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 806/of April (OJ L 122, p. 1; ‘Regulation No 2377/90’), state as
         follows:
      
‘… the use of veterinary medicinal products in food-producing animals may result in the presence of residues of foodstuffs
         obtained from treated animals;
      
…
… in order to protect public health, maximum residue limits [‘MRLs’] must be established in accordance with generally recognised
         principles of safety assessment, taking into account any other scientific assessment of the safety of the substances concerned
         which may have been undertaken by international organisations, in particular the Codex Alimentarius or, where such substances
         are used for other purposes, by other scientific committees established within the Community’.
      
Article 1(1)(b) of that regulation defines an MRL as the maximum concentration of residue resulting from the use of a veterinary
         medicinal product which may be accepted by the Community to be legally permitted or recognised as acceptable in or on a food.
      
Articles to of Regulation No 2377/provide for the classification in four separate annexes of pharmacologically active
         substances used in veterinary medicinal products for food-producing animals. Those substances are to be classified in Annex
         I if the MRLs have been established (Article of the regulation), in Annex II where, ‘following an evaluation …, it appears
         that it is not necessary for the protection of public health to establish [an MRL]’ (Article of that regulation) and in
         Annex IV where it appears that an MRL cannot be established because the residues, whatever their limit, present a hazard for
         the health of the consumer (first paragraph of Article of the regulation). Finally, under the first paragraph of Article
         thereof, a provisional MRL may be established for a substance used on the date of entry into force of the regulation, ‘provided
         that there are no grounds for supposing that residues of the substance concerned at the level proposed present a hazard for
         the health of the consumer’. Substances for which provisional MRLs have been established are dealt with in Annex III to Regulation
         No 2377/90. 
      
Pursuant to Article 6(1) of Regulation No 2377/90, ‘[i]n order to obtain the inclusion in Annex I, II or III of a pharmacologically
         active substance which is intended for use in veterinary medicinal products for administration to food-producing animals,
         an application to establish [an MRL] shall be submitted to the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products set
         up by [Council] Regulation (EEC) No 2309/[of July laying down Community procedures for the authorisation and supervision
         of medicinal products for human and veterinary use and establishing a European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products
         (OJ L 214, p. 1)], hereinafter referred to as “the Agency”’. 
      
Article of Regulation No 2377/provides:
      
‘1.      The Committee for Veterinary Medicinal Products referred to in Article of Regulation (EEC) No 2309/(hereinafter “the
         [CVMP]”) shall be responsible for formulating the Agency’s opinion on the classification of substances referred to in Annex
         I, II, III or IV to this Regulation.
      
…
5.      The Agency shall forward the definitive opinion of the [CVMP] within days of its adoption both to the Commission and to
         the applicant. The opinion shall be accompanied by a report describing the safety evaluation of the substance by the Committee,
         which shall give the grounds for its conclusions.
      
6.      The Commission shall prepare draft measures taking account of Community legislation …’ 
Under Article 8(1) of Regulation No 2377/90, ‘[t]he Commission shall be assisted by the Standing Committee on Veterinary Medicinal
         Products’. 
      
Article of Regulation No 2377/90, in its original version, provided:
      
‘With effect from January 1997, the administration to food-producing animals of veterinary medicinal products containing
         pharmacologically active substances which are not mentioned in Annex I, II or III shall be prohibited within the Community
         …’
      
In the version of Regulation No 2377/applicable to the dispute in the main proceedings, the date January was replaced
         by January for the majority of substances (including progesterone) whose use was authorised at March and for
         which applications for establishment of an MRL had been filed with the Commission or the Agency before January 1996.
      
–       Regulation No 1873/Regulation No 1873/amended Annex II to Regulation No 2377/by including progesterone for female bovine, ovine, caprine
         and equine animals. The inclusion of that pharmacologically active substance is accompanied by the following footnote: 
      
‘Only for intravaginal therapeutic or zootechnical use and in accordance with [Council] Directive 96/22/EC [of April concerning the prohibition on the use in stockfarming of certain substances having a hormonal or thyrostatic action and of
         ß-agonists, and repealing Directives 81/602/EEC, 88/146/EEC and 88/299/EEC (OJ L 125, p. 3)]’. 
      
The sixth, eighth and tenth recitals in the preamble to Regulation No 1873/are worded as follows:
      
‘(6)      The SCVPH [Scientific Committee on Veterinary Measures relating to Public Health] repeatedly confirmed that the use of hormones
         for growth promotion purposes in meat production poses a potential health risk to consumers due to their intrinsic pharmacological
         and toxicological properties and epidemiological findings. However, at present the data available on progesterone are insufficient
         to make any quantitative estimate of the risk arising from the exposure to residues in meat and meat products originating
         from treated animals. No threshold levels can be defined for progesterone in this regard. 
      
…
(8)      Animals also naturally produce progesterone. The level of endogenous secretion of progesterone in the animals is variable,
         depending notably on gender, age, breed and sexual cycle. Validated methods are available to detect progesterone in animal
         tissues. However, these methods cannot distinguish between naturally occurring hormones and residues of progesterone as a
         means of controlling that the restrictions of use established in Directive 96/22/EC are observed. 
      
…
(10)      The Commission considers that safeguards as to the possibility of misuse of veterinary medicinal products containing progesterone
         are necessary. Restricting the terms of the use of progesterone to administration only via the intravaginal route in female
         animals of bovine, ovine, caprine and equine species provides this additional safeguard needed to avoid misuse as the relevant
         veterinary medicinal products cannot, due to their specific presentation, be realistically used for prohibited purposes. It
         is therefore considered appropriate to include progesterone in Annex II to Regulation … No 2377/in accordance with the
         Annex to the present proposal for a Commission Regulation, which limits the use of progesterone to this specific purpose and
         product formulation.’
      
 The other relevant provisions
–       Directive 96/Directive 96/22, as amended by Directive 2003/74/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of September (OJ
         L 262, p. 17; ‘Directive 96/22’), which is the version relevant to the dispute in the main proceedings, provides that
         Member States are to prohibit the administration to a farm animal of hormonal substances having a gestagenic effect, which
         includes progesterone.
      
By derogation and in a limited number of cases, Article 4(1) of Directive 96/states that Member States may authorise ‘the
         administering to farm animals, for therapeutic purposes, of …, testosterone and progesterone … Veterinary medicinal products
         used for therapeutic treatment must comply with the requirements for placing on the market laid down in [Council] Directive
         81/851/EEC [of September on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to veterinary medicinal products
         (OJ L 317, p. 1)] and be administered only by a veterinarian, by injection or for the treatment of ovarian dysfunction
         in the form of vaginal spirals, but not by implant, to farm animals which have been clearly identified. …’. 
      
–       Directive 2001/82/EC
Article of Directive 2001/82/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of November on the Community code relating
         to veterinary medicinal products (OJ L 311, p. 1) provides: 
      
‘In order that a veterinary medicinal product may be the subject of a marketing authorisation for the purpose of administering
         it to food-producing animals, the active substances which it contains must be shown in Annex I, II or III of Regulation …
         No 2377/90.’
      
Article of Directive 2001/provides:
      
‘[Directives] 81/851/EEC, 81/852/EEC, 90/677/EEC and 92/74/EEC … are repealed …’
The reference made to the said Repealed Directives shall be construed as references to this Directive …’ 
 National legislation
The first sentence of Paragraph 30(1) of the German Law on medicinal products (Arzneimittelgesetz), in the version published
         on December (BGBl. I, p. 3586; ‘the AMG’), provides:
      
‘An authorisation … must be revoked where one of the grounds for refusal under Paragraph 25(2)(3),(5),(5a), (6) or (7) subsequently
         arises.’
      
Paragraph 25(2)(7) of the AMG provides:
      
‘The competent higher federal authority may refuse to grant an authorisation only if
… 
7.      the marketing of the medical product or its administration to animals would contravene legal provisions or a regulation, directive
         or decision of the Council or Commission …’ 
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
On February 1999, cp-Pharma obtained an extension of the marketing authorisation for the veterinary medicinal product ‘progesterone
         ad us. vet’ for a period of five years. That authorisation concerned a solution for intramuscular injection, the active substance
         of which is progesterone, to be administered in cases of follicle cysts and ‘nymphomania caused by follicle cysts’.
      
By decision of January 2004, the competent authority revoked the marketing authorisation on the ground that progesterone
         was listed in Annex II to Regulation No 2377/for administration only via the intravaginal route. According to that authority,
         since no MRL has been established for other applications, the prohibition set out in Article of that regulation applied
         to that medicinal product and therefore the authorisation had to be revoked.
      
Following the rejection of its objection to that decision to revoke the authorisation, cp-Pharma brought an action before
         the referring court seeking annulment of that decision on the ground that the Commission had disregarded the recommendation
         of the CVMP, which asked it to include progesterone in Annex II to Regulation No 2377/without limiting its use to intravaginal
         administration.
      
In the decision for reference, the Verwaltungsgericht Köln (Administrative Court, Cologne) takes the view that Regulation
         No 2377/90, in the event of the listing of a substance in Annex II thereto, does not empower the Commission to impose restrictions
         as to the methods of administration of that substance. Moreover, such a possibility appears, mutatis mutandis, to have been excluded by the Court in Case C‑32/P Commission v Boehringer [2002] ECR I‑1917, paragraph 55, in which it held that, where the substance in question is entered in Annex III to that regulation,
         the only limitation on the validity of an MRL envisaged by that regulation concerns the indication of the limited duration
         of its validity.
      
The referring court observes, in addition, that the CVMP had proposed that progesterone be entered in Annex II to Regulation
         No 2377/without any restrictions, as the risks to health through progesterone residues were estimated to be minimal.
      
Finally, that court notes that the provisions of Directive 96/22, establishing measures to avoid any misuse in the administration
         of progesterone as a veterinary medicinal product, provide expressly that that substance may be administered by injection.
      
Having regard to the foregoing, the Verwaltungsgericht Köln decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following question
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling: 
      
‘Is … Regulation … No 1873/… partially void on account of a breach of higher-ranking Community law (Articles 1(1) and
         of … Regulation … No 2377/in conjunction with Article 4(1) of … Directive 96/…), in so far as application of an injection
         solution as a pharmaceutical form is excluded by virtue of the note marked (*) against the listing of progesterone in Annex
         II to … Regulation … No 2377/90?’ 
      
 The question referred
Cp-Pharma and the Polish Government take the view, contrary to that of the Greek Government and the Commission, that Regulation
         No 1873/is invalid in that Regulation No 2377/does not expressly authorise the Commission to establish an MRL solely
         for certain methods of administration of progesterone and Directive 96/permits Member States to authorise marketing of
         that substance in injectable form. Cp-Pharma adds that, in any event, the Commission could not adopt a measure concerning
         the MRL for progesterone which contradicts the opinion of the CVMP, while the Polish Government submits that Regulation No
         1873/is insufficiently reasoned with regard to the grounds on which the Commission decided not to follow that opinion.
         
      
In order to answer the question referred by the national court, it is appropriate to note that, as the Court has already held
         in paragraph of the judgment in Case C‑198/P Commission v CEVA and Pfizer [2005] ECR I‑6357, the Commission must be given a discretion which is sufficient to allow it to determine, on a fully informed
         basis, the measures that are necessary and appropriate for the protection of public health.
      
That is evidently all the more justified with regard to a file such as that concerning progesterone which, as the Court has
         already recognised, is particularly complex since it raises questions which are delicate and controversial from a scientific
         viewpoint (Commission v CEVA and Pfizer, paragraph 81). 
      
That complexity is due to the fact that progesterone, in addition to therapeutic treatment, is liable to be used unlawfully
         as a growth stimulate and, currently, there are no reliable methods of analysis permitting distinction between endogenous
         progesterone, produced naturally by the animals, and exogenous progesterone, resulting from the administration of medicinal
         products, and therefore monitoring of the abusive use of that substance. Furthermore, the Commission, when it adopted Regulation
         No 1873/2003, was faced with a situation of ongoing scientific uncertainty with regard to the possible harmful effects of
         progesterone, characterised by divergent scientific opinions adopted by the CVMP, on the one hand, and by the SCVPH and other
         international scientific bodies, on the other (see, to that effect, Commission v CEVA and Pfizer, paragraph 82).
      
In such circumstances, it is necessary to ascertain whether the Commission has exceeded the limits of its discretion by providing
         for the inclusion of progesterone in Annex II to Regulation No 2377/only in respect of its intravaginal use.
      
Although it is true that Article of Regulation No 2377/does not expressly provide for the possibility of including a
         substance in Annex II thereto for only some of its methods of administration, that fact cannot, as the Advocate General observed
         in point of his Opinion, prevent the Commission from nevertheless making such an inclusion. That approach may appear particularly
         appropriate where, as in the dispute in the main proceedings, the substance in question cannot be included in Annex I or III
         to that regulation, but where certain limitations on the methods of administration of that substance can make it possible
         to ensure that the presence of residues in animal tissue does not constitute a risk for human health, so that a total prohibition
         on marketing that substance following its inclusion in Annex IV to that regulation would be disproportionate. 
      
As is apparent from the sixth and eighth recitals in the preamble to Regulation No 1873/2003, the fact that endogenous progesterone
         cannot be distinguished from exogenous progesterone made it impossible to establish an MRL, for the purposes of inclusion
         of that substance in Annex I or III to Regulation No 2377/90, which would exclude the existence of a risk to consumer health.
         
      
However, as the Commission has stated in its observations submitted to the Court and in its answers to the written questions
         put by the Court, without being contradicted on that point by the applicant in the main proceedings or by the governments
         which submitted observations to the Court, the inclusion of progesterone in Annex II to Regulation No 2377/exclusively
         in respect of intravaginal administration is likely to exclude risks to human health. As is apparent from those observations,
         in the case of administration by intravaginal spiral, the concentration of progesterone in the body of the animal increases
         significantly, then falls rapidly without leaving significant residues when the spiral is removed, whereas administration
         by injection leaves long-lasting residues potentially dangerous to human health.
      
In those circumstances, having regard both to the extent of the Commission’s discretion and to all the factual circumstances
         in light of which Regulation No 1873/was adopted, it does not appear that the approach followed by the Commission, taking
         account both of considerations of protection of human health and of requirements based on the principle of proportionality,
         disregarded the limits of the Commission’s discretion.
      
Contrary to cp-Pharma’s submissions, the fact that the CVMP had recommended the inclusion of progesterone in Annex II to Regulation
         No 2377/without any restriction as to its method of administration is not such as to call that conclusion into question.
         
      
In that regard, it is sufficient to note, firstly, that there is no provision of Regulation No 2377/which lays down that
         the opinions of the CVMP are binding and, secondly, that it follows expressly from the third recital in the preamble to that
         regulation that, in the course of establishing MRLs, the Commission must take account of any scientific assessment of the
         safety of the substances concerned which may have been undertaken by international organisations, in particular the Codex
         Alimentarius, or by other scientific committees established within the Community.
      
In other words, in the course of exercising its discretion, the Commission was in no way required to take account only of
         the opinion of the CVMP, which favoured inclusion of progesterone in Annex II to that regulation, but could legitimately base
         its decision on other information and scientific assessments, including the opinions of the SCVPH, which had pointed out the
         risks to human health resulting from the presence of residues of that substance in foodstuffs of animal origin. 
      
Nor did the Commission, contrary to the submissions of the Polish Government, infringe the obligation to give reasons by not
         specifically mentioning the scientific data which led it not to follow the opinion of the CVMP and by not indicating the extent
         to which the data contradicted that opinion.
      
It must be pointed out that the sixth recital in the preamble to Regulation No 1873/refers expressly to the opinions
         of the SCVPH, differing from those of the CVMP, which had confirmed on several occasions both the risks arising from use of
         progesterone and the fact that it is impossible to establish MRLs for that substance. Furthermore, the eighth and tenth recitals
         in the preamble to that regulation state the reasons for which, according to the Commission, only intravaginal administration
         of progesterone can prevent the misuse of that substance. 
      
Therefore, in accordance with the requirements of established case-law (see, inter alia, Case C‑367/P Commission v Sytraval and Brink’s France [1998] ECR I‑1719, paragraph 63; Joined Cases C‑346/and C‑529/Atzeni and Others [2006] ECR I‑1875, paragraph 73; and Case C‑266/P Sison v Council [2007] ECR I‑1233, paragraph 80), the reasoning given for Regulation No 1873/shows in a clear and unequivocal fashion
         the reasoning followed by the Commission in such a way as to enable the persons concerned to ascertain the reasons for the
         measure and to enable the Court to exercise its power of review. 
      
With regard to the argument raised by the Polish Government that Regulation No 1873/infringes the principle of proportionality
         because it is based on a purely hypothetical risk to human health which is not supported by the scientific data set out in
         its reasoning, it suffices to note that, as has been recalled in paragraph of the present judgment, the existence of such
         a risk, confirmed by a number of scientific opinions, is clearly apparent from the reasoning of that regulation. 
      
It should also be noted that the conclusion, set out in paragraphs and of the present judgment, that the Commission
         may restrict the inclusion of the substance in Annex II to Regulation No 2377/according to its method of administration
         is in no way called into question by the argument of the Polish Government that Regulation No 1873/is incompatible with
         the provisions of Directive 96/which permit the administration of progesterone by intramuscular injection. 
      
Firstly, it is appropriate to note that the conditions under which Article of Directive 96/allows Member States to authorise
         the administration of progesterone to farm animals include that of compliance with the requirements relating to placing on
         the market laid down in Directive 81/851, which was repealed subsequently by Directive 2001/82.
      
Secondly, Article of Directive 2001/expressly provides that, in order for a veterinary medicinal product to receive marketing
         authorisation for administration to food-producing animals, the active substances which that medicinal product contains must
         appear in Annex I, II or III to Regulation No 2377/90. 
      
Accordingly, it is clear that Article of Directive 96/22, read in conjunction with Article of Directive 2001/82, permits
         Member States to authorise administration of progesterone to farm animals only if that substance is included in Annex I, II
         or III to Regulation No 2377/in accordance with the provisions thereof.
      
On the grounds set out in paragraphs to of the present judgment, the Commission could legitimately restrict the inclusion
         of progesterone in Annex II to that regulation to a specific method of administration, that is to say intravaginally. In those
         circumstances, there is no incompatibility between the provisions of Regulation No 2377/and those of Article of Directive
         96/22. 
      
Having regard to all of the foregoing, the answer for the referring court must be that examination of the question referred
         has disclosed no factor of such a kind as to affect the validity of Regulation No 1873/2003. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
Examination of the question referred has disclosed no factor of such a kind as to affect the validity of Commission Regulation
            (EC) No 1873/of October amending Annex II to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2377/laying down a Community procedure
            for the establishment of maximum residue limits of veterinary medicinal products in foodstuffs of animal origin.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 