
Case C-443/P
Common Market Fertilizers SA
v
Commission of the European Communities
(Appeal – Anti-dumping duties – Article of the Customs Code – Remission of import duties – First paragraph of Article of Regulation (EEC) No 2454/– Interpretation – Legality – Commission decision – Group of experts meeting in the framework of the Customs Code Committee – Distinct entity in functional terms – Articles and 5(2) of Council Decision 1999/468/EC – Article of the rules of procedure of the Customs Code Committee – Conditions for the application of Article of the Customs Code – No obvious negligence)
Opinion of Advocate General Mengozzi delivered on March Judgment of the Court (Second Chamber), September Summary of the Judgment
1.     European Communities’ own resources – Repayment or remission of import or export duties 
(Commission Regulation No 2454/93, Art. 907, first and second paras)
2.     European Communities’ own resources – Repayment or remission of import or export duties 
(Commission Regulation No 2454/93, Art. 907)
3.     Common commercial policy – Protection against dumping – Conditions for imposing the anti-dumping duty established by the second
            subparagraph of Article 1(3) of Regulation No 3319/(Council Regulation No 3319/94, Art. 1(3), second subpara.)
4.     Customs union – Clearance procedures – Use of a customs agent 
(Council Regulation No 2913/92, Arts 4(18), 5(2), and 201(3))
1.     In the first paragraph of Article of Regulation No 2454/laying down provisions for the implementation of Regulation
         No 2913/establishing the Community Customs Code, the phrase “within the framework of the Committee” reflects the fact that
         the group of experts referred to in that article is clearly a distinct entity in functional terms from the Customs Code Committee.
         That interpretation is not inconsistent with the second paragraph of Article of the same regulation.  The second paragraph
         of Article must be interpreted as meaning that matters are not placed before the Customs Code Committee as such, for the
         purposes of obtaining an opinion from that Committee itself, but as a body in the framework of which the group of experts,
         which is distinct from that body, will be led to express its opinion.
      
(see paras 99-102)
2.     In Article of Regulation No 2913/establishing the Community Customs Code, the Council conferred on the Commission,
         in accordance with the third indent of Article EC, implementing powers for the purposes of determining, first, the situations
         in which customs duties may be repaid or remitted, and, second, the procedures to be followed to that end. 
      
Since that article did not require the Commission to use any particular procedure for the actual consideration of the applications
         for repayment or remission of customs duties, the Commission could legitimately, as it did by the first paragraph of Article
         of the regulation implementing the customs code, confer upon itself a power to take decisions following an advisory opinion
         of a group of experts that is distinct in functional terms from the Customs Code Committee,  and not make the opinion of the
         group of experts dependent upon a qualified majority.
      
(see paras 124, 134-135)
3.     The second subparagraph of Article 1(3) of Regulation No 3319/imposing a definitive anti-dumping duty on imports of urea
         ammonium nitrate solution originating in Bulgaria and Poland, exported by companies not exempted from the duty, and collecting
         definitively the provisional duty imposed refers to indirect invoicing and the import of a  product of the ZAP undertaking
         as the only conditions for the imposition of a specific anti-dumping duty, and does not require evidence of an intention on
         the part of the operator to circumvent the anti-dumping duty.
      
(see paras 178-179)
4.     It follows from the combined provisions of Articles 5(2), 4(18) and 201(3) of Regulation No 2913/establishing the Community
         Customs Code  that an operator who uses a customs agent, whether for direct or indirect representation, is in any event the
         debtor in respect of the customs debt as far as the customs authorities are concerned.
      
(see paras 184-186)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
September (*)
      
(Appeal – Anti-dumping duties – Article of the Customs Code – Remission of import duties – First paragraph of Article of Regulation (EEC) No 2454/– Interpretation – Legality – Commission decision – Group of experts meeting in the framework of the Customs Code Committee – Distinct entity in functional terms – Articles and 5(2) of Council Decision 1999/468/EC – Article of the rules of procedure of the Customs Code Committee – Conditions for the application of Article of the Customs Code – No obvious negligence)
In Case C‑443/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, lodged on December 2005,
Common Market Fertilizers SA, established in Brussels (Belgium), represented by A. Sutton, Barrister, and N. Flandin, avocat,
      
appellant,
the other party to the proceedings being:
Commission of the European Communities, represented by X. Lewis, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, J. Klučka, J. Makarczyk, G. Arestis and L. Bay Larsen (Rapporteur),
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: P. Mengozzi,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on October 2006,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2007,
gives the following
Judgment
By its appeal, Common Market Fertilizers SA (‘CMF’) asks the Court to set aside the judgment of the Court of First Instance
         of the European Communities of September in Joined Cases T‑134/and T‑135/Common Market Fertilizers v Commission [2005] ECR II‑(‘the judgment under appeal’) by which the Court dismissed its actions for annulment of Commission Decisions
         C(2002) final and C(2002) final of December (‘the contested decisions’) declaring the remission of import
         duties applied for by CMF to be unjustified.
      
 Legal context
The second subparagraph of Article 1(3) of Council Regulation (EC) No 3319/of December imposing a definitive anti-dumping
         duty on imports of urea ammonium nitrate solution originating in Bulgaria and Poland, exported by companies not exempted from
         the duty, and collecting definitively the provisional duty imposed (OJ L 350, p. 20) applies the following specific anti-dumping
         duty:
      
‘For imports put into free circulation which are not directly invoiced by one of the above exporters or producers located
         in Poland to the unrelated importer the following specific duty is set:
      
for the product originating in Poland … certified to be produced by Zakłady Azotowe Puławy … the specific duty [of] ECU per tonne product …’
      
Article of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/of October establishing the Community Customs Code (OJ L 302,
         p. 1), as amended by Regulation (EC) No 2700/of the European Parliament and of the Council of November (OJ L 311, p. 17), (‘the Customs Code’) provides:
      
‘1.      Import duties or export duties may be repaid or remitted in situations other than those referred to in Articles 236, 237,
         and 238:
      
–       to be determined in accordance with the procedure of the committee;
–       resulting from circumstances in which no deception or obvious negligence may be attributed to the person concerned. The situations
         in which this provision may be applied and the procedures to be followed to that end shall be defined in accordance with the
         Committee procedure. Repayment or remission may be made subject to special conditions.
      
2.      Duties shall be repaid or remitted for the reasons set out in paragraph upon submission of an application to the appropriate
         customs office …’
      
Article of the Customs Code provides:
‘For the purposes of this Code, the following definitions shall apply:
…
(24)  Committee procedure means either the procedure referred to in Articles and 247a, or in Articles and 248a.’
Article of the Customs Code provides:
‘The measures necessary for the implementation of this Regulation … shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure
         referred to in Article 247a(2) …’
      
Article 247a(2) of the Customs Code provides:
‘1.      The Commission shall be assisted by a Customs Code Committee (hereinafter referred to as “the Committee”).
2.      Where reference is made to this paragraph, Articles and of Decision 1999/468/EC [Council Decision of June laying
         down the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the Commission; (OJ L 184, p. 23; ‘the comitology
         decision’)] shall apply, …
      
…
3.      The Committee shall adopt its rules of procedure.’
Article of the rules of procedure of the Customs Code Committee is worded as follows:
‘1.      The Chairman shall send the invitation to the meeting, the agenda and proposed measures about which the committee’s opinion
         is required and any other working documents to the Permanent Representations and committee members in accordance with Article
         14(2), as a general rule, no later than calendar days before the date of the meeting.
      
2.      In urgent cases, and where the measures to be adopted must be applied immediately, the Chairman may, at the request of a committee
         member or on his or her own initiative, shorten the period laid down in the above paragraph to five calendar days before the
         date of the meeting.
      
3.      In cases of extreme urgency, the Chairman may depart from the periods laid down in paragraphs and above. If the placing
         of another point onto the agenda is requested during the course of a meeting, the approval of a simple majority of committee
         members is required.’
      
Article 905(1) of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2454/of July laying down provisions for the implementation of Regulation
         No 2913/(OJ L 253, p. 1), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1677/of July (OJ L 212, p. 18),
         (‘the implementing regulation’) states:
      
‘Where the decision-making customs authority to which an application for repayment or remission under Article 239(2) of the
         Code has been submitted cannot take a decision on the basis of Article 899, but the application is supported by evidence which
         might constitute a special situation resulting from circumstances in which no deception or obvious negligence may be attributed
         to the person concerned, the Member State to which this authority belongs shall transmit the case to the Commission to be
         settled under the procedure laid down in Articles to 909.
      
However, except if the decision-making customs authority is in doubt, it can decide itself to grant repayment or remission
         of the duties in cases in which it considers that the conditions laid down in Article 239(1) of the Code are fulfilled, provided
         that the amount concerned per operator in respect of one or more import or export operations, but arising from one and the
         same special situation, is less than ECU 000.
      
The term “the person concerned” shall be interpreted in the same way as in Article 899.
In all other cases, the decision-making customs authority shall refuse the application.’
Article of the implementing regulation provides:
‘Within days of receipt of the case referred to in Article 905(2) the Commission shall forward a copy thereof to the Member
         States.
      
Consideration of the case in question shall be included as soon as possible on the agenda of a meeting of the Committee provided
         for in Article of the Code.’
      
After the events in this case, the second paragraph of Article of the implementing regulation was amended as follows by
         Commission Regulation (EC) No 1335/of July amending Regulation No 2454/(OJ L 187, p. 16):
      
‘Consideration of the case in question shall be included as soon as possible on the agenda of a meeting of the group of experts
         provided for in Article 907.’
      
Article 906a of the implementing regulation provides:
‘Where, at any time in the procedure provided for in Articles and 907, the Commission intends to take a decision unfavourable
         towards the applicant for repayment or remission, it shall communicate its objections to him/her in writing, together with
         all the documents on which it bases those objections. The applicant for repayment or remission shall express his/her point
         of view in writing within a period of one month from the date on which the objections were sent. If he/she does not give his/her
         point of view within that period, he/she shall be deemed to have waived the right to express a position.’
      
The first paragraph of Article of the implementing regulation provides:
‘After consulting a group of experts composed of representatives of all Member States, meeting within the framework of the
         Committee to consider the case in question, the Commission shall decide whether or not the situation which has been considered
         justifies repayment or remission.’
      
Article of the comitology decision, headed ‘Regulatory procedure’, provides:
‘1.      The Commission shall be assisted by a regulatory committee composed of the representatives of the Member States and chaired
         by the representative of the Commission.
      
2.      The representative of the Commission shall submit to the committee a draft of the measures to be taken. The committee shall
         deliver its opinion on the draft within a time-limit which the chairman may lay down according to the urgency of the matter.
         The opinion shall be delivered by the majority laid down in Article 205(2) [EC] in the case of decisions which the Council
         is required to adopt on a proposal from the Commission. The votes of the representatives of the Member States within the Committee
         shall be weighted in the manner set out in that Article. The chairman shall not vote.
      
3.      The Commission shall, without prejudice to Article 8, adopt the measures envisaged if they are in accordance with the opinion
         of the committee.
      
4.      If the measures envisaged are not in accordance with the opinion of the committee, or if no opinion is delivered, the Commission
         shall, without delay, submit to the Council a proposal relating to the measures to be taken and shall inform the European
         Parliament.
      
…’
 Facts
CMF, a company established in Belgium, operates as a wholesaler dealing in chemical products, particularly nitrogenous solutions
         (urea and ammonium nitrate). Its group of companies includes, inter alia, Rellmann GmbH (‘Rellmann’), established in Hamburg
         (Germany), a wholly-owned subsidiary of CMF, and Agro Baltic GmbH (‘Agro Baltic’), established in Rostock (Germany), a wholly-owned
         subsidiary of Rellmann. In 1989, CMF acquired Champagne Fertilisants, the company which is its tax representative for its
         operations in France.
      
The Polish company Zakłady Azotowe Puławy (‘ZAP’) exports goods and sells them to Agro Baltic. Within CMF’s group of companies,
         Agro Baltic sells the goods on to Rellmann, which in turn sells them on to CMF. Invoices for those transactions are drawn
         up.
      
In Case T‑134/03, Agro Baltic bought three shipments of urea ammonium nitrate solution from ZAP between March and September
         1997. Those shipments followed the commercial route described in the preceding paragraph.
      
Cogema, an authorised customs agent, was instructed to arrange for the release of the goods for free circulation in the name
         of Agro Baltic and their release for consumption [‘clearance for home use’] in the name of CMF.
      
The goods were thus initially released for free circulation in the name of Agro Baltic using declaration EUwith the ZAP
         invoices to Agro Baltic attached, together with the EUR.certificates declaring the goods to be of Polish origin. The goods
         were at the same time placed under a warehousing procedure, which they left a few minutes later in order to be released for
         consumption in the name of Champagne Fertilisants.
      
In Case T‑135/03, Agro Baltic bought a shipment from ZAP in January 1995, which then followed the commercial route described
         in paragraph of this judgment.
      
Agro Baltic instructed SCAC Rouen, an authorised customs agent, to arrange for the goods to be released for free circulation
         in the name of Agro Baltic and to be released for consumption in the name of CMF. That entailed, in respect of the same goods,
         making two customs import declarations to the same customs office, referring to two different consignees, so as to separate
         the payment of customs duties from that of value added tax.
      
SCAC Rouen used a simplified customs clearing procedure for the release of the goods for free circulation and their release
         for consumption, in the name of CMF alone. To that end, SCAC Rouen lodged declaration IMin the name of CMF, attaching the
         Rellmann invoice and an EUR.certificate declaring the goods to be of Polish origin.
      
Initially, both in Case T‑134/and in Case T‑135/03, the French competent authorities accepted the declarations, granted
         exemption from import duties on the basis of the EUR.certificates, and did not demand payment of anti-dumping duties.
      
Following a post-clearance examination, however, they took the view that the specific duty of ECU per tonne provided for
         under the second subparagraph of Article 1(3) of Regulation No 3319/should have been applied to all the shipments. In fact,
         in their view, the real importer of the goods was CMF, which had not been directly invoiced by ZAP, even though ZAP had certified
         the goods in question.
      
As regards the shipments at issue in Case T‑134/03, the French competent authorities took the view that the interim warehousing
         of the goods constituted a legal fiction owing to its extremely short duration, and that CMF had acquired the goods in the
         three operations concerned even before the declarations releasing the goods for free circulation in the name of Agro Baltic
         had been lodged. Accordingly, they imposed on CMF duties and taxes in the amount of FRF (EUR 855).
      
As regards the shipments at issue in Case T‑135/03, the French competent authorities noted that a single declaration, in the
         name of CMF, had been made for release of the goods for free circulation and for their release for consumption. Accordingly,
         they imposed on CMF duties and taxes in the amount of FRF (EUR 098).
      
In November and December 1999, CMF applied to the French customs authorities for remission of duties on the basis of Article
         of the Customs Code. On February 2002, the authorities transmitted those applications to the Commission.
      
By letters dated and September 2002, the Commission informed CMF that it intended to take a negative decision in each
         of the two cases.
      
In November 2002, the REM/REC group of experts met in the framework of the Customs Code Committee, Repayments Section. Its
         final vote produced the following result in the two cases: ‘six delegations vote in favour of the Commission’s proposal, four
         delegations abstain and five delegations vote against the Commission’s proposal’.
      
On December 2002, on the view that there had been obvious negligence on the part of CMF and that there was no special situation
         and that therefore the conditions for the application of Article of the Customs Code had not been fulfilled, the Commission
         adopted the contested decisions. It notified those decisions to the French customs authorities, who in turn transmitted them
         to CMF on February 2003.
      
 Procedure before the Court of First Instance and the judgment under appeal
By applications lodged at the Registry of the Court of First Instance on April 2003, registered as Cases T‑134/and T‑135/03,
         CMF sought annulment of the contested decisions.
      
In support of its actions, it relied on three pleas in law.
The first plea, alleging infringement of essential procedural requirements and rights of the defence, was divided into five
         parts:
      
–       infringement of Article EC and Article of the comitology decision;
–       infringement of the first paragraph of Article of the implementing regulation;
–       infringement of Article 4(1) of the rules of procedure of the Customs Code Committee;
–       infringement of Article of Council Regulation No of April determining the languages to be used by the European
         Economic Community (OJ, English Special Edition 1952-1958, p. 59);
      
–       infringement of the rights of the defence.
The second plea, alleging manifest error of assessment in the application of Article of the Customs Code, was set out
         in three parts, concerning respectively:
      
–       the Commission’s refusal to acknowledge the existence of a special situation;
–       CMF’s lack of deception;
–       the Commission’s refusal to find that there was no obvious negligence on the part of CMF.
The third plea alleged an infringement of the duty to state reasons as required under Article EC.
The two cases, T‑134/and T‑135/03, were joined for the purposes of the oral procedure and the judgment.
By the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance dismissed the applications and ordered CMF to pay the costs.
 Forms of order sought by the parties
CMF claims that the Court should:
–       set aside the judgment under appeal;
–       grant the forms of order sought at first instance;
–       order the Commission to pay the costs both of the appeal and of the proceedings at first instance.
The Commission contends that the Court should:
–       dismiss the appeal;
–       order CMF to pay the costs.
 Appeal
CMF submits four grounds of appeal:
–       incomplete presentation of the legal context;
–       distortion of the facts;
–       misinterpretation of the notion of infringement of essential procedural requirements;
–       misapplication of Article of the Customs Code.
 Allegedly incomplete presentation of the legal context
 Arguments of the parties
–       Appellant’s arguments
Sub-dividing the ground of appeal into two parts, CMF alleges that the Court of First Instance did not refer in its presentation
         of the legal context of the case to:
      
–       the 39th recital in the preamble to Regulation No 3319/94, according to which, ‘… given the existence of a number of import
         channels via third country companies, it is considered appropriate to impose a variable duty at the level which would permit
         the Community industry to raise its prices to profitable levels for imports invoiced directly by Bulgarian or Polish producers
         or by parties which have exported the product concerned during the investigation period and a specific duty on the same basis
         for all other imports in order to avoid the circumvention of the anti-dumping measures’;
      
–       Article of the comitology decision, which provides:
‘The choice of procedural methods for the adoption of implementing measures shall be guided by the following criteria:
(a)       management measures, such as those relating to the application of the common agricultural and common fisheries policies, or
         to the implementation of programmes with substantial budgetary implications, should be adopted by use of the management procedure;
      
(b)       measures of general scope designed to apply essential provisions of basic instruments, including measures concerning the protection
         of the health or safety of humans, animals or plants, should be adopted by use of the regulatory procedure; where a basic
         instrument stipulates that certain non-essential provisions of the instrument may be adapted or updated by way of implementing
         procedures, such measures should be adopted by use of the regulatory procedure;
      
(c)       without prejudice to points (a) and (b), the advisory procedure shall be used in any case in which it is considered to be
         the most appropriate.’
      
By making no mention of recital of Regulation No 3319/94, the Court of First Instance did not, as it should have done,
         link its interpretation of the second subparagraph of Article 1(3) of the Regulation to that recital. Had it done so, it would
         have reached the conclusion that a specific duty cannot be imposed where, as in the present case, anti-dumping law has not
         in fact been circumvented.
      
By failing to refer to Article of the comitology decision, which provides non-binding criteria for the choice of procedure
         to be followed, the Court of First Instance incorrectly stated in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that the regulatory
         procedure may be used only for measures of general scope.
      
–       Arguments of the Commission
The Commission takes the view that reference to recital of Regulation No 3319/is irrelevant for the purposes of the
         interpretation of the second subparagraph of Article 1(3) of that regulation, which provides for a specific duty in the presence
         of two objective conditions, namely, indirect invoicing and the import of a ZAP product.
      
As to Article of the comitology decision, the Commission disputes CMF’s claim that the Court of First Instance stated that
         the regulatory procedure may be used only for measures of general scope.
      
 Findings of the Court
Neither of the two parts of this ground of appeal nor, in consequence, the ground of appeal itself, is capable of standing
         alone.
      
Indeed, by those two parts of the ground of appeal, which ostensibly amount to a complaint about the purely formal lack of
         reference, in the presentation of the legal context of the judgment under appeal, to a recital in the preamble to a regulation
         and to an article of a decision, CMF is in fact claiming that the Court of First Instance failed to take those provisions
         into consideration at the stage of interpreting the law at issue, that is, at the stage of the legal analysis.
      
However, as the Advocate General observes in point of his Opinion, the arguments relating to the two parts of this ground
         of appeal are presented in closer detail in the context of the fourth and third grounds of appeal respectively, in which it
         is specifically the legal analysis of the Court of First Instance that is challenged.
      
The two parts are thus indissociable from the fourth and third grounds of appeal.
Consequently, there is no need to consider them separately.
 Alleged distortion of the facts
 Arguments of the parties
–       Appellant’s arguments
CMF claims that, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, in which the facts of the case are presented, the Court
         of First Instance adopted the wholly false inferences drawn by the national competent authorities as to the existence of indirect
         invoicing.
      
According to CMF, that presentation is incomplete and incorrect, and involves a distortion of the facts. That led the Court
         of First Instance to take the view, wrongly, that the circumstances amounted in effect to indirect invoicing, and to misapply
         the second subparagraph of Article 1(3) of Regulation No 3319/94.
      
–       Arguments of the Commission
The Commission maintains that the ground of appeal is irrelevant and thus nugatory.
Indeed, the dispute between CMF and the Commission did not, and could not, concern the issue as to whether the duties were
         actually payable. It related only to the question whether the conditions for remission of the debt were fulfilled.
      
 Findings of the Court
Contrary to CMF’s claim, the Court of First Instance did not rule on the existence of indirect invoicing in the present case;
         nor, in consequence, did it rule on the existence of the customs debt.
      
The contested decisions involved the rejection of applications based on Article of the Customs Code for remission of customs
         debts which – necessarily – existed.
      
A plea alleging a manifest error of assessment in the application of Article of the Customs Code was raised before the
         Court of First Instance and considered in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal.
      
In its assessment, the Court of First Instance analysed one of the cumulative conditions required under that article, namely,
         the absence of obvious negligence on the part of the person concerned. 
      
Having concluded that that condition was not fulfilled, it rejected the plea.
That ground of appeal must therefore be rejected as being nugatory.
 Alleged misinterpretation of the notion of infringement of essential procedural requirements
 Arguments of the parties
–       Appellant’s arguments
CMF alleges that the Court of First Instance misinterpreted the first paragraph of Article of the implementing regulation
         in deciding that that article allowed the Commission to determine matters concerning the remission and repayment of customs
         duties on its own.
      
It takes the view that if such an interpretation were sound, the provision in question would be unlawful.
CMF submits that the first paragraph of Article is part of an implementing regulation, the basic regulation which it implements
         being the Customs Code. 
      
CMF notes that Article of the Customs Code provides that the measures necessary for the implementation of the Code are
         to be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 247a(2) thereof.
      
Accordingly, the only measures that could be laid down in the implementing regulation are implementing measures.
However, the Commission’s conferral upon itself of power to determine matters concerning the remission and repayment of customs
         duties on its own and to create a group of experts out of nothing is not in the nature of a measure implementing the basic
         regulation.
      
The first paragraph of Article of the implementing regulation cannot therefore provide the legal basis for such a conferral
         of power. Accordingly, the Court of First Instance could not conclude on the basis of that provision that the Commission had
         acted within its powers.
      
Nor is the power in question expressly provided for under the EC Treaty.
Article EC, under which each institution is to act within the limits of the powers conferred on it by the Treaty, has thus
         been infringed.
      
CMF claims that it raised a plea of illegality in respect of the first paragraph of Article of the implementing regulation
         before the Court of First Instance. 
      
It criticises the Court of First Instance for holding, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that that plea of illegality
         was inadmissible because it had been raised at the stage of the reply without being based on any matter of law or of fact
         which had come to light in the course of the procedure within the meaning of Article 48(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the
         Court of First Instance.
      
CMF acknowledges that the debate concerning the possible illegality of the first paragraph of Article of the implementing
         regulation was brought about by the interpretation given to that provision by the Commission in its defence, according to
         which the group of experts referred to in that provision is not a committee governed by the comitology decision.
      
However, it maintains that the Commission’s interpretation is a matter of law which came to light in the course of the procedure.
CMF criticises the Court of First Instance for going on to find, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal – on the (mistaken,
         according to CMF) ground that that plea was not a matter of public policy – that the Court was not obliged to raise of its
         own motion the question of the possible illegality of the first paragraph of Article of the implementing regulation.
      
CMF maintains moreover that, for the purposes of determining the legal nature of the committee consulted by the Commission,
         the Court of First Instance misinterpreted (in paragraph of the judgment under appeal) the criteria set out in Article
         of the comitology decision for choosing between the management procedure and the regulatory procedure (see paragraph of this judgment), by holding that the regulatory procedure is used for measures of general scope designed to implement essential
         provisions of basic instruments.
      
According to CMF, ‘measures of general scope’ is not the sole criterion for use of the regulatory procedure.
Furthermore, the criteria set out in Article of the comitology decision are not binding. Accordingly, the Council was entitled
         to provide that the regulatory procedure had to be followed in the case of measures concerning the remission or repayment
         of customs duties.
      
Furthermore, the interpretation of the Court of First Instance in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, according to
         which the contested decisions are individual decisions and not of general scope, is itself incorrect. In fact, those decisions,
         too, are of general scope since, in concerning a customs debt, they directly affect the European Community’s own resources.
      
CMF asserts that the intention of the Community legislature in Article 239(1) of the Customs Code was to impose the regulatory
         committee procedure for the adoption of decisions concerning the remission or repayment of customs duties.
      
It notes that Article 239(1) makes two references to the ‘committee procedure’, once where it refers to ‘situations … to be
         determined in accordance with the procedure of the committee’, then, a second time, when it states that ‘[t]he situations
         in which this provision may be applied and the procedures to be followed to that end shall be defined in accordance with the
         Committee procedure’.
      
The first reference concerns the taking of the substantive decision as to repayment or remission. The second relates to the
         provisions implementing Article 239(1) of the Customs Code, which must be adopted and defined in the implementing regulation.
         Any other explanation for that dual reference would lead to the conclusion that the Community legislature repeated itself
         for no reason.
      
CMF complains that, in the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance ignored the fact that, as CMF had pointed out,
         the group of experts consulted had in fact operated for years outside any budget line. In its view, the contested decisions
         were thus taken in direct breach of Community budgetary law. That breach should be added to the lack of any legal basis for
         the contested decisions and reinforces the total illegality of the context in which those decisions were taken.
      
CMF complains also that, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance stated that the group of
         experts referred to in the first paragraph of Article of the implementing regulation is an entity quite distinct in functional
         terms from the Customs Code Committee, without specifying the precise nature of that entity. By thus dismissing the question
         as to the legal basis for the creation of the group of experts, the Court of First Instance made an error of law.
      
Finally, CMF complains that, in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance held that natural
         or legal persons may not rely on an alleged breach of Article of the rules of procedure of the Customs Code Committee. 
      
In CMF’s view, the Court of First Instance should have taken account of the line of authority established by the judgments
         in Case C‑137/P Commission v BASF and Others [1994] ECR I‑2555, and in Case C‑263/Germany v Commission [1998] ECR I‑441, paragraphs and 32, which CMF had cited.
      
CMF takes the view that compliance with the time-limit of days laid down in Article of the rules of procedure of the
         Customs Code Committee was particularly important. Since the Court of First Instance noted in paragraph of the judgment
         under appeal that the members of the group of experts had calendar days to familiarise themselves with CMF’s response,
         it should have held that there had been an infringement of essential procedural requirements.
      
–       Arguments of the Commission
The Commission contends that the first paragraph of Article of the implementing regulation must be interpreted as meaning
         that the group of experts referred to in that provision is not a regulatory committee for the purposes of Article of the
         comitology decision. Its legal status does not derive from powers delegated by the Council, but from a provision – Article
         of the implementing regulation – adopted by the Commission. 
      
The Commission was thus empowered to take the contested decisions on the basis of Article of the implementing regulation.
Accordingly, the Court of First Instance did not err in law in concluding that the Commission was empowered under the first
         paragraph of Article of the implementing regulation to adopt the contested decisions.
      
The plea alleging the illegality of that provision, which was raised before the Court of First Instance, is distinct from
         the plea initially relied upon in the application. The Court of First Instance correctly held that it was inadmissible because
         it was put forward at the stage of the reply, and that, since the illegality alleged is not a matter of public policy, the
         question did not have to be raised of the Court’s own motion.
      
As to the merits, the Commission notes that the contested decisions are individual decisions, notwithstanding their budgetary
         consequences.
      
In its view, it is Article of the implementing regulation itself which, pursuant to Article of the Customs Code, had
         to be and was adopted in accordance with the opinion of the Customs Code Committee, not the individual decisions subsequently
         taken on the basis of Article 907. Consequently, the Court of First Instance did not infringe Article of the Customs Code.
      
As regards the fact that the group of experts operated for a number of years without its own budgetary line, the Commission
         explains that it provided that information itself in response to the written questions of the Court of First Instance for
         the hearing. 
      
At that hearing, CMF then raised the question of the budgetary line purely for the sake of completeness to reinforce its principal
         plea that the group of experts was in reality the regulatory committee.
      
The Commission contends that, although CMF now takes the view that the alleged lack of a budgetary line is a separate plea,
         that plea should be regarded as inadmissible because it was not raised in the applications initiating proceedings at first
         instance. 
      
Furthermore, as it is irrelevant, that plea is nugatory. The contested decisions do not concern expenditure incurred by the
         Commission after it had consulted the group of experts. As regards the argument that the Court of First Instance failed to
         clarify the precise nature of the group of experts after asserting that it was a distinct entity, the Commission observes
         that there was no need for such clarification since the Court of First Instance was required to rule only on the issue as
         to whether or not the group of experts was a regulatory committee.
      
As to the alleged infringement of Article of the rules of procedure of the Customs Code Committee, the Commission takes
         the view that Commission v BASF and Others, cited above, is irrelevant, as the Court found in that case that the precise and specific objective of the procedural requirement
         of authentication, at issue in that case, was to ensure legal certainty for the addressee of the measure.
      
However, in the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance examined the nature of the procedural requirement imposed
         by Article of the rules of procedure of the Customs Code Committee, and went on to conclude that that requirement was intended
         to ensure the internal working of the committee, not to protect the interests of the addressee of the measure to be adopted.
      
 Findings of the Court
The ground of appeal under consideration may be divided into five parts:
–       misinterpretation of the first paragraph of Article of the implementing regulation, in so far as the Court of First Instance
         conceded that, under that provision, the Commission itself may adopt the contested decisions without first obtaining the opinion
         of the Customs Code Committee delivered by the majority laid down in Article 5(2) of the comitology decision, which refers
         back to the majority laid down in Article 205(2) EC;
      
–       infringement of Article 48(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance, in so far as the Court of First Instance
         held that CMF’s plea of illegality in respect of the first paragraph of Article of the implementing regulation was inadmissible;
      
–       failure to take account of the fact that the illegality alleged by CMF as an objection was a matter of public policy, in so
         far as the Court of First Instance did not address of its own motion the possible illegality of the first paragraph of Article
         of the implementing regulation;
      
–       infringement of Community budgetary law, in so far as the contested decisions were adopted after consultation of a group of
         experts which operated outside any budgetary line;
      
–       infringement of Article of the rules of procedure of the Customs Code Committee, in so far as the Court of First Instance
         held that a failure to take account of that provision cannot be invoked by individuals.
      
These must now be examined in the same order.
–       First part: misinterpretation of the first paragraph of Article of the implementing regulation
The first paragraph of Article of the implementing regulation provides for the Commission to consult ‘a group of experts
         composed of representatives of all Member States, meeting within the framework of the Committee’.
      
In the light of that wording, the Court of First Instance correctly held in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that
         ‘[t]he phrase “within the framework of the Committee” reflects the fact that the group of experts referred to in Article is clearly a distinct entity in functional terms from the Customs Code Committee’. 
      
That interpretation is not inconsistent with the second paragraph of Article of the implementing regulation, under which
         ‘[c]onsideration of the case in question shall be included as soon as possible on the agenda of a meeting of the Committee
         provided for in Article of the Code’. 
      
In fact, the second paragraph of Article must be interpreted as meaning that matters are not placed before the Customs
         Code Committee as such – for the purposes of obtaining an opinion from that Committee itself – but as a body in the framework
         of which the group of experts, which is distinct from that body, will be led to express its opinion.
      
CMF is therefore wrong to criticise the Court of First Instance for failing to hold that the contested decisions should have
         been adopted in accordance with the opinion of the Customs Code Committee.
      
It cannot reasonably claim that the Court of First Instance failed to clarify the precise nature of the group of experts.
         As it is, the Court of First Instance was required to rule only on the issue as to whether or not the group of experts was
         a regulatory committee.
      
Accordingly, the first part of this ground of appeal must be rejected.
–       Second part: infringement of Article 48(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance
Under the first subparagraph of Article 48(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance, ‘[n]o new plea in
         law may be introduced in the course of proceedings unless it is based on matters of law or of fact which come to light in
         the course of the procedure.’
      
It is common ground that, before the Court of First Instance, CMF invoked the illegality of the first paragraph of Article
         of the implementing regulation following the Commission’s reply.
      
Contrary to CMF’s submission, the mere interpretation of that provision given by the Commission in its reply does not constitute
         a matter of law which came to light in the course of the procedure, for the purposes of the first subparagraph of Article
         48(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance.
      
The Court of First Instance therefore rightly held in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal that the plea of illegality
         was inadmissible.
      
Therefore, the second part of this ground of appeal must be rejected.
–       Third part: failure to take account of the public policy nature of the illegality invoked by CMF as an objection, in so far
         as the Court of First Instance did not address of its own motion the possible illegality of the first paragraph of Article
         of the implementing regulation 
      
In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance did indeed hold that the possible illegality of
         the first paragraph of Article of the implementing regulation is not a matter of public policy, going on to add that it
         does not follow from the case-law that it must of its own motion consider whether the Commission exceeded its powers by adopting
         the content of that article, which is the legal basis for the contested decisions.
      
However, in the same paragraph of the judgment under appeal, it noted that:
‘… there is no doubt in the present case that the Commission acted within its powers when it adopted the contested decisions.
         They were taken on the basis of the first paragraph of Article of the implementing regulation, which was in turn adopted
         in accordance with the opinion of the Customs Code Committee …’
      
However, in so ruling, the Court of First Instance correctly held that the first paragraph of Article of the implementing
         regulation was not vitiated by the illegality alleged, by implicitly but necessarily holding that only the adoption of that
         provision, and not the subsequent adoption of individual decisions by the Commission, was subject to the regulatory committee
         procedure.
      
In that regard, it should be noted that the third indent of Article EC empowers the Council to confer on the Commission,
         in the acts which the Council adopts, powers for the implementation of the rules which the Council lays down, making the exercise
         of those powers subject, where appropriate, to certain procedural requirements, or reserving the right, in specific cases,
         to exercise implementing powers directly itself. 
      
The concept of ‘implementation’ for the purposes of that article comprises both the drawing-up of implementing rules and the
         application of rules to specific cases by means of acts of individual application (Case C‑122/Commission v Parliament and Council [2006] ECR I‑2001, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
On the basis of the third indent of Article EC, the Council adopted the comitology decision, which lays down the procedures
         for the exercise of the implementing powers conferred on the Commission.
      
Article of that decision (see paragraph of this judgment) sets out the criteria on the basis of which the choice is to
         be made between three types of procedure, namely, the management procedure, the regulatory procedure and the advisory procedure.
         
      
The three procedures are defined in Articles to of the comitology decision.
It is clear from the wording of Article of the comitology decision that the criteria relating to the choice of committee
         procedure are not binding, which is expressly confirmed in the fifth recital in the preamble to that decision.
      
Thus, without prejudice to the possibility of recourse to the advisory procedure, measures of general scope may come under
         point (a) or point (b) of Article of the comitology decision (see Commission v Parliament and Council, paragraph 38). 
      
They may be covered by the management procedure where they are closely linked to measures of individual application and part
         of a framework sufficiently developed by the basic instrument itself (see Commission v Parliament and Council, paragraph 41).
      
By contrast, again without prejudice to the possibility of recourse to the advisory procedure, measures of individual application
         may be covered only by point (a) of Article of the comitology decision (Commission v Parliament and Council, paragraph 38).
      
In the present case, it must be noted that Article of the Customs Code is contained in an act of the Council.
Under that provision, the Council conferred on the Commission, in accordance with the third indent of Article EC, implementing
         powers for the purposes of determining, first, the situations in which customs duties may be repaid or remitted, and, second,
         the procedures to be followed to that end.
      
In the light of Articles 4(24), and 247a of the Customs Code, the reference to the committee procedure in Article of the Customs Code implies the use of the regulatory procedure, which applies to measures of general scope.
      
Contrary to CMF’s assertion, a decision of the Commission in relation to the repayment or remission of customs duties does
         not have general scope, despite the fact that it affects the Community’s own resources.
      
It constitutes an individual decision, just like a decision of the Commission imposing fines in competition matters, which
         also affects those resources.
      
Accordingly, the Council could have made its adoption subject only to the management procedure, an option which it did not
         use in Articles 239, or 247a of the Customs Code. 
      
CMF is therefore wrong to maintain, first, that the Council could require the adoption of decisions concerning individual
         operators to be subject to the regulatory procedure and, second, that the Court of First Instance misinterpreted the criteria
         set out in Article of the comitology decision for the choice between the management procedure and the regulatory procedure.
      
In the context of an interpretation of Article 239(1) of the Customs Code that is as literal as it is consistent, it must
         be held that ‘situations’ refers, in both instances in which it is used, to situations defined in the abstract rather than
         to the situations of individual operators specifically assessed in the context of individual decisions.
      
That conclusion is supported by the balanced juxtaposition in the second sentence of that article of ‘situations in which
         this provision may be applied’ and the ‘procedures to be followed’, which themselves relate to measures of general scope.
      
In adopting the first paragraph of Article of the implementing regulation – a measure of general scope – the Commission
         exercised the implementing power delegated by Article of the Customs Code in relation to the procedures to be followed.
      
It is common ground that, to that end, it duly obtained the opinion of the Customs Code Committee.
Since it was not obliged under Article of the Customs Code to use any particular procedure for the actual consideration
         of the applications for repayment or remission of customs duties, the Commission could legitimately: 
      
–       confer upon itself a power to take decisions following an advisory opinion of a group of experts that is distinct in functional
         terms from the Customs Code Committee, just as it could have granted itself the same power to be exercised without the assistance
         of such a group, and, moreover, just as it was able to provide in the second subparagraph of Article 905(1) of the implementing
         regulation that the customs authority may itself decide to repay or remit duties where the amount applied for is below a certain
         threshold;
      
–       not make the opinion of the group of experts dependent upon a qualified majority.
The first paragraph of Article of the implementing regulation does not, therefore, fail to take account of Article of the Customs Code, which was itself adopted in accordance with the third indent of Article EC.
      
Nor, therefore, does it infringe Article EC.
It follows from the foregoing that CMF’s complaint concerning one of the grounds of the judgment under appeal – that the possible
         illegality of the first paragraph of Article of the implementing regulation is not a matter of public policy – is directed
         against a ground which was included in the judgment purely for the sake of completeness and which, being in consequence nugatory,
         cannot lead to the judgment being set aside (see, in particular, Case C‑164/P Van den Berg v Council andCommission [2004] ECR I‑10225, paragraph 60, and also Joined Cases C‑189/P, C‑202/P, C‑205/P to C‑208/P and C‑213/P Dansk Rørindustri and Others v Commission [2005] ECR I‑5425, paragraph 148).
      
In fact, the question whether a possible illegality is a matter of public policy is irrelevant where the Court of First Instance
         correctly holds that the measure at issue is untainted by illegality and consequently does not raise the issue of illegality
         of its own motion.
      
The third part of the ground of appeal must therefore be rejected.
–       Fourth part: infringement of Community budgetary law
It is not necessary to consider whether CMF actually relied upon an infringement of Community budgetary law in support of
         its claim before the Court of First Instance for annulment of the contested decisions; it is sufficient to point out that
         the present case does not involve any expenditure by the Commission in respect of the operation of the group of experts.
      
In those circumstances, the question whether or not a budgetary line exists has no bearing on the legality of the contested
         decisions, which relate to applications for the remission of customs duties.
      
It follows that the fourth part of this ground of appeal, which is nugatory in any event, must be rejected.
–       Fifth part: infringement of Article of the rules of procedure of the Customs Code Committee
Article of the rules of procedure of the Customs Code Committee provides, inter alia, that proposed measures about which
         the committee’s opinion is required and any other working documents are to be sent to committee members, as a general rule,
         calendar days before the date of the meeting. That period may be reduced to five calendar days in urgent cases or reduced
         even further in cases of extreme urgency.
      
The Court of First Instance correctly held in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that the purpose of the rule set out
         in that provision is to ensure the internal working of the Customs Code Committee while fully respecting the prerogatives
         of its members. 
      
It went on to note that natural or legal persons may not rely on an alleged breach of that rule, since it is not intended
         to ensure protection for individuals (see, to that effect, Case C‑69/Nakajima v Council [1991] ECR I‑2069, paragraphs and 50).
      
Above all, having found that the group of experts was not a regulatory committee and that, furthermore, CMF was a third party,
         the Court of First Instance quite rightly ruled out the application of the case-law resulting from the judgment in Germany v Commission, which was delivered on the application of a Member State in relation to a standing committee on construction comprising
         representatives appointed by each Member State, and which annulled the contested decision because of a failure to observe
         the time-limit set under the committee’s rules of procedure for documents to be sent to its members.
      
Nor did the Court of First Instance err in law in failing to apply by analogy the case-law resulting from the judgment in
         Commission v BASF and Others, which related to the first paragraph of Article of the Commission’s rules of procedure then in force, under which the
         authentic language version or versions of acts adopted by the Commission at a meeting or by the written procedure were required
         to be authenticated by the signatures of the President and the Executive Secretary. 
      
Indeed, in paragraphs to of that judgment, the Court of Justice upheld a plea put forward by a legal person alleging
         infringement of the first paragraph of Article of the rules of procedure on the grounds (which cannot be applied to the
         present case) that the authentication of acts provided for in that provision was intended to guarantee legal certainty by
         ensuring that the text adopted by the College of Commissioners became fixed in the authentic language versions, and that therefore
         that authentication was an essential procedural requirement.
      
In those circumstances, the fifth part of this ground of appeal must be rejected.
It follows from the foregoing that the ground of appeal itself must be rejected in its entirety.
 Alleged misapplication of Article of the Customs Code
 Arguments of the parties
–       Appellant’s arguments
In CMF’s view, the Court of First Instance misinterpreted Article of the Customs Code in holding that the condition relating
         to the absence of obvious negligence was not fulfilled.
      
CMF’s ground of appeal may be divided into three parts.
By the first part of that ground of appeal, CMF criticises the Court of First Instance for having wrongly taken the view –
         by reference to its judgment in Case T‑104/Gondrand Frères v Commission [2004] ECR II‑3211, paragraph – that the second subparagraph of Article 1(3) of Regulation No 3319/presents no particular
         interpretative difficulty, having been laid down with the aim of preventing the risk of circumvention of anti-dumping measures
         through recourse to triangular import arrangements and implying a presumption as to the risk of circumvention where imports
         are not directly invoiced by the producer or the exporter to the unrelated importer.
      
However, the second subparagraph of Article 1(3) of Regulation No 3319/does not impose a specific duty where there is a
         risk of circumvention. If the Court of First Instance had interpreted that provision in conjunction with recital of that
         regulation (see paragraph of this judgment), it would have reached the conclusion that a specific duty is payable only
         where circumvention has been established.
      
The interpretation of the Court of First Instance shows that the provision in question was a complex provision to interpret.
By the second part of this ground of appeal, CMF complains that the Court of First Instance took the view that CMF could not
         avoid liability on the ground that mistakes were made by its customs agents, and that it had sufficient professional experience
         in the relevant sector.
      
CMF submits that the professional liability of customs agents has been recognised in Community law (Joined Cases 98/and
         230/Van Gend & Loos and Expeditiebedrijf Wim Bosman v Commission [1984] ECR 3763, paragraph 16).
      
It further maintains, as regards its professional experience, that it operates as a wholesaler dealing in chemical products
         and in agricultural supplies, particularly nitrogenous solutions, and that, as a result, it frequently buys the products covered
         by Regulation No 3319/94, very often originating in Poland and Lithuania.
      
However, that does not mean that it is a specialist in the procedures for clearing those products through customs in France.
         It specifically engaged French customs experts to deal with the complex customs clearing formalities.
      
CMF could therefore be described as an economic operator experienced in the import and export of nitrogenous solutions, but
         not as an operator experienced in customs clearing procedures.
      
The mistakes made by the customs agents do not therefore render it liable.
By the third part of this ground of appeal, CMF claims that the Court of First Instance wrongly took the view, on the basis
         of a misinterpretation of the facts, that CMF did not exercise sufficient care in its conduct.
      
In paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, it wrongly took the view that CMF had failed to seek advice from its
         customs agents and that it had made mistakes in drawing up its invoices.
      
CMF emphasises that, by letter of March 2000, it asked the French customs authorities for clarification in respect of Regulation
         No 3319/94.
      
Moreover, the invoicing errors referred to in general terms by the Court of First Instance in fact concerned only Case T‑134/and, furthermore, only one of the three shipments involved in that case.
      
Of the two mistakes made – and quickly rectified – one involved invoicing in French francs instead of dollars, the other,
         failing to enter the agents’ fees in respect of the shipment.
      
Such mistakes are among the normal commercial hazards of that type of operation. They cannot be characterised as indicating
         a lack of care on the part of CMF.
      
–       Arguments of the Commission
The Commission takes the view that the Court of First Instance did not make an error of assessment in ruling that the second
         subparagraph of Article 1(3) of Regulation No 3319/presented no particular interpretative difficulty. There is no subjective
         element in that provision that would involve consideration of the intention of the operator concerned. The fulfilment of the
         two objective conditions laid down in that provision is all that is required for the provision to apply.
      
As regards the mistakes which CMF attributes to its customs agents, the Commission contends that any liability on their part
         does not preclude the liability of CMF, which must assume such liability where appropriate.
      
As regards an operator’s professional experience, the Commission maintains that it should be assessed by reference to his
         experience of commercial import and export transactions rather than to his experience of customs clearing procedures (C‑48/Söhl & Söhlke [1999] ECR I‑7877, paragraph 57).
      
As for the issue of the care taken by CMF, the Commission notes, first of all, that CMF sought clarification from the national
         authorities after the events in the present case had taken place.
      
The Commission goes on to contend that the challenge of the assessment by the Court of First Instance of the invoicing errors
         is inadmissible, since it calls into question an assessment of the facts, which – save where the clear sense of the evidence
         has been distorted – does not constitute a matter of law which, as such, is amenable to review by the Court on appeal.
      
In any event, the challenge concerns only some of the facts examined by the Court of First Instance. The fact remains that
         CMF gave its customs agents precise but impracticable instructions and belatedly sought clarification from the national authorities.
      
 Findings of the Court
The Court of First Instance correctly noted in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that, in order to assess whether
         there is obvious negligence within the meaning of Article of the Customs Code, account must be taken in particular of
         the complexity of the provisions non-compliance with which resulted in the customs debt being incurred, and the professional
         experience of, and care taken by, the trader (Söhl & Söhlke, paragraph 56, and Case C‑156/Netherlands v Commission [2003] ECR I‑2527, paragraph 92).
      
It also rightly noted in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that the repayment or remission of import or export duties,
         which may be made only under certain conditions and in cases specifically provided for, constitutes an exception to the normal
         import and export rules and, consequently, the provisions which provide for such repayment or remission are to be interpreted
         strictly (Söhl & Söhlke, paragraph 52).
      
–       First part: complexity of the second subparagraph of Article 1(3) of Regulation No 3319/In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, referring to its earlier judgment in GondrandFrères v Commission (paragraph 66), the Court of First Instance held that the second subparagraph of Article 1(3) of Regulation No 3319/presented
         no particular interpretative difficulty.
      
In doing so, the Court of First Instance carried out a legal classification of the facts in order to determine whether the
         customs rules in question could be regarded as ‘complex’ for the purposes of applying Article of the Customs Code (see,
         by analogy, Case C‑499/P Biegi Nahrungsmittel and Commonfood v Commission [2005] ECR I‑1751, paragraphs and 43).
      
In that regard, it should be noted that the second subparagraph of Article 1(3) of Regulation No 3319/refers to indirect
         invoicing and the import of a ZAP product as the only conditions for the imposition of a specific duty. 
      
Furthermore, evidence of an intention on the part of the operator to circumvent the anti-dumping duty is not required under
         that provision.
      
Recital of Regulation No 3319/does not conflict with that last statement. It states that the aim is ‘to avoid’ the circumvention
         of the anti-dumping measures. That intention clearly amounts to a general objective of preventing situations of established
         circumvention rather than of taxing them.
      
In ruling that the second subparagraph of Article 1(3) of Regulation No 3319/presented no particular interpretative difficulty,
         inasmuch as it should be understood as being intended to ‘prevent the risk of circumvention’, the Court of First Instance
         did not therefore err in its legal classification of those matters capable of constituting one of the conditions for the application
         of Article of the Customs Code.
      
It follows that the first part of this ground of appeal must be rejected.
–       Second part: (1) ruling out the possibility that CMF could avoid liability on account of mistakes made by the customs agents,
         and (2) taking into account the sufficiency of CMF’s professional experience in the relevant sector
      
In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance held that CMF cannot avoid its own liability by
         relying on the mistake, genuine or otherwise, of its agents.
      
In that regard, it should be noted that, according to Article 5(2) of the Customs Code, representation of an operator for
         the performance of the acts and formalities laid down in the customs rules may be either direct, where the representative
         acts in the operator’s name and on his behalf, or indirect, where the representative acts in his own name but on behalf of
         another person.
      
It should further be noted that: 
–       under Article 4(18) of the Customs Code, the declarant is the person making the customs declaration in his own name or the
         person in whose name a customs declaration is made;
      
–       under Article 201(3) of the Customs Code, in the case of a customs debt the debtor is the declarant and, in the event of indirect
         representation, also the person on whose behalf the customs declaration is made.
      
It follows from those provisions that an operator who uses a customs agent, whether for direct or indirect representation,
         is in any event the debtor in respect of the customs debt as far as the customs authorities are concerned.
      
Therefore, the Court of First Instance did not err in law in ruling out any possibility that CMF could avoid liability on
         account of mistakes that may have been made by its customs agents, whose liability, if any, with regard to CMF relates only
         to their contractual relationship with CMF.
      
As regards the condition linked to the operator’s professional experience, the Court of First Instance rightly noted in paragraph
         of the judgment under appeal that it is necessary to examine whether or not the operator is a trader whose business activities
         consist mainly in import and export transactions and whether he had already gained some experience in the conduct of such
         transactions (Söhl & Söhlke, paragraph 57).
      
Having gone on to find, in paragraph of that judgment, that CMF itself admitted that it had a certain amount of experience
         in importing the nitrogenous products covered by Regulation No 3319/94, which is confirmed, moreover, in its appeal (see paragraph
         of this judgment), the Court of First Instance correctly concluded that the Commission was entitled to take the view that
         CMF had the requisite professional experience.
      
It follows that the second part of this ground of appeal must be rejected.
–       Third part: error in the consideration of the condition linked to the care taken by the operator
In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance noted, principally, that where doubts exist as
         to the exact application of the provisions non-compliance with which may result in a customs debt being incurred, the onus
         is on the trader to make inquiries and seek all possible clarification to ensure that he does not infringe those provisions
         (Söhl & Söhlke, paragraph 58).
      
It went on to note in paragraph of that judgment that, in spite of CMF’s claim as to inherent difficulties in applying
         Regulation No 3319/94, CMF had not only failed to seek advice from its customs agents, but had also given them very precise
         instructions.
      
In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, it added: ‘Furthermore, [CMF’s] mistakes in drawing up its invoices also suggest
         a lack of care on its part.’
      
In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance held that CMF’s conduct in the course of the transactions
         concerned could not be regarded as sufficiently careful.
      
In that regard, it should be noted first that, in doing so, the Court of First Instance carried out a legal classification
         of the facts in order to decide whether the ‘care’ requirement was fulfilled (see, by analogy, Biegi Nahrungsmittel and Commonfood v Commission, paragraphs and 43). Consequently, contrary to the Commission’s assertion, CMF’s challenge concerning the invoicing errors
         is admissible.
      
However, it must be observed that the conclusion reached is already sufficiently justified by the finding that CMF failed
         to seek any information or clarification relevant to the customs clearing procedures in question, in spite of its claim as
         to the ‘complexity’ of Regulation No 3319/94.
      
In fact, given the wording of the second subparagraph of Article 1(3) of that regulation, CMF must have had doubts as to the
         possible application of the specific duty to its chosen import arrangement, which involved the intervention of two companies
         between the Polish exporter and CMF itself.
      
Accordingly, although CMF took the view that, rather than a general objective of prevention, recital of Regulation No 3319/articulated the need for evidence of actual circumvention in addition to the only two conditions set out in the second subparagraph
         of Article 1(3) of that regulation, CMF clearly should have obtained information and sought all possible clarification in
         advance of the customs clearing procedures in question, rather than during the year as it has claimed in these proceedings.
      
It follows that, even if it were well founded, CMF’s complaint concerning the invoicing errors (which the Court of First Instance
         treated as somewhat ancillary factors in the analysis) is not capable of vitiating by an error of law the conclusion drawn
         in the judgment under appeal regarding the condition linked to the care exercised by the operator.
      
In conclusion, since none of the grounds of appeal are well founded, the appeal itself must be dismissed.
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, which applies to appeal proceedings pursuant to Article of those Rules,
         the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings.
         Since the appellant has been unsuccessful, it must be ordered to pay the costs, in accordance with the form of order sought
         to that effect by the Commission.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
1.      Dismisses the appeal;
2.      Orders Common Market Fertilizers SA to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 