
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-452/Proceedings brought byMargarethe OspeltandSchlössle Weissenberg Familienstiftung(Reference for a preliminary rulingfrom the Verwaltungsgerichtshof (Austria))
         
«(Free movement of capital – Article 73b of the EC Treaty (now Article EC) – Article of and Annex XII to the EEA Agreement – Prior authorisation procedure for the acquisition of agricultural and forestry plots – Permissibility – Conditions)»
Opinion of Advocate General Geelhoed delivered on April Judgment of the Court, September Summary of the Judgment
1..
Free movement of capital – Restrictions on the acquisition of agricultural and forestry plots placed on nationals of Member States of the European Economic
                     Area – Assessment in the light of the Agreement on the European Economic Area – Legal scope identical to that of Community provisions  
                  (EC Treaty, Art. 73b (now Art. EC); EEA Agreement, Art. and Annex XII) 
2..
Free movement of capital – Restrictions on the acquisition of immovable property – System of prior authorisation for the acquisition of farmland – Whether permissible – Limits – Conditions as to residence and involvement in farming not permissible  (Arts 73b, 73c, 73d, 73f, and 73g of the EC Treaty (now Arts EC, EC, EC, EC and EC)) 
1.
 National rules making transactions relating to agricultural and forestry plots subject to administrative restrictions must,
         in the case of a transaction between nationals of States party to the Agreement on the European Economic Area (EEA), be assessed
         in the light of Article of and Annex XII to that Agreement, which are provisions with the same legal scope as Article 73b
         of the Treaty (now Article EC), which is identical in substance.   It is apparent from those provisions that the rules laid down in them prohibiting restrictions on the movement of capital
         and discrimination, so far as concerns relations between the States party to the EEA Agreement, irrespective of whether they
         are members of the Community or members of EFTA, are identical to those under Community law with regard to relations between
         the Member States. National measures governing the acquisition of agricultural and forestry plots are therefore no more exempt
         from the abovementioned rules than under Community law. see paras 28, 32, operative part 2.
 Article 73b of the Treaty (now Article EC) in conjunction with Articles 73c, 73d, 73f and 73g of the Treaty (now Articles
         EC to EC) do not preclude the acquisition of agricultural land being made subject to the grant of prior authorisation.
          However, they do preclude such authorisation being refused in every case in which the acquirer does not himself farm the
         land concerned as part of a holding and on which he is not resident. see para. 54, operative part JUDGMENT OF THE COURTSeptember (1)
((Free movement of capital – Article 73b of the EC Treaty (now Article EC) – Article of and Annex XII to the EEA Agreement – Prior authorisation procedure for the acquisition of agricultural and forestry plots – Permissibility – Conditions))
 In Case C-452/01, 
             REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Verwaltungsgerichtshof (Austria) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings
            brought by
            
Margarethe Ospelt
and
Schlössle Weissenberg Familienstiftung,
 on the interpretation of Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) and Articles 73b to 73d, 73f and
            73g of the EC Treaty (now Articles EC to EC),
THE COURT,,
 composed of: G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias, President, J.-P. Puissochet (Rapporteur), M. Wathelet, R. Schintgen and C.W.A. Timmermans (Presidents of Chambers), C. Gulmann, D.A.O. Edward, A. La Pergola, P. Jann, V. Skouris, F. Macken, N. Colneric, S. von Bahr, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues and A. Rosas, Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed, Registrar: H.A. Rühl, Principal Administrator, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
 Ms Ospelt and Schlössle Weissenberg Familienstiftung, by C. Hopp, Rechtsanwalt, 
               
─
 the Austrian Government, by H. Dossi, acting as Agent, 
               
─
 the Government of the Principality of Liechtenstein, by A. Entner-Koch, acting as Agent, 
               
─
 the Norwegian Government, by I. Holten, acting as Agent, 
               
─
 the Commission of the European Communities, by G. Braun and M. Patakia, acting as Agents, 
               
─
 the EFTA Surveillance Authority, by E. Wright and D. Sif Tynes, acting as Agents, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of: Ms Ospelt and Schlössle Weissenberg Familienstiftung, represented by C. Hopp; the
               Austrian Government, represented by P. Kustor and H. Kraft, acting as Agents; the Norwegian Government, represented by I.
               Holten; the Commission, represented by G. Braun and M. Patakia; and the EFTA Surveillance Authority, represented by E. Wright
               and D. Sif Tynes, at the hearing on January 2003,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on April 2003, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By order of October 2001, received at the Court on November 2001, the Verwaltungsgerichtshof referred to the Court for
         a preliminary ruling under Article EC two questions on the interpretation of Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment,
         Article EC) and Articles 73b to 73d, 73f and 73g of the EC Treaty (now Articles EC to EC). 
         
            
 Those questions have been raised in the context of proceedings brought by Ms Ospelt and Schlössle Weissenberg Familienstiftung
         (hereinafter  
         the Foundation) against a decision of the Grundverkehrslandeskommission des Landes Vorarlberg refusing to transfer to the Foundation land
         belonging to Ms Ospelt on the ground that the requirements for acquiring agricultural and forestry plots laid down by the
         laws of the  
         Land of Vorarlberg (Austria) had not been fulfilled. 
         
Legal background
 Community law and the  Agreement on the European Economic Area
         
            
 According to the first paragraph of Article of the Treaty: Within the scope of application of this Treaty, and without prejudice to any special provisions contained therein, any discrimination
         on grounds of nationality shall be prohibited.
         
            
 Article 73b(1) of the Treaty requires that: Within the framework of the provisions set out in this chapter, all restrictions on the movement of capital between Member
         States and between Member States and third countries shall be prohibited.
         
            
 Under Article 73c(1) of the Treaty: The provisions of Article 73b shall be without prejudice to the application to third countries of any restrictions which exist
         on December under national or Community law adopted in respect of the movement of capital to or from third countries
         involving direct investment ─ including in real estate ....
         
            
 Article of the Agreement on the European Economic Area of May (OJ L 1, p. 3, hereinafter  
         the EEA Agreement) provides: Within the framework of the provisions of this agreement, there shall be no restrictions between the Contracting Parties on
         the movement of capital belonging to persons resident in EC Member States or EFTA States and no discrimination based on the
         nationality or on the place of residence of the parties or on the place where such capital is invested. Annex XII contains
         the provisions necessary to implement this article.
         
            
 The abovementioned Annex XII declares applicable to the European Economic Area (
         the EEA) Council Directive 88/361/EEC of June for the implementation of Article of the Treaty (OJ L 178, p. 5). 
         Annex I to that directive, which establishes the nomenclature in respect of movements of capital which still has the same
         indicative value for the purposes of defining the notion of capital movements (see Case C-222/Trummer and Mayer [1999] ECR I-1661, paragraph 21), states that that concept covers transactions by which non-residents make investments in
         real estate on national territory. 
         
            
 Article of the EEA Agreement provides in particular that, in so far as they are identical in substance to corresponding
         rules of the Treaty, the provisions of that agreement  
         shall, in their implementation and application, be interpreted in conformity with the relevant rulings of the Court of Justice
         of the European Communities given prior to the date of signature of this agreement. 
          Austrian legislation
         
            
 Under Paragraph VII of the Bundes-Verfassungsgesetznovelle (Law amending the Constitution) of (BGBl. 444), the  
         Länder are authorised to introduce administrative controls on property transactions for the purpose of preserving, strengthening
         or creating, in the public interest, a viable agricultural community. 
         
            
 So far as concerns the  
         Land of Vorarlberg, Paragraph of the Vorarlberger Grundverkehrsgesetz (Vorarlberg Land Transfer Law) of September (LGBl.
         1993/61), as amended (LGBl. 1995/11, 1996/9, 1997/and 1997/85, hereinafter  
         the VGVG), provides: 
         
(1)
 This Law shall apply to transactions relating to:
         
(a)
 agricultural and forestry plots, 
         
(b)
 building plots, 
         
(c)
 plots to which foreigners acquire title. 
         ...
         
(3)
 The purpose of this Law is to:
         
(a)
 preserve agricultural and forestry plots of family farming establishments in the interest of improving their structural circumstances
         in accordance with the natural factors prevailing in the  
         Land, 
         ...
         
(c)
 preserve the broadest possible, socially sustainable distribution of land ownership in accordance with the size of the  
         Land, and 
         
(d)
 place restrictions on the acquisition of land by foreigners who do not have the same status as Austrians under Community law.
         
            
 Paragraph 3(1) of the VGVG provides: Subject to Paragraph and in so far as follows from the law of the European Union, the rules on the acquisition of land by
         foreigners shall not apply to:...
         
(e)
 persons and companies for the purpose of direct investments, real property investments and other capital transactions.
         
            
 Paragraph 4(1) of the VGVG is worded as follows: The transfer of agricultural or forestry plots shall be subject to authorisation by the authority responsible for land transactions
         where it relates to one of the following rights:
         
(a)
 ownership, 
         
(b)
 the right to build ..., 
         
(c)
 the right of use or right of usufruct, 
         
(d)
 leasehold rights over agricultural holdings, 
         ...
         
            
 Paragraph of the VGVG provides: 
         
1.
 Acquisition of title shall be authorised only:
         
(a)
 in the case of agricultural plots, where it is consistent with the preservation of an effective agricultural community and
         the acquirer himself cultivates the plot as part of an agricultural establishment and also has his place of residence there
         or, where that is not the case, it is not contrary to the preservation and creation of an economically healthy, medium and
         small-scale agricultural estate, 
         
(b)
 in the case of forestry plots, where it is not contrary to the interest of forestry in particular and to the general economic
         interest, 
         ...
         
2.
 The conditions laid down in subparagraph (1) are not satisfied in particular where:
         
(a)
 the plot would be withdrawn from agricultural or forestry use without sufficient reason; 
         ...
         
(c)
 it must be concluded that the plot is being acquired solely to form or extend a large estate or hunting areas; 
         
(d)
 it must be concluded that cultivation by the acquirer himself is not certain in the long term or the acquirer does not have
         the specialist knowledge necessary to cultivate the plot himself; 
         
(e)
 the favourable land ownership arrangement as a result of the restructuring of rural land holdings would be affected without
         compelling reason; 
         ...
         
            
 Paragraph of the VGVG provides a long list of transfers for which authorisation is not required, including between persons
         who are related by blood or by marriage or by persons inheriting as a result of testate succession or testamentary gift. 
         
            
 Under Paragraph of the VGVG, where authorisation is refused, the transfer is retrospectively deprived of legal effects.
         
         The main proceedings and the questions referred
            
 Ms Ospelt, a national of the Principality of Liechtenstein, owns land measuring m
         on which she resides in Zwischenwasser, in the  
         Land of Vorarlberg.  That property includes a castle where Ms Ospelt resides.  Most of the plots making up that property are agricultural
         plots which had been leased to farmers.  Other plots are forested. 
         
            
 On April 1998, the entire property was notarially authenticated with the purpose of transferring it to the Foundation,
         which is established in the Principality of Liechtenstein and whose first beneficiary is Ms Ospelt.  The notarial act sought
         to prevent any division caused through inheritance of the family property.  The Foundation stated its intention was to continue
         leasing the agricultural plots to the same farmers as before. 
         
            
 On April 1998, an application was made to the Grundverkehrslandeskommission des Landes Vorarlberg for the authorisation
         required under Paragraph 4(1) of the VGVG (
         the prior authorisation).  It was refused on the ground that the conditions for acquisition by foreigners had not been fulfilled. 
         
            
 Ms Ospelt and the Foundation appealed against that refusal to the Unabhängiger Verwaltungssenat (Austria) which, by a decision
         of October 1998, also refused to grant prior authorisation on the ground that neither the Foundation nor Ms Ospelt pursued
         an agricultural activity or intended to do so in the future and that such a transaction was contrary to the public-interest
         aims of the VGVG as regards preserving and creating viable medium and small-scale agricultural holdings.  It took the view
         that that ground of refusal was applicable also where the land in question was not farmed by the person who had until then
         been the owner, as was the case in the main proceedings. 
         
            
 Ms Ospelt and the Foundation brought an action against that decision before the Verfassungsgerichtshof (Austria).  By decision
         of September 2000, it declined jurisdiction and remitted the case to the Verwaltungsgerichtshof. 
         
            
 In its order for reference, the Verwaltungsgerichtshof observed that the Court had held, in Case C-302/Konle [1999] ECR I-3099, which concerned building plots, that restrictions on the free movement of capital were permissible in
         the name of a land planning objective.  It pointed out, first, however, that the Court has not yet determined whether the
         objectives pursued by a system of prior authorisation such as that at issue in the main proceedings, relating to agricultural
         and forestry plots and established in the interest of the agricultural sector, could justify restrictions on the free movement
         of capital.  Secondly, it took the view that neither had the Court considered in  
         Konle, cited above, whether such a system of prior authorisation, which had always been deemed necessary by the legislature of
         the  
         Land of Vorarlberg and applied in a non-discriminatory manner, could be regarded as necessary having regard to the aforementioned
         objectives. 
         
            
 In those circumstances, the Verwaltungsgerichtshof decided to stay proceedings and refer the following questions to the Court
         for a preliminary ruling: 
         
(1)
 Are Article EC (ex Article of the EC Treaty) and Article EC et seq. (ex Article 73b et seq. of the EC Treaty) to be
         interpreted as meaning that rules whereby transactions in agricultural and forestry plots are subject to restrictions imposed
         by the administrative authorities in the public interest of preserving, strengthening or creating a viable agricultural community
         are also permitted in relation to Member States of the EEA as  
         third countries under Article 56(1) EC ... having regard to the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by an applicable law of the European Union,
         in particular the free movement of capital? 
         
(2)
 In the event that the first question is answered in the affirmative, are Article EC ... and Article EC et seq. ... to
         be interpreted as meaning that the fact that the appellant must, in the case of transfers of agricultural and forestry plots,
         undergo an  
         authorisation procedure even before the property right is entered in the land register, pursuant to the [VGVG], entails an infringement of Community
         law and of one of the appellant's fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the law of the European Union, which is also applicable
         to Member States of the EEA as  
         third countries under Article 56(1) EC ...?
         
The first question
            
 By its first question, the national court seeks to ascertain whether rules such as those laid down by the VGVG which make
         transactions relating to agricultural and forestry plots subject to administrative controls could, in the event that Articles
         6, 73b to 73d, 73f and 73g of the Treaty do not preclude their application to such transactions as between nationals of Member
         States, also be accepted in respect of transactions between nationals of Member States and those of a third country under
         those articles.  Given the facts of the dispute in the main proceedings and of the wording of the questions referred, it would
         appear that the national court implicitly regards the Principality of Liechtenstein, which is a member of the European Free
         Trade Association (
         EFTA), as a third country for the purposes of Article 73b of the Treaty. 
         
            
 First, it should be borne in mind that, although Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC) does not call into question
         the Member States' right to establish a system for the acquisition of immovable property which lays down measures specific
         to transactions relating to agricultural and forestry plots, such a system remains subject to the fundamental rules of Community
         law, including those of non-discrimination, freedom of establishment and free movement of capital (see, to that effect, Case
         182/Fearon [1984] ECR 3677, paragraph 7, and  
         Konle, cited above, paragraphs and 22).  In particular, the Court has held that the scope of the national measures governing
         the acquisition of immovable property should be assessed in the light of those provisions of the Treaty which relate to the
         movement of capital (see, to that effect, Joined Cases C-515/99, C-519/to C-524/and C-526/to C-540/Reisch and Others [2002] ECR I-2157, paragraphs to 31). 
         
            
 Moreover, Article of the EEA Agreement, to which the Republic of Austria, since January 1994, and the Principality of
         Liechtenstein, since May 1995, have been parties (Decision of the EEA Council No 1/of March on the entry into
         force of the Agreement on the European Economic Area for the Principality of Liechtenstein, OJ L 86, p. 58) provides
         that,  
         [w]ithin the framework of the provisions of this agreement, there shall be no restrictions between the Contracting Parties
         on the movement of capital belonging to persons resident in EC Member States or EFTA States and no discrimination based on
         the nationality or on the place of residence of the parties or on the place where such capital is invested. 
         
            
 Annex XII to the EEA Agreement, which contains the provisions necessary to implement Article 40, declares that Directive 88/and Annex I thereto are applicable to the EEA. 
         
            
 Article of and Annex XII to the EEA Agreement are applicable to the dispute in the main proceedings which relates to a
         transaction between nationals of States party to that Agreement.  The Court may give an interpretation of them where a reference
         is made by a court of a Member State with regard to the scope within that State of an agreement which forms an integral part
         of the Community legal system (see Case C-321/Andersson and Wåkerås-Andersson [1999] ECR I-3551, paragraphs to 31, and Case C-300/Salzmann [2003] ECR I-4899, paragraph 65). 
         
            
 However, it is apparent from those provisions that the rules laid down in them prohibiting restrictions on the movement of
         capital and discrimination, so far as concerns relations between the States party to the EEA Agreement, irrespective of whether
         they are members of the Community or members of EFTA, are identical to those under Community law with regard to relations
         between the Member States.  National measures governing the acquisition of agricultural and forestry plots are therefore no
         more exempt from the abovementioned rules than under Community law. 
         
            
 Furthermore, one of the principal aims of the EEA Agreement is to provide for the fullest possible realisation of the free
         movement of goods, persons, services and capital within the whole European Economic Area, so that the internal market established
         within the European Union is extended to the EFTA States.  From that angle, several provisions of the abovementioned Agreement
         are intended to ensure as uniform an interpretation as possible thereof throughout the EEA (see Opinion 1/[1992] ECR I-2821).
          It is for the Court, in that context, to ensure that the rules of the EEA Agreement which are identical in substance to those
         of the Treaty are interpreted uniformly within the Member States. 
         
            
 It would run counter to that objective as to uniformity of application of the rules relating to free movement of capital within
         the EEA for a State such as the Republic of Austria, which is a party to that Agreement, which entered into force on January
         1994, to be able, after its accession to the European Union on January 1995, to maintain legislation which restricts that
         freedom vis-à-vis another State party to that Agreement by basing itself on Article 73c of the Treaty. 
         
            
 Thus, since May 1995, the date on which the EEA Agreement entered into force in respect of the Principality of Liechtenstein,
         and in the sectors covered thereby, Member States may no longer invoke Article 73c vis-à-vis the Principality of Liechtenstein.
          Consequently, contrary to the arguments advanced by the Austrian Government, it is not for the Court to examine, pursuant
         to that provision, whether the restrictions on the movement of capital between Austria and Liechtenstein as a consequence
         of the VGVG were already substantively in force on December and thus whether they could be maintained by virtue of
         the same article. 
         
            
 Accordingly, the answer to the first question must be that rules such as those laid down by the VGVG making transactions relating
         to agricultural and forestry plots subject to administrative controls must, where a transaction is in issue between nationals
         of States party to the EEA Agreement, be assessed in the light of Article of and Annex XII to the aforementioned Agreement,
         which are provisions possessing the same legal scope as that of Article 73b of the Treaty, which is identical in substance.
         
         The second question
            
 By its second question, the referring court asks whether Articles 6, 73b to 73d, 73f and 73g of the Treaty preclude a system
         of prior authorisation such as that established by the VGVG for transactions involving agricultural land. 
         
            
 Measures such as those in issue in the main proceedings which entail, by their very purpose, a restriction on the free movement
         of capital (see, to that effect,  
         Konle, cited above, paragraph 39) may nevertheless be permitted provided that, first, they pursue in a non-discriminatory way an
         objective in the public interest and, secondly, they are appropriate for ensuring that the aim pursued is achieved and do
         not go beyond what is necessary for that purpose (see, to that effect,  
         Konle, paragraph 40, and  
         Salzmann, paragraph 42).  Furthermore, where the granting of prior authorisation is concerned, such measures must be based on objective
         criteria which are known in advance and which allow all persons affected by a restrictive measure of that type to have a legal
         remedy available to them (see, to that effect, Case C-205/Analir and Others [2001] ECR I-1271, paragraph 38). 
         
            
 First, as regards the condition as to non-discrimination, it is clear from Paragraph of the VGVG that the rules on the acquisition
         of land by foreigners do not apply,  
         in so far as such is clearly required by the law of the European Union, to  
         persons and companies carrying out ... investments in immovable property and other transactions involving the free movement
         of capital.  Those provisions observe the requirement of equal treatment between Austrian acquirers of title and persons who are not
         of that nationality but who are resident in one of the Member States and exercise the freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty (see,
         to that effect,  
         Reisch and Others, cited above, paragraph 34). 
         
            
 However, the abovementioned provisions refer explicitly neither to the EEA Agreement nor to the exercise of the free movement
         of capital by persons resident in States party to that Agreement.  They thus appear to restrict treatment as nationals only
         to residents of Member States.  It is therefore not certain that they can prevent discrimination against residents of EFTA
         States, which are parties to the EEA Agreement but are not members of the Community.  In the absence of other evidence produced
         to the Court, it falls to the referring court to determine whether that legislation, in the light of the other provisions
         of Paragraph and the VGVG as a whole, may, in that respect, be interpreted in a manner compatible with Article of the
         EEA Agreement. 
         
            
 On the other hand, as regards the requirement as to residence laid down in Paragraph 5(1)(a) of the VGVG, it is not disputed
         that it was established within the framework of legislation concerning the ownership of agricultural land which is intended
         to achieve the specific objectives of preserving agricultural communities and viable farms.  Contrary to the claims of Ms
         Ospelt and the Foundation, it does not make any distinction between its own nationals and nationals of other Member States
         of the Community or, more broadly, of States party to the EEA Agreement.  It is therefore not, a priori, discriminatory in
         nature (see, to that effect,  
         Fearon, cited above, paragraph 10). 
         
            
 Secondly, so far as concerns the condition as to the aims of the national measure in issue, there is no doubt that the VGVG
         pursues public-interest objectives which are such as to justify restrictions on the free movement of capital.   
         
            
 First, preserving agricultural communities, maintaining a distribution of land ownership which allows the development of viable
         farms and sympathetic management of green spaces and the countryside as well as encouraging a reasonable use of the available
         land by resisting pressure on land, and preventing natural disasters are social objectives. 
         
            
 Secondly, as the Austrian Government and the Commission maintain, those objectives are consistent with the objectives of the
         common agricultural policy which, according to Article 39(1)(b) of the EC Treaty (now Article 33(1)(b) EC), aims  
         to ensure a fair standard of living for the agricultural community in the working-out of which, according to Article 33(2)(a), account must be taken  
         of the particular nature of agricultural activity, which results from the social structure of agriculture and from structural
         and natural disparities between the various agricultural regions. 
         
            
 Thirdly, so far as concerns the condition as to proportionality, it must be borne in mind that a system of prior authorisation
         may, in certain circumstances, be necessary and proportionate to the aims pursued, if the same objectives cannot be attained
         by less restrictive measures, in particular by a system of declarations (see, to that effect, Joined Cases C-163/94, C-165/and C-250/Sanz de Lera and Others [1995] ECR I-4821, paragraphs to 28;  
         Konle, cited above, paragraph 44; and Case C-483/Commission v  
         France [2002] ECR I-4781, paragraph 46). 
         
            
 That is the case where national authorities seek to control the development of agricultural land ownership by laying down
         objectives such as those in the VGVG. 
         
            
 Indeed, the objective of sustaining and developing viable agriculture on the basis of social and land planning considerations
         entails keeping land intended for agriculture in such use and continuing to make use of it under appropriate conditions. 
         In that context, prior supervision by the competent authorities does not merely reflect a need for information but is intended
         to ensure that the transfer of agricultural land will not lead to their ceasing to be used as intended or to a use which might
         be incompatible with their long-term agricultural use. 
         
            
 Any supervision by national authorities which was subsequent to transfer of such land would not provide the same guarantee.
          It could not prevent a transfer which ran counter to that function of continued agricultural use, and would thus not be appropriate
         to the objective.  Furthermore, action taken a posteriori, such as measures to annul the transfer, sanctions or evictions,
         could only be decided by the courts and would lead to delays inconsistent with the requirements of continuity of use and sound
         land management.  Legal certainty, which is of fundamental importance for any system of land transfer, would thus be undermined.
         
         
            
 Thus, unlike supervision measures aimed at preventing construction of secondary residences after the transfer of building
         plots, which may be subsequent to the transaction without detracting from that objective (see, to that effect,  
         Reisch and Others, cited above, paragraphs to 39), national provisions such as the VGVG can achieve their objectives only if the agricultural
         use for which the plots were intended is not irretrievably impaired.  In those circumstances, the very principle underlying
         a system of prior authorisation cannot be disputed.  The Court has in any event previously held that such a system in connection
         with the acquisition of property ownership is not necessarily contrary to Community law (see  
         Konle, cited above, paragraph 45). 
         
            
 None the less, the rules and the substantive conditions laid down by the prior authorisation mechanism chosen must not go
         beyond what is necessary in order to achieve the objective pursued. 
         
            
 One of the conditions laid down by the VGVG does not fully meet those requirements. 
         
            
 Although the VGVG is based on criteria which enable the investors concerned to be aware of the specific, objective circumstances
         in which their application will be granted (see, to that effect,  
         Commission v  
         France, cited above, paragraph 50), Paragraph 5(1)(a) thereof subjects the acquisition of agricultural land to a restrictive condition
         which is not in every case necessary with regard to the objectives which it pursues. 
         
            
 In the main proceedings, the transaction between Ms Ospelt and the Foundation was rejected, pursuant to Paragraph 5(1)(a)
         of the VGVG, on the ground that the Foundation did not pursue an agricultural activity, that furthermore it did not have the
         intention of so doing and that acquisition of agricultural land in order to lease it again to farmers was contrary to the
         objective of the VGVG aimed at ensuring that acquirers of agricultural land should be farmers themselves.  The Unabhängiger
         Verwaltungssenat stated that those grounds were also applicable where the land concerned was farmed prior to the transaction
         by persons other than the owner, as is the case in the main proceedings.  In making such a finding, the competent authority
         appears to have based itself on the fact that the condition laid down in Paragraph 5(1)(a) of the VGVG, according to which
         the acquirer must himself farm the land as part of a holding in which he is moreover resident, was not fulfilled. 
         
            
 However, if the national authorities were to interpret the VGVG as meaning that the grant of the authorisation prior to the
         transfer of real property is subject, in all cases, to observance of that condition, it would go beyond what is necessary
         in order to achieve the public-interest objectives which it pursues and should, to that extent, be regarded as incompatible
         with the free movement of capital. 
         
            
 Thus, where, in a case such as that in the main proceedings, the land concerned by the transfer is, at the moment of sale,
         farmed by a tenant farmer rather than the landowner, such a condition precludes a transfer to a new owner who would additionally
         not farm the property and who would not be resident on the land but who has undertaken to continue to have the land farmed
         by the same tenant.  By reserving the possibility of acquiring and farming property to farmers who have the resources to own
         the land concerned, that condition thus reduces the possibility of leasing the land to farmers who do not have such resources.
          It has the further effect of precluding legal persons, including those whose object is farming, from acquiring farmland.
          It therefore constitutes an obstacle to planned transactions which do not in themselves affect the agricultural use and the
         continued farming of the land by farmers or legal persons such as farming associations. 
         
            
 Moreover, as the Government of the Principality of Liechtenstein points out, other measures which are less restrictive of
         the free movement of capital could contribute towards achievement of the same objective of maintaining a viable farming community.
          The transfer of agricultural land to a legal person could, for instance, be made subject to particular obligations, such
         as that it be let on a long lease.  Mechanisms could also be put in place giving a right of first refusal to tenants which
         would make it possible, where the latter did not acquire the property, for title to be acquired by non-farming owners who
         would undertake to keep the land in agricultural use. 
         
            
 However, Paragraph 5(1)(a) of the VGVG provides that acquisition may be permitted, even where the condition referred to in
         paragraphs to of the present judgment is not met, when such acquisition  
         is not contrary to the preservation and creation of an economically healthy, medium and small-scale agricultural estate.  If, in view of that provision, the national authorities were to interpret the VGVG as meaning that prior authorisation
         may be granted, depending on the circumstances, to persons who are not farmers resident on the land concerned but who can
         give the necessary assurances that the abovementioned land will be kept in agricultural use, the VGVG would not fetter the
         free movement of capital beyond what is necessary in order to achieve its objectives. 
         
            
 The answer to the second question must therefore be that Articles 73b to 73d, 73f and 73g of the Treaty do not preclude the
         acquisition of agricultural land being made subject to the grant of prior authorisation such as that established by the VGVG.
          However, they do preclude such authorisation being refused in every case in which the acquirer does not himself farm the
         land concerned as part of a holding and on which he is not resident. 
         
Costs
            
 The costs incurred by the Austrian Government, the Principality of Liechtenstein, the Norwegian Government, the Commission
         and the EFTA Surveillance Authority, which have submitted observations to the Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings
         are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the proceedings pending before the national court, the decision on
         costs is a matter for that court.  
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT,
 in answer to the questions referred to it by the Verwaltungsgerichtshof by order of October 2001, hereby rules: 
         
1.
 Rules such as those of the Vorarlberger Grundverkehrsgesetz (Vorarlberg Land Transfer Law) of September 1993, as amended,
            making transactions relating to agricultural and forestry plots subject to administrative controls must, where a transaction
            is in issue between nationals of States party to the Agreement on the European Economic Area of May 1992, be assessed in
            the light of Article of and Annex XII to the aforementioned Agreement, which are provisions possessing the same legal scope
            as that of Article 73b of the EC Treaty (now Article EC), which is identical in substance. 
            
2.
 Article 73b of the Treaty in conjunction with Articles 73c, 73d, 73f and 73g of the EC Treaty (now Articles EC to EC)
            do not preclude the acquisition of agricultural land being made subject to the grant of prior authorisation such as that established
            by the VGVG.  However, they do preclude such authorisation being refused in every case in which the acquirer does not himself
            farm the land concerned as part of a holding and on which he is not resident. 
            
Rodríguez Iglesias
Puissochet 
Wathelet 
Schintgen
Timmermans 
Gulmann 
Edward
La Pergola 
Jann 
Skouris
Macken 
Colneric 
von Bahr
Cunha Rodrigues 
Rosas 
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on September 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: German.
Top  
 