
Case C-248/Commission of the European Communities
v
Ireland
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Protection of underground water against pollution caused by hazardous substances – Directive 80/68/EEC)
Judgment of the Court (Second Chamber), October Summary of the Judgment
1.     Approximation of laws – Protection of groundwater – Directive 80/(Council Directive 80/68, Arts 3, and 5)
2.     Approximation of laws – Protection of groundwater – Directive 80/(Council Directive 80/68, Arts 4, and 7)
3.     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Action in respect of an administrative practice contrary to Community law – Admissibility
            – Conditions 
(Arts EC, EC and EC)
4.     Approximation of laws – Protection of groundwater – Directive 80/(Council Directive 80/68, Arts 2(a), 5(1) and 7)
1.     Under Article 3(a) of Directive 80/on the protection of groundwater against pollution caused by certain dangerous substances,
         the Member States are bound to take the steps necessary to prevent the introduction into groundwater of substances in list
         I.
      
According to the second subparagraph of Article 4(2) of that directive, authorisation for indirect discharge of those substances
         may be granted by a Member State only if all technical precautions have been taken to ensure that the substances in question
         cannot reach other aquatic systems or harm other ecosystems.
      
That condition is not fulfilled, because the discharges are not confined to groundwater, where an aquatic system including
         a river that does not have its source in the groundwater under a municipal landfill site is as a matter of fact harmed by
         the indirect discharge of listed substances and, according to the hydrogeological survey, there was an alternative solution
         to the one adopted, which would have made it possible not to worsen the degree to which that river was polluted.
      
 (see paras 34-35, 37, 41-42)
2.     The environment receiving the discharges forms the subject of the prior investigations referred to in Articles and of
         Directive 80/on the protection of groundwater against pollution caused by certain dangerous substances. With regard to
         that specific subject-matter, Article of the directive requires those investigations also to have a specific objective,
         namely examination of the hydrogeological conditions of the area concerned, the possible purifying powers of the soil and
         subsoil and the risk of pollution and deterioration of the groundwater by the discharges, in order to establish whether discharges
         into groundwater are a satisfactory solution from the point of view of the environment. Article thus makes the grant of
         authorisation subject to precise and detailed conditions which must be regarded as mandatory in order to achieve the aim of
         the directive. If the objective so sought by the Community legislature is to be fully attained, the prior investigation, upon
         which grant of authorisation is conditional, must enable full and detailed understanding of the state of the environment receiving
         the discharges, but it is not for all that necessary for any express reference to be made to the directive.
      
(see paras 53-54)
3.     The Commission may seek a finding from the Court that provisions of a directive have not been complied with because a general
         practice contrary thereto has been adopted by the authorities of a Member State, using particular situations to shed light
         on that practice. For a State’s action consisting in an administrative practice contrary to the requirements of Community
         law to amount to a failure to fulfil obligations for the purposes of Article EC, that administrative practice must be,
         to some degree, of a consistent and general nature.
      
(see paras 64-65)
4.     As is made unequivocally clear by the very words of Article 5(1) of Directive 80/68, the Member States must, as a rule, for
         all substances in list II, including those from septic tanks, establish prior investigation and authorisation procedures for
         all disposal or tipping for the purpose of disposal of those substances which might lead to indirect discharge.
      
Where the competent authorities of a Member State, having regard to the increase in a hotel’s capacity, cease to regard the
         effluent discharged by that establishment as domestic for the purposes of Article 2(a) of the directive, and impose upon it
         the duty to obtain a licence for the discharge of effluent, that licence may be issued only under the terms of, and in accordance
         with the procedures prescribed by, the directive.
      
Where, having regard to the number of bedrooms it contains and the events held there, a hotel cannot legitimately escape the
         application of the directive, and it is not disputed that substances in list II are produced by the hotel’s septic tank and
         discharged into groundwater, it must be subject to the prior investigation and authorisation procedure required by Article
         5(1) of the directive. That investigation must meet the conditions laid down in Article of the directive, requiring it to
         have a specific objective, namely examination of the hydrogeological conditions of the area concerned, the possible purifying
         powers of the soil and subsoil and the risk of pollution and deterioration of the groundwater by the discharges, in order
         to establish whether discharges into groundwater are a satisfactory solution from the point of view of the environment.
      
(see paras 53, 77, 86-87, 91-93)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil its obligations – Protection of underground water against pollution caused by hazardous substances – Directive 80/68/EEC)
In Case C‑248/05,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on June 2005,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by S. Pardo Quintillán and D. Recchia, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Ireland, represented by D. O’Hagan, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of Chamber, L. Bay Larsen, J. Makarczyk (Rapporteur), P. Kūris and J.-C. Bonichot,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: Y. Bot,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities requests the Court to declare that:
–       by failing to take all the measures necessary to comply with Articles 4, 5, 7, and of Council Directive 80/68/EEC of
         December on the protection of groundwater against pollution caused by certain dangerous substances (OJ L 20,
         p. 43), as amended by Council Directive 91/692/EEC of December standardising and rationalising reports on the implementation
         of certain directives relating to the environment (OJ L 377, p. 48, ‘the Groundwater Directive’ or ‘the Directive’),
         at Ballymurtagh landfill (County Wicklow), and
      
–       by failing to take all the measures necessary to comply with Articles 5, 7, 8, 10, and of the Groundwater Directive
         with regard to indirect discharges from septic tanks,
      
Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under those provisions of the Groundwater Directive.
 Relevant provisions
Article 1(1) of the Groundwater Directive provides that:
‘The purpose of this Directive is to prevent the pollution of groundwater by substances belonging to the families and groups
         of substances in lists I or II in the Annex, hereinafter referred to as “substances in lists I or II”, and as far as possible
         to check or eliminate the consequences of pollution which has already occurred.’
      
In the words of Article 1(2) of the Groundwater Directive:
‘For the purposes of this Directive:
(a)      “groundwater” means all water which is below the surface of the ground in the saturation zone and in direct contact with the
         ground or subsoil; 
      
(b)      “direct discharge” means the introduction into groundwater of substances in lists I or II without percolation through the
         ground or subsoil;
      
(c)      “indirect discharge” means the introduction into groundwater of substances in lists I or II after percolation through the
         ground or subsoil;
      
(d)       “pollution” means the discharge by man, directly or indirectly, of substances or energy into groundwater, the results of which
         are such as to endanger human health or water supplies, harm living resources and the aquatic ecosystem or interfere with
         other legitimate uses of water.’
      
Article provides that the Directive is not to apply to:
‘(a)      discharges of domestic effluents from isolated dwellings not connected to a sewerage system and situated outside areas protected
         for the abstraction of water for human consumption;
      
…’.
Article of the Directive provides:
‘Member States shall take the necessary steps to:
(a)      prevent the introduction into groundwater of substances in list I; and;
(b)      limit the introduction into groundwater of substances in list II so as to avoid pollution of this water by these substances.’
Article 4(1) and (2) of the Directive states:
‘1.      To comply with the obligation referred to in Article 3(a), Member States:
–       shall prohibit all direct discharge of substances in list I,
–       shall subject to prior investigation any disposal or tipping for the purpose of disposal of these substances which might lead
         to indirect discharge.  In the light of that investigation, Member States shall prohibit such activity or shall grant authorisation
         provided that all the technical precautions necessary to prevent such discharge are observed,
      
–       shall take all appropriate measures they deem necessary to prevent any indirect discharge of substances in list I due to activities
         on or in the ground other than those mentioned in the second indent.  They shall notify such measures to the Commission, which,
         in the light of this information, may submit proposals to the Council for revision of this Directive.
      
2.      However, should prior investigation reveal that the groundwater into which the discharge of substances in list I is envisaged
         is permanently unsuitable for other uses, especially domestic or agricultural, the Member States may authorise the discharge
         of these substances provided that their presence does not impede exploitation of ground resources.
      
These authorisations may be granted only if all technical precautions have been taken to ensure that these substances cannot
         reach other aquatic systems or harm other ecosystems.’
      
In accordance with Article of the Directive:
‘1.      To comply with the obligation referred to in Article 3(b), Member States shall make subject to prior investigation: 
–       all direct discharge of substances in list II, so as to limit such discharges,
–       the disposal or tipping for the purpose of disposal of these substances which might lead to indirect discharge.
In the light of that investigation, Member States may grant an authorisation, provided that all the technical precautions
         for preventing groundwater pollution by these substances are observed.
      
2.      Furthermore, Member States shall take the appropriate measures they deem necessary to limit all indirect discharge of substances
         in list II, due to activities on or in the ground other than those mentioned in the first paragraph.’
      
Article of the Directive is worded as follows:
‘The prior investigations referred to in Articles and shall include examination of the hydrogeological conditions of the
         area concerned, the possible purifying powers of the soil and subsoil and the risk of pollution and alteration of the quality
         of the groundwater from the discharge and shall establish whether the discharge of substances into groundwater is a satisfactory
         solution from the point of view of the environment.’
      
Article of the Directive provides:
‘The authorisations referred to in Articles 4, and may not be issued by the competent authorities of the Member States
         until it has been checked that the groundwater, and in particular its quality, will undergo the requisite surveillance.’
      
In the words of Article of the Directive:
‘When direct discharge is authorised in accordance with Article 4(2) and (3) or Article 5, or when waste water disposal which
         inevitably causes indirect discharge is authorised in accordance with Article 5, the authorisation shall specify in particular:
      
–       the place of discharge,
–       the method of discharge, 
–       essential precautions, particular attention being paid to the nature and concentration of the substances present in the effluents,
         the characteristics of the receiving environment and the proximity of water catchment areas, in particular those for drinking,
         thermal and mineral water,
      
–       the maximum quantity of a substance permissible in an effluent during one or more specified periods of time and the appropriate
         requirements as to the concentration of these substances,
      
–       the arrangements enabling effluents discharged into groundwater to be monitored,
–       if necessary, measures for monitoring groundwater, and in particular its quality.’
Article of the Directive is worded as follows:
‘When disposal or tipping for the purpose of disposal which might lead to indirect discharge is authorised in accordance with
         Articles or 5, authorisation shall specify in particular:
      
–       the place where such disposal or tipping is done,
–       the methods of disposal or tipping used,
–       essential precautions, particular attention being paid to the nature and concentration of the substances present in the matter
         to be tipped or disposed of, the characteristics of the receiving environment and the proximity of water catchment areas,
         in particular those for drinking, thermal and mineral water,
      
–       the maximum quantity permissible, during one or more specified periods of time, of the matter containing substances in lists
         I or II and, where possible, of those substances themselves, to be tipped or disposed of and the appropriate requirements
         as to the concentration of those substances,
      
–       in the cases referred to in Article 4(1) and Article 5(1) the technical precautions to be implemented to prevent any discharge
         into groundwater of substances in list I and any pollution of such water by substances in list II,
      
–       if necessary, the measures for monitoring the groundwater, and in particular its quality.’
Article of the Directive provides:
‘1.      If the person requesting an authorisation as referred to in Articles or states that he is unable to comply with the conditions
         laid down, or if this situation is evident to the competent authority in the Member State concerned, authorisation shall be
         refused.
      
2.      Should the conditions laid down in an authorisation not be complied with, the competent authority in the Member State concerned
         shall take appropriate steps to ensure that these conditions are fulfilled; if necessary, it shall withdraw the authorisation.’
      
Article of the Directive provides that:
‘The competent authorities of the Member States shall monitor compliance with the conditions laid down in the authorisations
         and the effects of discharges on groundwater.’
      
 The pre-litigation procedure 
In the Commission registered a complaint concerning the municipal landfill established on an old mine at Ballymurtagh
         by Wicklow County Council. 
      
In the Commission registered another complaint concerning unauthorised discharges to groundwater from hotel premises
         at Creacon Lodge (New Ross), County Wexford, opened in 1995.  When dealing with that complaint, the Commission studied more
         extensive questions in relation to effluents discharged by septic tanks, concerning the conditions for application of the
         Directive in the Irish countryside in respect of buildings used for commercial or non-domestic purposes and dwellings which
         are not isolated but situated in various settlements.
      
Furthermore, the Commission became aware of a report on eutrophication problems in the Lakes of Killarney, County Kerry, which
         indicated that premises with septic tanks were one of the causes of the serious contamination of those waters and stressed
         that septic tanks were often unsuitable or not properly maintained.
      
For the purposes of the investigation of the second complaint the Commission addressed a letter to Ireland on May 2001,
         mentioning the report referred to above.
      
Dissatisfied with the responses given during the investigation of the first complaint and taking account of the lack of any
         response concerning the second complaint, the Commission addressed a letter of formal notice to Ireland on October 2001,
         expressing its concerns about the conditions in which that Member State applied several provisions of the Groundwater Directive
         and inviting it to present its observations on that subject.
      
That letter going unanswered, the Commission sent that Member State a reasoned opinion on December 2002, requesting it
         to take the measures necessary to comply with that opinion within a period of two months from its receipt.
      
By letter of September 2003, the Irish authorities sent a reply to that opinion, supplying information on the measures taken
         and claiming to comply with the Directive. Taking the view that the position adopted by Ireland was unsatisfactory, the Commission
         has brought this action.
      
 The action
It should at the outset be emphasised that the Commission has expressly acknowledged in its pleadings that Ireland has adopted
         the legislation necessary to transpose the Groundwater Directive into its domestic law.
      
 The heads of claim relating to Ballymurtagh municipal landfill
In its application the Commission charges Ireland with failing to adopt all the measures necessary to comply with Articles
         4, 5, 7, and of the Directive with regard to the Ballymurtagh municipal landfill site.
      
First, the Commission alleges that that Member State issued no formal authorisation before that landfill was brought into
         operation, when such authorisation ought to have been sought and granted before activity began at the new installation, in
         order that such activity might be made subject to adequate conditions for the purposes of Article of the Directive.  Second,
         the Commission takes the view that the requisite technical precautions have not been adopted in order to avoid the discharge
         of substances in lists I and II mentioned in the Annex to the Groundwater Directive (‘substances in lists I and II’, ‘substances
         in list I’ or ‘substances in list II’, as the case may be).  Third, it argues that the waste licence granted by the Environmental
         Protection Agency (‘the Agency’) on April for operation of the landfill is not in keeping with the provisions of the
         Directive on account of the irregularity of both the licence and the prior investigation. 
      
It should be noted that the Commission in its reply has abandoned its claims alleging that the Ballymurtagh landfill was not
         formally authorised before it was brought into operation and alleging failure to comply with Article of the Directive. 
      
 Concerning the claim alleging non-compliance with the Directive by reason of the discharge of substances in lists I and II
         
      
–       Arguments of the parties 
The Commission argues that Ireland, in allowing the Ballymurtagh municipal landfill to be created and operated when it knew
         that substances in list I, for example, cadmium, and in list II, such as heavy metals and phosphorus, would inevitably find
         their way into the Avoca River because of the lack of any protective membrane under the landfill, has not observed its obligation
         to take all ‘technical precautions’ pursuant to the second subparagraph of Article 4(2) of the Directive.
      
The Commission maintains that discharges of such substances are subject to conditions that were not satisfied so far as the
         site in question is concerned.  Those conditions include the requirements set out in Article 4(2) of the Directive, which
         make it clear that the discharge may be made only into groundwater and that it must be impossible for substances in list I
         present in those waters to reach other aquatic systems. 
      
However, according to the Commission, the groundwater under the Ballymurtagh site, on the one hand, and the Avoca, on the
         other, cannot be said to form part of the same aquatic system.  
      
In any event, according to the Commission, even if that groundwater issuing into the Avoca were to be regarded as forming
         part, together with that river, of the same aquatic system, the river cannot be considered permanently unsuitable for other
         uses.  In point of fact, the Environmental Impact Statement on Ballymurtagh Landfill (‘the EIS’), produced pursuant to the
         domestic legislation on waste management, states that ‘The Avoca River in the vicinity of the mines/landfill is a fast-flowing
         rocky river and can be classified as a very good salmonid habitat’.  
      
The Commission maintains, in addition, that Wicklow County Council could have been in no doubt that, for want of a protective
         barrier, residual fluid produced by the percolation of water through the waste (‘leachate’) would reach the Avoca, inasmuch
         as the hydrogeological survey made in (Cullen K.T., ‘Ballymurtagh Open Pit: Report on the Hydrogeological Survey of a
         Proposed Waste Disposal Site’, March 1987, ‘the Survey’), presented a choice between, on the one hand, the dilution and
         dispersion of the leachate and, on the other, the sealing of the base of the pit.  The County Council chose the dilute and
         disperse option which could not but lead to the pollution of another water system.
      
Ireland contends that, in accordance with the actual wording of Article 4(2) of the Groundwater Directive, the discharge of
         substances in list I may be authorised subject to certain conditions.
      
That Member State argues from the conclusions of the Survey which state that ‘the highly contaminated nature of both the groundwater
         beneath the mine and of the Avoca River allows this [dilute and disperse] option to be worthy of serious consideration as
         the principal effect on the quality of either the mine overflow or the Avoca River would be a discoloration dependant on the
         nature and composition of the leachate’.
      
According to Ireland, the groundwater within and in the lower slopes of the old mineral-bearing areas is highly contaminated
         as a result of the former mine-working and is unsuitable for domestic or agricultural use.  It states that in any event, according
         to the Agency’s most recent report on water quality, the most serious case of pollution by metals is that of the Avoca, which
         is seriously contaminated by copper, zinc and, to a lesser extent, lead. 
      
Moreover, according to that Member State, the aquatic system is made up of both water from surface run-off and groundwater
         and in the circumstances it cannot be said that there exist two separate unrelated systems.
      
–       Findings of the Court 
It is to be borne in mind, first, that under Article 3(a) of the Groundwater Directive the Member States are bound to take
         the steps necessary to prevent the introduction into groundwater of substances in list I. 
      
In order to comply with that obligation, the Member States must, in accordance with Article 4(1) of the Directive, prohibit
         all direct discharge of those substances and also subject to prior investigation any disposal or tipping for the purpose of
         disposal of those substances which might lead to indirect discharge, in order either to prohibit such activity or to grant
         authorisation provided that all the technical precautions necessary to prevent such discharge have been observed.
      
Moreover, the first subparagraph of Article 4(2) of the Directive makes it clear that the Member States may authorise the
         discharge of substances in list I if a prior investigation should reveal that the groundwater into which it is envisaged the
         substances would be discharged is permanently unsuitable for other uses, especially domestic or agricultural, and provided
         that their presence does not impede the exploitation of ground resources.
      
Further, according to the second subparagraph of Article 4(2), such authorisation may be granted only if all technical precautions
         have been taken to ensure that the substances in question cannot reach other aquatic systems or harm other ecosystems.
      
Second, by virtue of Article 3(b) of the Directive, the Member States are to limit the introduction into groundwater of substances
         in list II so as to avoid pollution of that water by those substances.
      
In order to comply with that obligation, the Member States must, in accordance with the first subparagraph of Article 5(1)
         of the Directive, make subject to prior investigation all direct discharge of substances in list II, so as to limit such discharges,
         and also the disposal or tipping for the purpose of disposal of those substances which might lead to indirect discharge. 
         According to the second subparagraph of Article 5(1), in the light of that investigation Member States may grant an authorisation
         provided that all the technical precautions for preventing the pollution of groundwater by those substances have been observed.
      
First, it is to be stressed that Ireland recognises that the groundwater into which issue indirect discharges of substances
         in list I may flow into the Avoca, where the presence of certain of those substances may, moreover, cause discolouration of
         the water. 
      
Given that the Avoca, which it has been established does not have its source in the groundwater under the Ballymurtagh site,
         belongs to an aquatic system which is as a matter of fact harmed by those discharges, the condition fixed in the second subparagraph
         of Article 4(2) of the Directive has not been satisfied because the discharges are not confined to groundwater.  The conclusions
         of various studies finding that the pollution of the river is of long standing are irrelevant to assessing whether that condition
         has been satisfied.
      
Therefore, in choosing for the Ballymurtagh municipal landfill the method of diluting and dispersing the leachate when, according
         to the Survey, there existed another solution consisting of sealing the base of the pit, which would have made it possible
         not to worsen the degree to which the Avoca was polluted, which is not denied by Ireland, and in thus making it possible for
         substances in list I to reach an aquatic system separate from the groundwater under that landfill site, that Member State
         has not complied with the obligation to take all technical precautions imposed by the second subparagraph of Article 4(2)
         of the Groundwater Directive.
      
Second, in so far as the introduction into groundwater of substances in list II, especially of heavy metals and phosphorus,
         is inherent in the technical choice made by Ireland, that choice does not comply with the obligation under Article 3(b) of
         the Directive to limit the introduction of those substances into the water concerned in order to avoid its pollution, because
         not all the technical precautions that would enable that objective to be attained have been taken.
      
In consequence, the requirements laid down in Article of the Directive, which, as stated in paragraph above, are designed
         solely to ensure compliance with the obligation set out in Article 3(b) of the Directive, have not been satisfied either.
         
      
It follows from the foregoing that, as regards the municipal landfill site at Ballymurtagh, Ireland has not satisfied the
         requirements of Articles and of the Directive so far as discharges of substances in lists I and II are concerned. 
      
 Concerning the claim alleging non-compliance with the Groundwater Directive by reason of the granting of an improper authorisation
–       Arguments of the parties 
The Commission maintains that the waste licence granted by the Agency on April is incompatible with Articles 4, 5,
         and of the Directive. 
      
According to the Commission, the requirements relating to the investigation before the grant of that authorisation have not
         been satisfied.  On this point, it maintains that it is apparent from the very words of the licence that ‘within six months
         of the date of grant of this licence, the licensee shall submit a proposal to the Agency to examine the feasibility of controlling
         groundwater discharges and the impact of same on the Avoca’, that Articles and of the Directive had been infringed inasmuch
         as the investigation of the impact on groundwater and the possible adoption of technical precautions did not precede the granting
         of authorisation.
      
The Commission adds that, even if the Survey could have constituted a ‘prior investigation’ for the purposes of Article 4(2)
         of the Directive, it would still have been inadequate in that it is not apparent that the Survey involved obtaining comprehensive
         information regarding the substances in lists I and II and in that it contains no express reference to Article of the Directive.
      
What is more, according to the Commission, the deficiencies of the survey are not remedied by the content of the EIS.
According to Ireland, the requirements of the Directive relating to prior investigation were observed, in that the hydrogeological
         survey and the EIS were carried out.
      
It adds that the Agency, before granting the waste licence in 2001, took into consideration the conclusions of several studies
         of groundwater and hydrogeological surveys, including the ‘Geological and Hydrogeological Study of the Ballymurtagh Landfill
         near Avoca, 1997’, Co. Wicklow, B.J. Murphy & Associates. 
      
–       Findings of the Court 
As has been held in paragraphs and above, Ireland, in choosing for the Ballymurtagh landfill the method of diluting
         and dispersing leachate, has failed to take all the technical precautions required, on the one hand, by Article of the Directive
         with regard to substances in list I and, on the other, by Article with regard to substances in list II.  In consequence,
         that Member State could not properly grant authorisation pursuant to those articles, grant of such authorisation being as
         a matter of fact conditional upon the technical precautions required by those provisions being adopted, which they were not.
      
What is more, the environment receiving the discharges forms the subject of the prior investigations referred to in Articles
         and of the Directive.  With regard to that specific subject-matter, Article of the Directive requires those investigations
         to have a specific objective also, that is to say, examination of the hydrogeological conditions of the area concerned, the
         possible purifying powers of the soil and subsoil and the risk of pollution and deterioration of the groundwater by the discharges,
         in order to establish whether discharges into groundwater are a satisfactory solution from the point of view of the environment.
         Article thus makes the grant of authorisation subject to precise and detailed conditions which must be regarded as mandatory
         in order to achieve the aim of the Directive (see Case C-360/Commission v Italy [1991] ECR I‑791, paragraph 23).
      
If the objective so sought by the Community legislature is to be fully attained, the prior investigation, upon which grant
         of authorisation is conditional, must enable full and detailed understanding of the state of the environment receiving the
         discharges, but it is not for all that necessary for any express reference to be made to the Directive. 
      
In the circumstances of the case, however, it is common ground that the pollutants, which the hydrogeological survey indicated
         might be found in the leachate from the Ballymurtagh municipal landfill, have not been the subject of any gathering of comprehensive
         information.  The hydrogeological survey does not, therefore, give an exhaustive list of the risks of pollution and degradation
         of the quality of groundwater entailed by the discharge of substances in lists I and II.
      
In addition, it is made clear by the reference in the waste licence granted by the Agency on April and referred to
         in paragraph above that the environmental impact of the discharge on groundwater and surface water was not fully understood
         before that licence was granted, in contravention of the requirements laid down by Article of the Directive. 
      
Nor, finally, does the licence granted by the Agency meet the conditions laid down in Article of the Directive. 
As a result, the head of claim alleging infringement of Articles 4, 5, and of the Directive, by reason of the granting
         of an improper authorisation as regards the Ballymurtagh municipal landfill, is well founded.
      
From all the foregoing it follows that, by having failed to take all the measures necessary to comply with Articles 4, 5,
         and of the Directive with regard to the Ballymurtagh municipal landfill, Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations
         under the Directive.
      
 Concerning the head of claim relating to indirect discharges from septic tanks into groundwater of substances in list II 
According to the Commission, Ireland has not taken the measures necessary to comply with the Groundwater Directive for the
         purpose of protecting groundwater, in all its countryside, from indirect discharges of substances in list II from septic tanks,
         that is to say, wastewater treatment systems intended to dispose of domestic wastewater through the ground.
      
Premises relying on septic tanks are not as a matter of course subjected to adequate prior investigation and authorisation
         procedures, when effluents from septic tanks contain large quantities of phosphorus and ammonia, which amounts to a failure
         to fulfil the obligations imposed by Article of the Directive and, therefore, to abide by the provisions related thereto,
         namely, Articles 7, 8, and of the Directive.
      
In support of that head of claim the Commission relies on the following matters:
–       Ireland’s restrictive interpretation of Article 5(1) of the Directive and the fact that that Member State has not taken adequate
         measures to ensure that that provision is correctly interpreted, 
      
–       Ireland’s failure for several years to take action with respect to unauthorised discharges from hotel premises in County Wexford;
–       Ireland’s failure to abide by the requirements of the Directive concerning septic tanks in the Lakes of Killarney area, and
–       official water pollution reports and breaches of Directive 80/778/EEC of July on the quality of water intended for
         human consumption (OJ L 229, p. 11).
      
A preliminary point to note is that the Commission does not seek, in this part of the action, a declaration that Ireland has
         failed to fulfil its obligations under the Groundwater Directive with respect to particular factual situations but seeks rather
         to criticise a failure to fulfil obligations constituted by the existence of an administrative practice contrary to Community
         law, that practice being illustrated by several examples.
      
First, the Commission may seek a finding that provisions of a directive have not been complied with because a general practice
         contrary thereto has been adopted by the authorities of a Member State, using particular situations to shed light on that
         practice (see, to that effect, Case C‑494/Commission v Ireland [2005] ECR I‑3331, paragraph 27). 
      
In particular, the Court has held that, although a State’s action consisting in an administrative practice contrary to the
         requirements of Community law can amount to a failure to fulfil obligations for the purposes of Article EC, that administrative
         practice must be, to some degree, of a consistent and general nature (see, inter alia, Case C‑441/Commission v Germany [2006] ECR I‑3449, paragraph 50, and Case C‑342/Commission v Finland [2007] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 33).
      
Secondly, in proceedings under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations it is for the Commission to prove the existence
         of the alleged infringement and to provide the Court with the information necessary for it to determine whether the infringement
         is made out, and the Commission may not rely on any presumption for that purpose (Commission v Ireland, paragraph and the case-law there cited, and Commission v Germany, paragraph 48).
      
However, the Member States are required, under Article EC, to facilitate the achievement of the Commission’s tasks, which
         consist in particular, according to Article EC, in ensuring that the provisions of the EC Treaty and the measures taken
         by the institutions pursuant thereto are applied (Commission v Ireland, paragraph 42, and the case-law there cited).
      
From that point of view, account is to be taken of the fact that, when it is a question of checking whether the national provisions
         intended to ensure effective implementation of the directive are correctly applied in practice, the Commission is largely
         reliant on the information provided by any complainants and by the Member State concerned (Commission v Ireland, paragraph 43).
      
It follows, in particular, that when the Commission has adduced sufficient evidence to show that the authorities of the defendant
         Member State have developed a repeated and persistent practice which is contrary to the provisions of a directive, it is incumbent
         on that Member State to challenge in substance and in detail the information produced and the consequences flowing therefrom
         (Commission v Ireland, paragraph 47).
      
It is in the light of those principles that this head of claim put forward by the Commission is now to be considered.
Lastly, inasmuch as the claims set out here do not relate to the content of provisions of domestic law, the arguments put
         forward by Ireland concerning the effectiveness of the legislation transposing the Directive into domestic law and the supporting
         nature, in relation to the Directive, of Irish planning laws, are irrelevant to the consideration of the substance of those
         claims. 
      
 Ireland’s interpretation of Article 5(1) of the Directive
–       Arguments of the parties 
The Commission maintains that Ireland makes a restrictive interpretation of Article of the Directive that is not conducive
         to implementation of the authorisation system established by that article in respect of indirect discharges from septic tanks
         of substances in list II throughout Ireland, in contravention of the requirements of the Directive.
      
The Commission adds that that analysis prevailed in County Wexford with particular regard to the hotel premises at Creacon
         Lodge.
      
It notes, in addition, that in all counties the number of licences for discharge of effluents to groundwater is very low in
         relation to the circumstances in which the Directive is applicable, which makes clear how the latter is misinterpreted.
      
Ireland counters that, after the period prescribed for replying to the reasoned opinion sent by the Commission had expired,
         it altered its interpretation of the provision at issue.    
      
It adds that, for their part, the local authorities responsible for implementing the legislation transposing the Directive
         into domestic law have always in practice followed an interpretation in keeping with the purpose of Article 5(1) of the Directive.
      
–       Findings of the Court 
As indicated in paragraph above, and as is made unequivocally clear by the very words of Article 5(1) of the Directive,
         the Member States must, as a rule, for all substances in list II, including those from septic tanks, establish prior investigation
         and authorisation procedures for all disposal or tipping for the purpose of disposal of those substances which might lead
         to indirect discharge.
      
Ireland now recognises the need to implement the Directive in accordance with that interpretation of Article 5(1), which alone
         is compatible with Community requirements.
      
It is to be considered whether the unduly restrictive interpretation of that provision originally supported by Ireland was
         actually given effect in practice, by examining the other evidence adduced by the Commission which tends to elucidate that
         interpretation and relates to that same administrative practice that has been criticised. 
      
 Disposal of wastewater from the hotel premises at Creacon Lodge
–       Arguments of the parties 
According to the Commission, the disposal of wastewater from the hotel at Creacon Lodge, County Wexford, has for some years
         led to the discharge of substances in list II, so contaminating, by a drain-pipe, some neighbouring areas, including a water
         course. 
      
From to that establishment, which can, according to the Commission, cater for up to people, was equipped with
         a gallon septic tank, in contravention of a clause in the planning permission requiring the installation of an additional
         septic tank.  In January a new wastewater treatment plant was installed, but no prior investigation had been conducted
         as required by Article 5(1) of the Directive and no authorisation granted for the discharge of wastewater as required by that
         provision.  It was not until November that a definitive licence for wastewater discharge was granted. 
      
Disputing the reception capacity of the Creacon Lodge hotel premises put forward by the Commission, Ireland states that four
         planning application processes were dealt with between the years and and that significant conditions and control
         were imposed in respect of the treatment and disposal of effluents from the hotel buildings.  It adds that in a 2000-gallon
         septic tank was installed.
      
Ireland states that, following the grant of the definitive discharge licence on November by An Bord Pleanala, the
         independent authority responsible for examining appeals in respect of planning matters, which called for the installation
         of effluent treatment equipment, both Wexford County Council and the Agency carried out checks including a study of samples
         of effluent from the wastewater treatment system of the Creacon Lodge hotel premises, in order to ensure that that system
         complied with the specific conditions of the discharge licence.
      
Finally, Ireland states that various notices were served on the proprietor of that hotel, specifying the measures with which
         it had to comply, a body of measures illustrative of the efforts made to ensure that the persons responsible for that establishment
         complied with the conditions stipulated in that discharge licence. 
      
–       Findings of the Court 
A preliminary point to note is that, regarding the evidence produced here by the Commission, the latter admits that it had
         been misinformed as to certain specific matters concerning the hotel at Creacon Lodge.  That is so in the case of the installation
         of a septic tank in 1996, which the Commission accepts was suitable for the occupancy of the hotel, whether in connection
         with classic hotel visits or with unusual events.
      
Furthermore, the several applications for planning permission dealt with by the competent authorities show that, when the
         establishment in question had a maximum of bedrooms, those authorities believed that the effluent discharged by the establishment
         could be regarded as domestic for the purposes of Article 2(a) of the Directive.
      
When lodging the applications for planning permission seeking to increase the hotel’s reception capacity, which led to the
         issue of licences of February and September 2000, the hotel proprietors were informed of their duty to hold a licence
         for the discharge of effluent created by their establishment. 
      
Finally, it has been established that An Bord Pleanala’s decision of November is equivalent, in domestic Irish legislation,
         to the grant of definitive authorisation for the discharge of effluent.
      
It is in the light of those facts that the pertinence of this evidence falls to be examined.
First, Article 2(a) of the Directive makes it plain that the latter does not apply to discharges of effluents from isolated
         dwellings not connected to a sewerage system and situated outside areas protected for the abstraction of water for human consumption.
      
Having regard to the capacity of the hotel premises at Creacon Lodge to accommodate guests, especially to the number of bedrooms
         it contains and the events held there, that establishment could not legitimately escape the application of the Directive,
         inasmuch as the effluents it put out could not be classed as ‘domestic effluents’ from isolated dwellings for the purposes
         of Article 2(a) of the Directive. 
      
Second, given that the establishment in question falls within the ambit of the Directive and that it is not disputed that
         substances in list II are produced by the hotel’s septic tank and discharged into groundwater, it ought, as stated in paragraph
         above, to have been subject to the prior investigation and authorisation procedure demanded by Article 5(1) of the Directive.
      
On this point, the prior investigation referred to in that provision must meet the conditions laid down in Article of the
         Directive and recalled in paragraph above.  
      
Now, although it is common ground that a definitive discharge licence was given on November in respect of Creacon
         Lodge, it does not follow from the line of argument put forward by Ireland that that licence satisfied the conditions laid
         down in Article 7.  The Member State does no more, in fact, than assert that the grant of effluent discharge licences calls
         for site inspections pursuant to the national legislation implementing the Directive, giving no precise details of the inspection
         that took place in the case of that establishment.
      
Finally, Ireland cannot base any argument on the proprietor’s unwillingness in order to challenge the evidence furnished by
         the Commission.
      
In light of the foregoing, it is to be held that it has been established to the requisite legal standard that the hotel premises
         at Creacon Lodge have produced indirect discharges of substances in list II without satisfying the conditions laid down by
         Articles and of the Directive and in the related provisions of Articles 8, 10, and thereof. 
      
 Septic tanks in the region of the Lakes of Killarney 
–       Arguments of the parties 
The Commission makes the preliminary point that for more than a decade the Irish authorities have been seriously worried by
         eutrophication of fresh water in terms of surface water quality.  Those authorities have undertaken several studies of polluting
         effects in certain catchment areas and proposed management measures in order to remedy the various problems found. 
      
Those measures include the monitoring and management system for the Lough Leane catchment, the largest catchment of the Lakes
         of Killarney, on the initiative of Kerry County Council, which it took three years from July to July to prepare.
         In this connection, several reports have been drawn up (interim reports and a final report concerning ‘A catchment-based approach
         for reducing nutrient inputs from all sources to the Lakes of Killarney’, December and November 2003). 
      
According to the Commission, those reports are evidence of Ireland’s consistent failure to fulfil its obligations, in so far,
         in particular, as the way in which that Member State applies the Directive in practice cannot be considered to be compatible
         with Article 5(1).  It adds that those reports make it clear that in the geographical area in question no checks have been
         made to establish whether septic tanks have been built in accordance with the requirements of the Directive. 
      
Ireland argues that the Commission has not established that the level of phosphate detected in Lough Leane can be ascribed
         principally to discharges of effluent from septic tanks to which the Directive applies.  Ireland claims that it is, moreover,
         established that the majority of septic tanks in the area concerned serve isolated dwellings and are, accordingly, excluded
         from the ambit of the Directive.
      
–       Findings of the Court 
It is to be borne in mind, first, that the final report referred to in paragraph above shows that nutrients from septic
         tank effluent have an effect on the quality of groundwater feeding surface water and flowing directly into Lough Leane.  Here,
         the second interim report referred to in paragraph makes it clear that 12% of total phosphorus input into that lake can
         be attributed to septic tanks.
      
Second, that final report states that ‘a substantial number of residential dwellings, bed and breakfast accommodation and
         camping/caravan parks in the Lough Leane catchment area are not … presently serviced by the urban sewerage network and rely
         on septic tanks’.  Particular reference is made to the village of Barraduff, where the dwellings are connected to individual
         septic tanks. 
      
Third, as observed in paragraph above, Article 2(a) of the Directive makes it plain that the latter does not apply to discharges
         of effluents from isolated dwellings not connected to a sewerage system and situated outside certain areas.
      
In the light of the statements referred to above, appearing in that final report, some of the dwellings in the geographical
         area concerned, especially residential villages, cannot be considered to be isolated dwellings and do not, therefore, fall
         within the ambit of the derogation provided by Article 2(a).   
      
Effluents discharged by hotel establishments cannot be classed as ‘domestic effluents’ within the meaning of that provision.
In consequence, it is possible that substances in list II have been discharged from the septic tanks with which dwellings
         in the Lough Leane catchment area are fitted and which are not covered by the exception in Article 2(a) of the Directive without
         observance of the conditions laid down in Article 5(1) thereof.  
      
 The official water pollution reports and breaches of Directive 80/ascribable to Ireland
–       Arguments of the parties 
According to the Commission, the Agency’s official water-pollution reports supply additional evidence of Ireland’s general
         failure to ensure that the disposal of wastewater by means of septic tanks in the Irish countryside is subject to adequate
         prior investigation, authorisation and monitoring.
      
The Commission states that those reports reveal a pattern of widespread and persistent microbiological contamination affecting
         hundreds of public and private water supplies, many drawing from groundwater sources.  
      
On this point, the Commission, recalling that in Case C‑316/Commission v Ireland [2002] ECR I‑the Court held that Ireland had failed to comply with the microbiological standards of Directive 80/778,
         argues that there is a correlation between microbiological contamination and the presence of list II substances, in particular
         ammonia, phosphorus and chlorides. 
      
Ireland denies those assertions made by the Commission, maintaining that they are not supported by any real evidence.
–       Findings of the Court 
While the extracts from the reports quoted by the Commission emphasise the contamination of water supplies, they do not establish
         to the requisite legal standard a causal link between that contamination and the presence of substances in list II.  It may
         be mentioned here that the Agency’s report for the period 1998-(Water Quality in Ireland, 1998-2000, Environmental Protection
         Agency, 2002) refers to the existence of multiple causes that might explain the high levels of nitrates found in 20% of sampling
         stations.
      
Last, no inferences may be drawn from an earlier judgment of the Court, finding that Ireland had failed to fulfil its obligations
         under Directive 80/778, not germane to this action.
      
The general statements made by the Commission cannot, therefore, be regarded as relevant evidence.
In consequence, it appears from the foregoing examination of all the evidence adduced by the Commission, first, that substances
         in list II have been indirectly discharged by the hotel premises at Creacon Lodge without complying with the conditions laid
         down in Articles 5, 7, 8, 10, and of the Directive and, second, that it is possible that such substances have been discharged
         from the septic tanks with which dwellings in the Lough Leane catchment area are fitted in breach of the conditions laid down
         in Article 5(1) of the Directive.
      
None the less, such defective application, geographically confined as it is, cannot provide grounds for inferring that there
         exists throughout the Irish countryside an administrative practice relating to indirect discharges into groundwater of effluents
         from septic tanks that possesses the characteristics required by the Court’s case-law and violates Articles 5, 7, 8, 10, and of the Directive (see, to that effect, Case C‑287/Commission v Belgium [2005] ECR I‑3761, paragraph 30).
      
It follows that, the Commission not having furnished proof that Ireland has failed to take all the measures necessary to comply
         with Articles 5, 7, 8, 10, and of the Directive so far as concerns indirect discharges throughout its countryside into
         groundwater of substances in list II from septic tanks, the claim relating to those discharges must be rejected.
      
Having regard to all the foregoing considerations, it is to be declared that, by having failed to adopt all the measures necessary
         to comply with Articles 4, 5, and of the Directive with regard to the Ballymurtagh (County Wicklow) municipal landfill,
         Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under the directive. 
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs, if they have been
         applied for.  Under Article 69(3) of those Rules, where each of the parties succeeds on some and fails on other heads, or
         where the circumstances are exceptional, the Court may order that the costs be shared or that the parties bear their own costs.
      
In this dispute account is to be taken of the fact that the Court has not upheld the whole action for a declaration of failure
         to fulfil obligations, as defined by the Commission.
      
Ireland must therefore be ordered to pay two thirds of all the costs.  The Commission is ordered to pay the other third.
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, by having failed to adopt all the measures necessary to comply with Articles 4, 5, and of Council Directive
            80/68/EEC of December on the protection of groundwater against pollution caused by certain dangerous substances, as
            amended by Council Directive 91/692/EEC of December standardising and rationalising reports on the implementation
            of certain directives relating to the environment, with regard to the municipal landfill at Ballymurtagh (County Wicklow),
            Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under Directive 80/68, as amended by Directive 91/692;
2.      Dismisses the remainder of the action;
3.      Orders Ireland to pay two thirds of all the costs.  The Commission of the European Communities is ordered to pay the other
            third.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 