
Order of the Court (Sixth Chamber) of October – Longevity Health Products v OHIM
(Case C‑84/P)
Appeal – Community trade mark – Regulation (EC) No 40/– Article 8(1)(b) – Word sign ‘Kids Vits’ – Opposition by the proprietor of the Community word mark VITS4KIDS – Level of attention of the relevant public – Likelihood of confusion – Similarity of the signs – Right to be heard
1.                     Appeals – Formal requirements – Proof that the authority granted to the applicant’s lawyer has been properly conferred on
            him by someone authorised for the purpose – Excluded (Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, Arts 38(5)(b) and 112(1))
            (see para. 19)
2.                     Community trade mark – Appeals procedure – Action before the Community judicature – Jurisdiction of the General Court – Permission
            to lodge a reply – General Court’s discretion (Rules of Procedure of the General Court, Art. 135(2)) (see para. 24)
3.                     Appeals – Grounds – Incorrect assessment of the facts and evidence – Inadmissibility – Review by the Court of the assessment
            of the facts and evidence – Possible only where the clear sense of the evidence has been distorted (Art. 256(1), TFEU; Statute
            of the Court of Justice, Art. 58, first para.) (see para. 30)
Re: 
Appeal brought against the judgment of the General Court (Eighth Chamber) of December in Case T-484/Longevity Health Products 
v
 OHIM – Merck (Kids Vits)
, by which that court dismissed the action against the decision of the Fourth Board of Appeal of OHIM of August 2008, refusing
                  the registration of the word sign ‘Kids Vits’ as a Community trade mark for certain goods in Class 5, by upholding the opposition
                  by the proprietor of the earlier Community word mark ‘VITS4KIDS’ – Breach of the right to a judicial hearing – Infringement
                  of Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation (EC) No 40/– Likelihood of confusion between two marks.
               
Operative part 
1.
	The appeal is dismissed. 
2.
	Longevity Health Products, Inc. is ordered to pay the costs.
Top  
 