
Case C-338/Commission of the European Communities
v
Kingdom of Spain
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Second Directive 77/91/EEC – Articles and – Public limited companies – Capital increase – Right of pre‑emption for shares and for bonds convertible into shares – Withdrawal – Protection of shareholders – Equal treatment)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Companies – Directive 77/– Equal treatment of shareholders
            – Change in the capital of a public limited company – Shareholders’ right of pre-emption provided for in the event of an increase
            in capital by contributions in cash
(Council Directive 77/91, Arts 29(1) and (4) and 42)
2.        Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Companies – Directive 77/– Change in the capital of a public
            limited company – Shareholders’ right of pre-emption provided for in the event of an increase in capital by contributions
            in cash
(Council Directive 77/91, Art. 29(1) and (6))
3.        Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Companies – Directive 77/– Change in the capital of a public
            limited company – Shareholders’ right of pre-emption provided for in the event of an increase in capital by contributions
            in cash
(Council Directive 77/91, Art. 29(4) and (6))
1.        A Member State which maintains in force rules whereby the general meeting of shareholders of a listed company may freely determine
         the issue price of the new shares, when deciding on an increase in capital that entails the total or partial withdrawal of
         a right of pre‑emption, does not fail to fulfil its obligations under Article of Second Directive 77/on company law,
         read in conjunction with Article 29(1) and (4) thereof, provided that the meeting has available to it a report for the director
         of the company and a report from an auditor appointed for that purpose, and provided that the issue price of the shares is
         higher than their net asset value as apparent from the auditor’s report.
      
Although the right of pre-emption granted to shareholders does not admit of any exception other than that expressly laid down
         in Article 29(4) of the Second Directive, the fact remains that the Second Directive lays down minimum requirements for the
         protection of shareholders and creditors of public limited companies, by leaving the Member States free to adopt provisions
         that are more favourable to them, which provide, inter alia, for more restrictive conditions on withdrawing the right of pre‑emption.
      
In addition, the fact that the issue price of the new shares may be set below their market value, in accordance with those
         rules, cannot be regarded as liable to lead to unequal treatment, for the purposes of Article of the Second Directive,
         between existing and new shareholders, in the absence of evidence to show, as required under Article of the directive,
         that both those categories of shareholders are in the same position, and must therefore be treated equally. Furthermore, to
         require that the issue price of new shares must not be below their market value would have the effect that, even if that price
         were justified by the directors’ report, the general meeting of shareholders could not apply it without infringing the principle
         of equal treatment referred to in Article of the Second Directive.
      
(see paras 26, 30-31, 33-34)
2.        A Member State which grants a pre-emption right in respect of shares, in the event of an increase in capital by contributions
         in cash, not only to shareholders, but also to holders of bonds convertible into shares, and which grants a pre-emption right
         in respect of bonds convertible into shares, not only to shareholders, but also to the holders of bonds convertible into shares
         pertaining to earlier issues, fails to fulfil its obligations under Article 29(1) and (6) of Second Directive 77/on company
         law.
      
As is apparent from the wording of Article 29(1) and (6), the new shares and the bonds convertible into shares are not to
         be offered to the shareholders and the bondholders simultaneously, but ‘on a pre-emptive basis’ to the shareholders. Thus,
         only in so far as the shareholders have not exercised their right of pre-emption can those shares and bonds be offered to
         other purchasers, including, in particular, the holders of convertible bonds.
      
(see paras 39-40, 46, operative part 1)
3.        A Member State which fails to provide that the general meeting of shareholders may decide to withdraw pre-emption rights in
         respect of bonds convertible into shares on an issue of such bonds fails to fulfil its obligations under Article 29(6) of
         Second Directive 77/on company law, read in conjunction with Article 29(4) thereof.
      
Even though the Member States are free to adopt more restrictive conditions on withdrawal of the right of pre-emption at issue,
         the fact remains that Article 29(6) of the Second Directive, read in conjunction with Article 29(4) thereof, requires that,
         in certain circumstances, the general meeting of shareholders be able to decide to withdraw the right of pre-emption for all
         securities which are convertible into shares. National rules which make no express provision for the possibility of such withdrawal,
         even if they could be interpreted contrary to their wording, would not be likely to create a situation which is sufficiently
         precise, clear and transparent in order to allow individuals to know the full extent of their rights and rely on them before
         the national courts.
      
(see paras 50-51, 55, 57, operative part 1)
  
  
 JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
December 2008(*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Second Directive 77/91/EEC – Articles and – Public limited liability companies – Capital increase – Right to pre-emptive subscription for shares and for bonds convertible into shares – Withdrawal – Protection of shareholders – Equal treatment)
In Case C‑338/06,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on August 2006,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by G. Braun and R. Vidal Puig, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Kingdom of Spain, represented by F. Díez Moreno, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant,
supported by:
Republic of Poland, represented by E. Ośniecka-Tamecka, acting as Agent,
      
Republic of Finland, represented by J. Heliskoski, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, represented by V. Jackson, acting as Agent, assisted by J. Stratford, Barrister,
      
interveners,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of P. Jann, President of the Chamber, A. Tizzano (Rapporteur), A. Borg Barthet, E. Levits and J.-J. Kasel, Judges,
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: R. Grass,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2008,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities requests that the Court declare that:
      
–        by allowing the general meeting of shareholders to approve the issue of new shares without pre-emptive subscription rights,
         at a price below their fair value;
      
–        by granting the right to pre-emptive subscription of shares in the event of a capital increase by consideration in cash, not
         only to shareholders, but also to holders of bonds convertible into shares;
      
–        by granting the right to pre-emptive subscription rights for bonds convertible into shares not only to shareholders, but also
         to holders of bonds convertible into shares pertaining to earlier issues, and
      
–        by failing to provide that the shareholders’ meeting may decide to withdraw pre-emptive subscription rights for bonds convertible
         into shares,
      
the Kingdom of Spain has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles and of Second Council Directive 77/91/EEC of
         December on coordination of safeguards which, for the protection of the interests of members and others, are required
         by Member States of companies within the meaning of the second paragraph of Article [48] of the Treaty, in respect of the
         formation of public limited liability companies and the maintenance and alteration of their capital, with a view to making
         such safeguards equivalent (OJ L 26, p. 1; ‘the Second Directive’).
      
 Legal context
 Community law
The second and fifth recitals in the preamble to the Second Directive, which are legally based on Article 54(3)(g) of the
         EEC Treaty (subsequently Article 54(3)(g) of the EC Treaty, and now Article 44(2)(g) EC), are worded as follows:
      
‘Whereas in order to ensure minimum equivalent protection for both shareholders and creditors of [public limited liability
         companies], the coordination of national provisions relating to their formation and to the maintenance, increase or reduction
         of their capital is particularly important;
      
…
Whereas it is necessary, having regard to the objectives of Article [44(2)(g) EC], that the Member States’ laws relating to
         the increase or reduction of capital ensure that the principles of equal treatment of shareholders in the same position and
         of protection of creditors whose claims exist prior to the decision on reduction are observed and harmonised’.
      
Article of the Second Directive provides:
      
‘1. Whenever the capital is increased by consideration in cash, the shares must be offered on a pre-emptive basis to shareholders
         in proportion to the capital represented by their shares. 
      
…
4. The right of pre-emption may not be restricted or withdrawn by the statutes or instrument of incorporation. This may, however,
         be done by decision of the general meeting. The administrative or management body shall be required to present to such a meeting
         a written report indicating the reasons for restriction or withdrawal of the right of pre-emption, and justifying the proposed
         issue price. The general meeting shall act in accordance with the rules for a quorum and a majority laid down in Article … 
      
…
6. Paragraphs to shall apply to the issue of all securities which are convertible into shares or which carry the right
         to subscribe for shares, but not to the conversion of such securities, nor to the exercise of the right to subscribe.
      
…’
Article of the Second Directive provides:
      
‘For the purposes of the implementation of this Directive, the laws of the Member States shall ensure equal treatment to all
         shareholders who are in the same position.’
      
 National law
Under Article 158(1) of Royal Legislative Decree 1564/of December 1989, which amends the Law on public companies (Real
         decreto legislativo 1564/por el que se aprueba el texto refundido de la Ley de Sociedades Anónimas) (BOE No 310, of December 1989, p. 679), in the version applicable to the present dispute (‘the LSA’):
      
‘Where the capital is increased by means of the issue of new ordinary or preference shares, the shareholders and holders of
         convertible bonds may … exercise their right to subscribe for a number of shares proportionate to the nominal value of the
         shares which they already hold or, in the case of holders of convertible bonds, which they would hold if, at that time, they
         exercised their right to conversion.’
      
Article of the LSA provides:
      
‘1.      If necessary in the company’s interest, the general meeting may, when deciding to increase the capital, resolve to withdraw
         the right of pre-emptive subscription entirely or partly. For this resolution to be valid, it must conform with the provisions
         of Article and ensure that:
      
…
(b)      at the time of convening the meeting, the shareholders shall be provided, in accordance with Article 144(1)(c), with a report
         drawn up by the directors in which they justify in detail the proposal and the issue price of the shares, giving the names
         of the persons to whom they are to be allotted, together with a report, for which the directors are liable, prepared by an
         auditor who is not the company’s auditor and is appointed for that purpose by the Commercial Registry, on the fair value of
         the company’s shares, the theoretical value of the rights to pre-emption subscription which it is proposed to withdraw and
         the accuracy of the information in the directors’ report; 
      
(c)      the nominal value of the shares to be issued, together with the issue premium, as the case may be, shall correspond to the
         fair value shown in the auditor’s report referred to in (b) above. In the case of a listed company, the fair value shall mean
         the market value of the company’s shares, which shall be presumed to be the stock exchange quotation, unless the contrary
         is proved.
      
Nevertheless, in the case of listed companies, the general meeting of shareholders may, as soon as the directors’ report and
         the auditor’s report required under (b) above, which must indicate the net asset value of the shares, are available, freely
         determine the issue price of the new shares, provided that the price is higher than the corresponding net asset value shown
         in the auditor’s report. The general meeting may also confine itself to laying down the procedure for determining the price. … 
      
…’
Article of the LSA is worded as follows: 
      
‘1.      The shareholders of the company shall have a right of pre-emption for the convertible bonds.
2.      The holders of convertible bonds issued earlier shall have the same right in the proportion laid down by the rules on the
         conversion.
      
3.      The provisions of Article of this law shall apply to the preferential right of subscription for convertible bonds.’
 Pre-litigation procedure
Since it considered that the Spanish legislation was not consistent with Articles and of the Second Directive, the Commission
         sent a letter of formal notice on January to the Kingdom of Spain. The latter replied, by letter of March 2004,
         in which it rejected all the claims of breach of the Second Directive.
      
Since it took the view that the explanations provided by the Kingdom of Spain were not satisfactory, the Commission sent a
         reasoned opinion to that Member State on January 2005, to which it replied, on March 2005, by sending it a report drawn
         up by the Ministry for the Economy and Finance.
      
Since the explanations provided were not entirely satisfactory, the Commission decided, on August 2006, to institute proceedings
         under Article EC before the Court.
      
By order of the President of the Court of January 2007, the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Finland and the United
         Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland were granted leave to intervene in this case in support of the form of order
         sought by the Kingdom of Spain.
      
 The action
 The first complaint
 Arguments of the parties
By its first complaint, the Commission submits that the second subparagraph of Article 159(1)(c) of the LSA infringes Article
         of the Second Directive, read in conjunction with Article 29(1) and (4) thereof, in that it does not ensure equal treatment
         of shareholders in a listed public company.
      
According to the Commission, where capital is increased by means of the issue of new shares, under Article 159(1)(c) of the
         LSA the general meeting of such a company may approve the withdrawal of the pre-emption right laid down in Article of
         that law, and freely determine the issue price of the new shares, provided that, in particular, the issue price is higher
         than the ‘net asset value’ of those shares. 
      
This effectively means allowing the price of the new shares, from which the pre-emption right is excluded, to be set at an
         ‘unfairly’ low level. According to the Commission, the ‘net asset value’ of a share may be significantly lower than its ‘market
         value’, calculated on the basis of its stock market price, whereas under the first subparagraph of Article 159(1)(c) of the
         LSA the ‘market value’ of a share is to be understood as meaning its ‘fair value’. 
      
The Commission infers from this that the second subparagraph of Article 159(1)(c) of the LSA introduces discrimination in
         respect of listed companies between, on the one hand, shareholders who held shares prior to the capital increase of the company
         concerned (‘existing shareholders’), who purchased their shares at their ‘market value’, and, on the other, shareholders who
         acquired their shares after the capital increase of that company (‘new shareholders’), who might have acquired their shares
         at a price far lower than their market value.
      
The Kingdom of Spain challenges these arguments, maintaining, first, that the LSA lays down conditions for withdrawing the
         right of pre-emption which are stricter than those provided for in the Second Directive. 
      
As the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Finland and the United Kingdom also submit, the LSA, contrary to the Second Directive,
         provides for a minimum threshold for determining the issue price of the new shares which must be higher than their ‘net asset
         value’. Furthermore, under that law there is a requirement not only for the report provided for in Article 29(4) of the directive,
         but also for a second report, drawn up by an independent ‘auditor’, justifying the issue price of the new shares. 
      
In addition, the Kingdom of Spain contends that the LSA in no way allows a price to be set which is unfairly lower than the
         ‘market value’ of the new shares. The first subparagraph of Article 159(1)(c) merely introduces a rebuttable assumption that
         the ‘fair value’ of the shares of a listed company corresponds to their ‘market value’. However, the general meeting is able
         to set an issue price of less than the ‘market value’, the fairness of which is justified in the light of the two reports
         referred to in the preceding paragraph of this judgment. 
      
In this regard, the Republic of Poland goes on to say that, in any event, the setting of the price of the shares at below
         their ‘market value’ has to be assessed by reference not only to the principle of non-discrimination but also to the principle
         that company organs must act in the company’s interest.
      
The Kingdom of Spain, the Republic of Poland and the United Kingdom claim that no discrimination between existing and new
         shareholders is possible because those two categories of shareholders are not in the ‘same position’ within the meaning of
         Article of the Second Directive. Due to fluctuations in the stock market price, each shareholder would have acquired his
         shares at a different price, depending on the date on which the shares were purchased.
      
Furthermore, the Kingdom of Spain and the Republic of Poland point out that Article 159(1) of the LSA precludes any possibility
         of discrimination by providing that withdrawal of the pre-emption right can be approved by the general meeting only where
         the conditions on majority and quorum necessary for altering the company’s articles of association are met, and that, in any
         event, the minority shareholders who voted against the decision approving that withdrawal are able to challenge that decision
         where they consider it to be contrary to the company interest.
      
In addition, according to the United Kingdom, there can be no question of different ‘treatment’ because the price of a share
         is a purely economic factor. In any event, even if unequal treatment can be established, it is justified on account of the
         measures of additional protection laid down by the LSA and, as the Kingdom of Spain also points out, in the light of the need
         to ensure that increases in capital serve the company’s financial interest.
      
 Findings of the Court
In order to rule on the substance of the first complaint raised by the Commission, it should be borne in mind that the Court
         of Justice has already had occasion to hold that the Second Directive seeks, pursuant to Article 44(2)(g) EC, to coordinate
         the safeguards which, for the protection of the interests of members and others, are required of companies within the meaning
         of the second paragraph of Article EC with a view to making such safeguards equivalent. According to the second recital
         in the preamble thereto, the Second Directive is therefore intended to ensure minimum equivalent protection for both shareholders
         and creditors of public limited liability companies (Case C-42/Siemens [1996] ECR I-6017, paragraph 13). 
      
As regards more particularly the protection of shareholders when capital is increased by consideration in cash, Article 29(1)
         of the Second Directive provides clearly, precisely and unconditionally that the shares must be offered on a pre-emptive basis
         to shareholders in proportion to the capital represented by their shares (see, to that effect, Case C-381/Syndesmos Melon tis Eleftheras Evangelikis Ekklisias and Others [1992] ECR I-2111, paragraph 39). 
      
It is therefore only by way of exception that Article 29(4) of the Second Directive provides for the general meeting to be
         able to limit or withdraw the shareholders’ rights of pre-emption, subject to certain conditions expressly laid down in that
         provision.
      
It must be pointed out, however, that although the right of pre-emption granted to shareholders does not admit of any exception
         other than that expressly laid down in Article 29(4) of the directive (Syndesmos Melon tis Eleftheras Evangelikis Ekklisias and Others, paragraph 40), the fact remains that, as is apparent from the second recital and the judgment in Siemens, the Second Directive lays down minimum requirements for the protection of shareholders and creditors of public limited liability
         companies, by leaving the Member States free to adopt provisions that are more favourable to them, which provide, inter alia,
         for more restrictive conditions on withdrawing the right of pre-emption. 
      
Clearly, in the present case, the effect of the national legislation is precisely to strengthen the protection afforded to
         shareholders of public limited companies under Article 29(4) of the Second Directive.
      
Under the first subparagraph of Article 159(1)(b) of the LSA, when the pre-emption right is to be wholly or partially withdrawn,
         there is a requirement not only for the report referred to in Article 29(4) of the Second Directive, but also for a second
         report on the fair value of the company’s shares, the theoretical value of the pre-emption rights which it is proposed to
         withdraw and the accuracy of the information in the directors’ report. According to that provision of national law, the second
         report, for which the directors are liable, must be prepared by an auditor who is not the company’s auditor and is appointed
         for that purpose by the Commercial Registry. 
      
Whereas Article 29(4) of the Second Directive is limited to requiring that the issue price of the new shares be justified
         in the report of the company’s administrative or management body, and does not set any minimum threshold for this, the second
         subparagraph of Article 159(1)(c) of the LSA lays down, as regards quoted companies, a minimum issue price for the new shares,
         by requiring that that price be above the net asset value of the shares in question irrespective of the conclusions of the
         report.
      
This assessment of the national rules cannot, moreover, be undermined by the Commission’s arguments to the effect that setting
         the issue price of the new shares at below their market value, as permitted by Article of the LSA, is liable to lead to
         unequal treatment, for the purposes of Article of the Second Directive, between existing and new shareholders.
      
First, it must be pointed out that the Commission has not provided any evidence to show, as is required under Article of
         the directive, that those two categories of shareholders are in the same position, thus requiring the LSA to ensure them equal
         treatment.
      
Secondly, the effect of the Commission’s interpretation would be to render Article 29(4) of the Second Directive redundant,
         since under that provision the issue price has to be justified by the directors’ report, although it does not have to be set
         in accordance with the market value of the shares in question.
      
To require that the issue price of new shares must not be below their market value would have the effect that, even if that
         price were justified by the directors’ report, the general meeting could not apply it without infringing the principle of
         equal treatment referred to in Article of the Second Directive. 
      
In the light of all the foregoing, the first complaint relied on by the Commission in support of its action must be rejected
         as unfounded.
      
 The second and third complaints
 Arguments of the parties
By its second and third complaints, which must be examined together, the Commission submits first that Article 158(1) of the
         LSA gives not only shareholders but also holders of bonds convertible into shares a right of pre-emption for new shares. Secondly,
         Article 293(2) of that law provides that when there is an issue of bonds convertible into shares, a right of pre-emption for
         those shares is granted both to shareholders and to holders of earlier issues of convertible bonds.
      
These provisions of the LSA, it argues, infringe Article 29(1) and (6) of the Second Directive, since the directive requires
         new shares and convertible bonds to be offered on a pre-emptive basis to shareholders alone.
      
The Kingdom of Spain and the Republic of Poland dispute the Commission’s claim, relying, in particular, on an interpretation
         of Article 29(1) and (6) on the basis of the directive’s purpose and function, which is to protect the holders of convertible
         bonds as potential shareholders and thus to maintain the value of the shares reserved for them. 
      
 Findings of the Court
It is indeed the case, as the Kingdom of Spain submits, that Article 29(1) and (6) of the Second Directive does not provide
         that both the new shares and the bonds convertible into shares are to be offered exclusively to the shareholders and that
         they can thus also be offered to holders of earlier issues of convertible bonds. 
      
It must be held, however, that it is apparent from the very wording of that article that the offer must not be made to both
         of them simultaneously, but ‘on a pre-emptive basis’ to the shareholders.
      
Thus, only in so far as the shareholders have not exercised their right of pre-emption can those shares and bonds be offered
         to other purchasers, including, in particular, the holders of convertible bonds.
      
Furthermore, if the legislature had wished to extend the right of pre-emption at issue to the latter, it would have done so
         expressly, in the same way as, in Article 29(6) of the Second Directive, it extended the right of pre-emption to other securities
         which are convertible into shares or which carry the right to subscribe for shares.
      
Such an interpretation also accords with the aims of the directive.
      
As the Advocate General pointed out in point of her Opinion, and as is apparent from point of the judgment in Siemens, one of the aims of the Second Directive is to afford shareholders more effective protection, by enabling them – in the event
         of an increase in capital – to avoid dilution of their stake in the capital represented by their shareholding.
      
Thus, in order to avoid such a risk, Article 29(1) and (6) of the Second Directive gives precisely to shareholders priority
         over all other potential purchasers of new shares or of bonds convertible into shares.
      
It is clear that the achievement of such an objective would be jeopardised if those new securities could also be offered on
         a pre-emptive basis to a category of purchasers other than that of shareholders, namely the holders of bonds convertible into
         shares.
      
It follows that, by granting a pre-emption right in respect of shares in the event of a capital increase by consideration
         in cash, not only to shareholders, but also to holders of bonds convertible into shares, and a pre-emption right in respect
         of bonds convertible into shares not only to shareholders, but also to the holders of bonds convertible into shares pertaining
         to earlier issues, the Kingdom of Spain has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 29(1) and (6) of the Second Directive.
      
 The fourth complaint
 Arguments of the parties
By its fourth plea, the Commission contends that Article 293(3) of the LSA infringes Article 29(6) in conjunction with Article
         29(4) of the Second Directive, as that article does not provide for the general meeting to be able to withdraw the pre-emption
         right for bonds convertible into shares.
      
According to the Kingdom of Spain, a systematic interpretation of Article of the LSA can lead to no conclusion other than
         that the general meeting can withdraw this right of pre-emption.
      
In this connection, the Republic of Finland observes that, in any event, even if Article of the LSA precluded the possibility
         of withdrawing that pre-emption right, this would not be sufficient to establish failure on the part of the Kingdom of Spain
         to fulfil its obligations given that the purpose of the Second Directive is minimum harmonisation.
      
 Findings of the Court
It must be pointed out that even though, as has been stated in paragraph of this judgment, the Member States are free to
         adopt more restrictive conditions on withdrawal of the right of pre-emption at issue, the fact remains that Article 29(6)
         of the Second Directive, read in conjunction with Article 29(4), requires that, in certain circumstances, the general meeting
         of shareholders be able to decide to withdraw the right of pre-emption for all securities which are convertible into shares.
      
Clearly, as the Commission submits, the wording of Article of the LSA makes no express provision for the possibility of
         such withdrawal.
      
Furthermore, whereas Article 293(3) provides that Article of the LSA is applicable to the right of pre-emptive subscription,
         nowhere does it provide that Article thereof, governing the right of pre-emption for new shares, is also applicable to
         the right of pre-emption for bonds convertible into shares.
      
Moreover, the systematic interpretation advocated by the Kingdom of Spain – to the effect that Article of the LSA can
         only be interpreted as providing for the possibility to withdraw the right of pre-emption in question, since otherwise that
         article would be completely illogical – cannot be upheld.
      
In that regard, it must be borne in mind that, according to settled case-law, the need to ensure that Community law is fully
         applied requires Member States not only to bring their legislation into conformity with Community law but also to do so by
         adopting rules of law capable of creating a situation which is sufficiently precise, clear and transparent to allow individuals
         to know the full extent of their rights and rely on them before the national courts (Case 162/Commission v Italy [2001] ECR I-541, paragraph and the case-law cited). 
      
In the present case, even if Article of the LSA could be interpreted contrary to its wording, as the Kingdom of Spain
         suggests, such an interpretation would be very unlikely to create a situation which is sufficiently precise, clear and transparent
         to allow individuals to know the full extent of their rights and rely on them before the national courts.
      
This is particularly the case since, as the Advocate General observes in point of her Opinion, the Kingdom of Spain did
         not produce any specific evidence to show that Spanish courts interpret Article of the LSA as providing for the possibility
         to withdraw the right of pre-emption for bonds convertible into shares.
      
It must therefore be held that, by failing to provide that the shareholders’ meeting may decide to withdraw pre-emption rights
         in respect of bonds convertible into shares, the Kingdom of Spain has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 29(6)
         of the Second Directive, read in conjunction with Article 29(4) thereof.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs, if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Under Article 69(3) of those rules, where each of the parties succeeds on
         some and fails on other heads, the Court may order that the costs be shared or that the parties bear their own costs. Finally,
         under the first subparagraph of Article 69(4) the Member States and the institutions which intervene in the proceedings are
         to bear their own costs.
      
In this case, the Kingdom of Spain, which has been unsuccessful in respect of three of the four grounds of complaint raised
         by the Commission in support of its application, must be ordered to pay three quarters of the costs, and the Commission, which
         has been unsuccessful in respect of its first ground of complaint, must be ordered to pay one quarter of the costs.
      
In accordance with Article 69(4) of the Rules of Procedure, the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Finland and the United
         Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland are to bear their own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that the Kingdom of Spain:
–        by granting a pre-emption right in respect of shares in the event of a capital increase by consideration in cash, not only
            to shareholders, but also to holders of bonds convertible into shares; 
–        by granting a pre-emption right in respect of bonds convertible into shares not only to shareholders, but also to holders
            of bonds convertible into shares pertaining to earlier issues; and
–        by failing to provide that the shareholders’ meeting may decide to withdraw pre-emption rights in respect of bonds convertible
            into shares;
has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of Second Council Directive 77/91/EEC of December on coordination
            of safeguards which, for the protection of the interests of members and others, are required by Member States of companies
            within the meaning of the second paragraph of Article [48] of the Treaty, in respect of the formation of public limited liability
            companies and the maintenance and alteration of their capital, with a view to making such safeguards equivalent;
2.      Dismisses the action as to the remainder;
3.      Orders the Kingdom of Spain to pay three quarters of all the costs. The Commission of the European Communities is ordered
            to pay a quarter of the costs;
4.      Orders the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Finland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to bear
            their own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Spanish.
      
Top  
 