
Avis juridique important
|
61986JJudgment of the Court of June 1988.  -  Commission of the European Communities v Kingdom of Belgium.  -  Failure of a Member State to fulfil its obligations - Failure to implement Council Directive 82/470/EEC in national law - Effective exercise of freedom of establishment and freedom to provide services in respect of activities of self-employed persons in certain services incidental to transport and travel agencies and in storage and warehousing.  -  Case 283/86.  
European Court reports Page Parties
Grounds
Decision on costs
Operative part
Keywords
++++. Action for failure by a Member State to fulfil its obligations - Period given the Member State in the reasoned opinion - Default subsequently remedied - Interest in pursuing the action  ( EEC Treaty, Art . )  . Member States - Obligations - Implementation of directives - Failure to comply - Justification - Not permissible  ( EEC Treaty, Art . )  
Parties
In Case 283/Commission of the European Communities, represented by Etienne Lasnet, Legal Adviser to the Commission, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of G . Kremlis, a member of the Commission' s Legal Department, Jean Monnet Building, Plateau de Kirchberg,  applicant,  v  Kingdom of Belgium, represented by Jan Devadder, Deputy Adviser in the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, External Trade and Cooperation with Developing Countries, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the Belgian Embassy,  defendant,  APPLICATION for a declaration that by failing to adopt within the prescribed period the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Council Directive 82/470/EEC of June ( Official Journal 29.6.1982, L 213, p . ) on measures to facilitate the effective exercise of freedom of establishment and freedom to provide services in respect of activities of self-employed persons in certain services incidental to transport and travel agencies ( ISIC Group ) and in storage and warehousing ( ISIC Group ) the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil its obligations under the directive and under the third paragraph of Article and the first paragraph of Article of the EEC Treaty,  THE COURT  composed of : Lord Mackenzie Stuart, President, G . Bosco, J . C . Moitinho de Almeida and G . C . Rodríguez Iglesias ( Presidents of Chambers ), T . Koopmans, U . Everling and Y . Galmot, Judges,  Advocate General : C . O . Lenz  Registrar : B . Pastor, Administrator  having regard to the Report for the Hearing and further to the hearing on February 1988,  after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General delivered at the sitting on February 1988,  gives the following  Judgment  
Grounds
By application lodged at the Court Registry on November the Commission of the European Communities brought an action under Article of the EEC Treaty for a declaration that by failing to adopt within the prescribed period the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Council Directive 82/470/EEC of June on measures to facilitate the effective exercise of freedom of establishment and freedom to provide services in respect of activities of self-employed persons in certain services incidental to transport and travel agencies ( ISIC Group ) and in storage and warehousing ( ISIC Group ) ( Official Journal 1982, L 213, p . ) the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil its obligations under the directive and under the third paragraph of Article and the first paragraph of Article of the EEC Treaty .  Article of Directive 82/provides that Member States are to adopt the measures necessary to comply with the directive within months of its notification and must forthwith inform the Commission thereof . That period expired on January .  Since it had received no communication from the Belgian Government within the prescribed period on measures implementing the directive, on April the Commission sent a letter of formal notice requesting it to submit its observations on the matter within a period of two months . The observations of the Belgian Government, which were communicated by letters dated and August 1985, were not considered satisfactory by the Commission, and on April it therefore issued a reasoned opinion under the first paragraph of Article of the Treaty . In answer to that opinion, in a letter dated September the Belgian Government explained the difficulties which had prevented the adoption of the measures needed to comply with the directive . Holding that the Kingdom of Belgium had still not adopted the said measures, the Commission brought the present action for failure to fulfil obligations .  Reference is made to the Report for the Hearing for the course of the procedure and the submissions and arguments of the parties, which are mentioned hereinafter only in so far as is necessary for the reasoning of the Court .  The Belgian Government admits that it has not yet adopted all the national measures needed to transpose the directive . At the hearing it stated that as regards travel agents the Belgian legislation now complied with the provisions of the directive, following the adoption of the Royal Decree of October amending the Royal Decree of June on the rules governing travel agents . As regards services incidental to transport the Belgian Government stated that a draft law had been prepared to amend the Law of June on the rules governing persons engaged in services incidental to the transport of goods but that the draft had not yet been submitted for parliamentary approval because of the dissolution of parliament at the end of the previous year .  The complaint relating to the failure to adopt measures transposing the directive in relation to travel agents must be considered by the Court . Even if the legislation adopted by the Kingdom of Belgium has made good the failure, which is denied by the Commission since the competent national authorities and bodies required by Articles and of the directive have not yet been appointed, the Court has consistently held that where a default has been remedied after the period prescribed under the second paragraph of Article of the Treaty an interest still subsists in pursuing the action .  The Court has consistently held that a Member State may not rely on provisions, practices or situations in its internal legal system to justify failure to observe the obligations and time-limits laid down by directives .  It must therefore be held that by failing to adopt within the prescribed period the provisions necessary to comply with Council Directive 82/of June the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EEC Treaty .  
Decision on costs
Costs  Under Article ( ) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs . Since the defendant has failed in its submissions, it must be ordered to pay the costs .  
Operative part
On those grounds,  THE COURT  hereby :  ( ) Declares that by failing to adopt within the prescribed period the provisions necessary to comply with Council Directive 82/of June the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EEC Treaty;  ( ) Orders the Kingdom of Belgium to pay the costs .  
Top  
 