
Case C-74/Commission of the European Communities
v
Hellenic Republic
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Article EC – Registration tax on imported second-hand cars – Determination of taxable value – Depreciation of vehicles based solely on age – Publicising of criteria for calculation – Possibility of challenging the application of the fixed method of calculation)
Judgment of the Court (Fourth Chamber), September Summary of the Judgment
1.     Tax provisions – Internal taxation – Tax on the registration of imported second-hand vehicles
(Art. 90, first indent, EC)
2.     Tax provisions – Internal taxation – Tax on the registration of imported second-hand vehicles
(Art. 90, first indent, EC)
1.     By applying a single criterion of depreciation, based on the age of the vehicles, for the purpose of determining the taxable
         value of second-hand vehicles imported from another Member State into national territory in order to establish the registration
         tax, and by adopting a reduction in value of 7% for vehicles between and months old or 14% for vehicles more than a year
         old, which does not ensure that the tax due does not exceed, even if only in certain cases, the amount of the residual tax
         incorporated in the value of similar second-hand vehicles already registered in the national territory, a Member State fails
         to fulfil its obligations under Article EC.
      
(see paras 40, 59, 61, operative part 1)
2.     A Member State does not fail to fulfil its obligations under Article EC by applying to second-hand vehicles imported from
         other Member States a system of taxation under which the actual depreciation of the vehicles is defined in a general and abstract
         way on the basis of criteria laid down by national law, in so far as: (1) the criteria on which the fixed method of calculating
         the depreciation of vehicles is based are made known to the public; and (2) the owner of  a second-hand vehicle imported from
         another Member State is able to challenge the application of such a fixed method of calculation to the vehicle in order to
         demonstrate that it leads to taxation exceeding the amount of the residual tax incorporated in the value of similar used vehicles
         already registered in the national territory. 
      
(see paras 46, 50, 60)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
September (*)
      
(Failure of Member State to fulfil obligations – Article EC – Registration tax on imported second-hand cars – Determination of taxable value – Depreciation of vehicles based solely on age – Publicising of criteria of calculation – Possibility of challenging the application of the fixed method of calculation)
In Case C‑74/06,
ACTION for failure to fulfil obligations under Article EC, brought on February 2006,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by D. Triantafyllou, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Hellenic Republic, represented by P. Mylonopoulos and K. Boskovits, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts (Rapporteur), President of Chamber, E. Juhász, G. Arestis, J. Malenovský and T. von Danwitz, Judges,
Advocate General: P. Mengozzi,
Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on April 2007,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities asks the Court for a declaration that by applying, for the
         purpose of determining the taxable value of second-hand cars imported into Greek territory from another Member State, a single
         criterion of depreciation based on the age of the vehicle and by adopting a reduction in value of 7% for vehicles between
         and months old or of 14% for cars more than year old, which does not ensure that the tax due does not exceed, even
         if only in certain cases, the amount of the residual tax incorporated in the value of similar second-hand cars already registered
         on the national territory, while the basis for calculating depreciation is not made known to the public and the examination
         of vehicles by experts is subject to the payment of a fee of EUR 300, the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations
         under Article EC.
      
 National law
Article 126(1)(a) of Greek Law 2960/on the national customs code (FEK [Greek Official Journal] A’ 265), as amended by
         Greek Law 3156/(FEK A’ 157, ‘Law 2960/2001’), determines taxable value for the purposes of the registration tax on imported
         second-hand cars in the following manner:
      
‘…
As regards second-hand passenger vehicles, there shall be taken into account … the wholesale price of a corresponding vehicle
         when put into circulation on the international market, that price being reduced, to reflect wear caused by normal use or in
         any other way, in accordance with the following depreciation percentages:
      
Between and months from the date when the vehicle is first put into circulation, provided that the vehicle has covered
         more than kilometres, depreciation of 7%.
      
From to years inclusive                   14%Between and years inclusive          21%Between and years inclusive          28%Between and years inclusive          34%Between and years inclusive          40%Between and years inclusive          46%Between and years inclusive          52%Between and years inclusive          57%Between and years inclusive          62%Between and years inclusive          67%Between and years inclusive          70%Between and years inclusive          73%Between and years inclusive          76%Between and years inclusive          79%Between and years inclusive          80%.’
      
Article 126(5) of Law 2960/provides that, if the owner of a second-hand passenger vehicle disputes the amount of the
         registration tax calculated in accordance with the depreciation scale set out in Article 126(1)(a), the taxable value is to
         be determined by a committee of experts, acting as a complaints commission, in such a way that the registration tax payable
         is equal to the amount of the residual tax incorporated in the value of a vehicle of the same make, same model, and propulsion
         system, or failing such a vehicle, of a similar or equivalent vehicle which was put into circulation in Greece in the course
         of the same year as that in which the vehicle concerned was first put into circulation in another Member State of the European
         Union. The complaints commissions who examine the actual condition of the vehicles are based at the offices of customs districts
         and are made up of a representative of the customs district, a representative of the Ministry of Transport and Communications
         and the vehicle owner or his agent. Before a complaints commission can instruct expert examination of the vehicle, the vehicle
         owner must pay a fee the amount of which is set at EUR 300.
      
Decree F.112/of the State Secretary for Economic Affairs and Finance, of January (FEK B’ 207), sets out the factors
         to enable the complaints commissions established by Article 126(5) of Law 2960/to assess the actual condition of second-hand
         passenger vehicles. Article 2(b) and (c) of that Decree provide that the complaints commission is to:
      
‘(b)      analyse the mechanical condition of the vehicle by checking the chassis/bodywork, the engine, the battery, the electrical
         system, the condition of the tyres and assess whether each is in working order, and, as regards the external appearance of
         the vehicle concerned, check the type and condition of the paintwork; 
      
(c)      check the general condition of the vehicle in relation to its use and maintenance, the quality of the internal upholstery
         and more generally of the interior of the passenger compartment, the mileage recorded on the odometer, the condition of the
         security belts and the quality of accessories installed in the vehicle, in particular the air-conditioning, radio, computer,
         alloy wheels, airbags, anti-theft system, opening roof, automatic gearbox, ABS and EBV braking systems, EDS, ASR, ESP drive
         power and of other accessories essential to determine the commercial value of the vehicle.’ 
      
 Pre-litigation procedure
The Court held in Case C‑375/Commission v Greece [1997] ECR I‑that the Hellenic Republic had failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of the EC Treaty (now,
         after amendment, Article EC) by determining, for the application of the special consumer tax and the flat-rate added special
         duty, the taxable value of imported second-hand cars by reducing the price of equivalent new cars by 5% for each year of age
         of the vehicles concerned, subject, as a rule, to a maximum reduction of 20%.
      
In order to comply with that judgment, in 1999, and the Hellenic Republic reformed its system of taxation of the
         vehicles concerned by replacing the charging of the special consumer tax and flat-rate added special duty with the charging
         of a registration tax and by revising the method of calculation of the taxable value of such vehicles. In 2003, complaints
         commissions were established to hear any disputes arising out of the application of that legislation.
      
The Commission, however, considered that, as thus amended, the Greek legislation applies a scale which is based on a single
         criterion of vehicle depreciation (how long the vehicle had been in use at the taxable date) which does not reflect the actual
         depreciation with sufficient precision to avoid any risk of imported second-hand vehicles being subject to a tax which exceeds
         the amount of the residual tax incorporated in the value of similar second-hand vehicles already registered in Greece. The
         Commission considers that that scale, which entails, even if only in certain cases, the charging of a higher tax on imported
         vehicles, is contrary to Article EC.
      
A letter of formal notice criticising that legislation was sent by the Commission to the Hellenic Republic on April 2004,
         and that was followed, on July 2004, by a complementary letter of formal notice which took account of the setting up of
         the complaints commissions. On July 2005, following the Member State’s response, the Commission issued a reasoned opinion.
         The Commission considered that the response of the Hellenic Republic to that opinion was not satisfactory, and decided to
         bring the present proceedings.
      
 The action
 Arguments of the parties
According to the Commission, the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC by applying, for
         the purpose of determining the taxable value of imported second-hand cars, a single criterion of depreciation based on age.
         The system is not such as to exclude any possibility, even if only in certain cases, of imported products being taxed more
         heavily than national products. 
      
Although the depreciation scale established by the Greek legislation as amended in allows a closer approximation of the
         actual value of second-hand cars, the scale nevertheless cannot be considered to provide the necessary degree of precision.
         In practically all cases, it is not a realistic approach to the actual loss in value to take into consideration depreciation
         of 7% for vehicles the age of which varies between and months or 14% for vehicles more than year old. The scale should
         be based on more rapid depreciation covering all vehicles. It is not obvious from the Greek legislation in question that criteria
         other than age, such as those proposed in the case-law of the Court, are taken into account.
      
In addition, the Greek legislation is not in conformity with the case-law of the Court to the effect that, where a Member
         State applies to second-hand vehicles imported from other Member States a system of taxation under which the actual depreciation
         of the vehicles is defined in a general and abstract way on the basis of criteria laid down by national law, the first paragraph
         of Article EC requires that system of taxation to be structured in such a way, making allowance for the reasonable approximations
         inherent in any system of that type, as to exclude any discriminatory effect.
      
It is evident from the case-law that it is essential to publicise the criteria on which the fixed method of calculating vehicle
         depreciation is based in order to mitigate the lack of transparency in the taxation system in question. The Greek Government
         has officially refused to divulge to the Greek Union of Automobile Traders and Importers any information as to the taxable
         values currently adopted. In that regard, it is not sufficient to publish the general criteria, linked to age; it is also
         necessary that there be made public the tables of fixed values which are established in accordance with those criteria. The
         lack of such publicity entails a risk that the authorities may set the taxable value arbitrarily. The Commission considers
         moreover that, in the same way that legislation attaches objective values to real estate, it would be appropriate to set up
         a similar system for vehicles. On that point, the Commission refers to the prices published in the magazines of automobile
         clubs to illustrate the possibility of establishing reference tables for the value of second-hand vehicles.
      
The Commission adds that it has not at any time insisted that prices charged by a particular distributor be made public and
         accordingly dismisses the contention that sale prices are protected by professional and administrative confidentiality or
         that it is theoretically possible that a private citizen might ask the competent authorities to inform him of the sale prices.
      
Further, while the Commission states that it approves of the setting up of complaints commissions, the Commission claims,
         first, that as long as the method of calculation of taxable value, based on a scale using a single criterion, remains unchanged,
         the procedure before those commissions does not enable the defects of that method of calculation to be remedied and makes
         no contribution to meeting the requirement that the amount of the tax should not, even if only in certain cases, exceed the
         amount of the residual tax incorporated in the value of similar vehicles already registered in Greece. Recourse to the complaints
         commissions should be limited to cases where marginal errors in applying a properly designed system can, exceptionally, be
         corrected, and should not be a substitute for a defective system. Secondly, the Commission claims that the obligation to pay
         a fee amounting to EUR is likely to deter persons liable to tax from resorting to the complaints procedure. As a consequence
         of the lack of transparency in the system set up by the legislation which determines the amount of tax and of the fee to be
         paid in order to initiate the complaints procedure, the latter is, in practice, unproductive and ineffective, as is evidenced
         by the small number of complaints submitted.
      
The Hellenic Republic disputes that its system of taxation of imported second-hand vehicles constitutes a failure to fulfil
         its obligations under Article EC.
      
First, the system does incorporate the greater part of the criteria required by the case-law. In order to determine the condition
         as affected by age and, consequently, the depreciation of the vehicle to be adopted for the purpose of establishing its taxable
         value, account is taken, first, of wear caused by normal use or in any other way together with, as regards vehicles the age
         of which varies between and months, the number of kilometres covered and, secondly, of the type of vehicle, since the
         wholesale price used as the basis of calculation is determined by the lists of prices submitted to the customs authorities
         by the official distributors of vehicles, which are worked out according to engine capacity and make.
      
In the view of the Hellenic Republic, the Commission’s position is based on the requirement that there should be a number
         of criteria, but beyond that there is no specification as to how those criteria should appropriately be combined and no account
         is taken of the fact that no legislatively-defined criterion can have any absolutely precise correspondence with the actual
         depreciation of a vehicle. Further, that requirement might lead to the application of complicated systems of calculation which
         would be likely to hinder the importation of second-hand vehicles.
      
The Hellenic Republic submits further that the present system has encouraged the importation of second-hand vehicles, the
         numbers having trebled between and 2005, which shows that the system is a realistic and objective approach to the depreciation
         of such vehicles.
      
As regards, secondly, the alleged failure to publicise the criteria by which the taxable value is established, the Hellenic
         Republic contends, first of all, that the information to be found in customs documents is covered by administrative confidentiality
         and that to make known to third parties the lists of wholesale prices submitted by automobile distributors would infringe
         both administrative and business confidentiality. Further, the criteria of depreciation of second-hand vehicles and the factors
         which enable the complaints commissions to assess their actual condition are published and are accessible to the public in
         full. Before customs clearance of an imported vehicle, the owner may request the Ministry of Finance to inform him of all
         the factors influencing the determination of the taxable value of that vehicle.
      
Moreover, retail prices published in magazines are indicative only, and cannot therefore represent a reliable, fixed point
         of reference. Those prices could, however, be taken into account by a complaints commission in the event that a vehicle owner
         claimed that there was a substantial difference between those prices and the value adopted on customs clearance.
      
The Hellenic Republic challenges the relevance of the Commission’s proposal that reference tables of values be published,
         by analogy with the fixed values established for real estate. In the latter case, those values do not reflect the average
         prices as defined by the market but legislation which refers to taxable values established following evaluations carried out
         by the competent tax authorities. Moreover, the Commission is urging the Member State to make public an average of the market
         prices set by retail traders, when the Greek system is based on the wholesale price.
      
Thirdly, in relation to the possibility of challenging the application of the fixed method of calculation before the complaints
         commissions, the Hellenic Republic contends that the setting up of those commissions, in conjunction with the application
         of an objective scale of depreciation, is intended to avoid, in all cases, the charging of a registration tax which infringes
         Article EC. The Greek legislation is consistent with the case-law, according to which the fact that the owner of an imported
         vehicle has the possibility of challenging the application of the fixed scale to his vehicle, by demonstrating that it leads
         to taxation higher than the amount of the residual tax incorporated in the value of similar second-hand vehicles already registered
         in the national territory, will prevent any possible discriminatory effects of a system of taxation based on such a scale.
         The setting up of the complaints commissions is a response, moreover, to the requirements set out by the Commission in its
         Proposal for a directive on passenger car related taxes (COM(2005) final), in particular to the conditions specified in
         Article 10(3) of that proposed directive on scales of values.
      
Lastly, as regards the fee of EUR charged by the authorities for the expert examination of a vehicle to be carried out
         by a complaints commission, that fee will not deter any person liable to tax from bringing a complaint before such a commission
         to support his claim that his vehicle should be assessed as subject to higher depreciation if that person has genuine reason
         to think that the vehicle’s value has been overestimated by the customs authorities. The small number of cases brought before
         the complaints commissions demonstrates that the Greek legislation enables the objectives laid down by the case-law of the
         Court to be achieved.
      
 Findings of the Court
In relation to the taxation of imported second-hand vehicles, the Court has held that Article EC seeks to ensure the complete
         neutrality of internal taxation as regards competition between products already on the domestic market and imported products
         (see, inter alia, Case C‑387/Weigel [2004] ECR I‑4981, paragraph 66; Joined Cases C‑290/and C‑333/Nádasdi and Németh [2000] ECR I‑10115, paragraph 46; and Case C‑313/Brzeziński [2007] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 28).
      
It is settled case-law that the first paragraph of Article EC is infringed where the taxation on the imported product and
         that on the similar domestic product are calculated in a different manner on the basis of different criteria which lead, even
         if only in certain cases, to higher taxation being imposed on the imported product (see, inter alia, Commission v Greece, paragraph 20, and the case-law cited there; Case C‑393/Gomes Valente [2001] ECR I‑1327, paragraph 21; and Case C‑101/Tulliasiamies and Siilin [2002] ECR I‑7487, paragraph 53).
      
The Court has thus held that the first paragraph of Article EC is infringed when a Member State charges on second-hand
         vehicles from another Member State a tax the amount of which, calculated without taking the vehicle's actual depreciation
         into account, exceeds the amount of the residual tax incorporated in the value of similar second-hand vehicles already registered
         in the national territory (Case C‑345/Nunes Tadeu [1995] ECR I‑paragraph 20, and Gomes Valente, paragraph 23).
      
In applying Article EC, and in particular when comparing the taxes applicable to imported second-hand cars with those applicable
         to second-hand cars purchased at home, which are similar or competing products, it is necessary to have regard not only to
         the rate of direct or indirect internal taxation on domestic or imported products but also to the basis of assessment and
         the detailed rules for levying the tax in question (see Case 74/Iannelli & Volpi [1977] ECR 557, paragraph 21; Case C‑47/Commission v Denmark [1990] ECR I‑paragraph 18; and Nunes Tadeu, paragraph 12).
      
More specifically, a Member State may not charge tax on imported second-hand motor vehicles based on a value which is higher
         than the real value of the vehicle with the result that they are taxed more heavily than similar second-hand cars on the domestic
         market (see, to that effect, Commission v Denmark, paragraph 22). The taxable value imputed to the imported second-hand vehicle by the revenue authorities should faithfully
         reflect the value of a similar second-hand vehicle already registered on the domestic market (see, inter alia, Weigel, paragraph 71).
      
In that regard, the Court has held that the taking into account of the actual depreciation of the vehicles need not necessarily
         involve an assessment or expert examination of each of them. To avoid the administrative burden inherent in such a system,
         a Member State may establish, by means of fixed scales determined by statute, regulation or administrative provision and calculated
         on the basis of criteria such as a vehicle’s age, mileage, general condition, propulsion method, make or model, a value for
         second-hand vehicles which, as a general rule, would be very close to their actual value (Gomes Valente, paragraph 24, and Weigel, paragraph 73).
      
Such scales must, in any case, take account of the fact that the annual depreciation in the value of cars is in general considerably
         more than 5%, that that depreciation is not linear, especially in the first years when it is much more marked than subsequently,
         and that vehicles continue to depreciate more than four years after being put into circulation. Moreover, a vehicle starts
         to depreciate as soon as it is purchased or brought into use (see, to that effect, Commission v Greece, paragraph 22, and Tulliasiamies and Siilin, paragraph 78).
      
According to settled case-law, in order for a system of taxation of imported second-hand cars which takes into account the
         actual depreciation of the vehicles on the basis of general criteria to be compatible with Article EC, it must be structured
         in such a way, making allowance for the reasonable approximations inherent in any system of that type, as to exclude any discriminatory
         effect (Gomes Valente, paragraph 26; see also, to that effect, Commission v Greece paragraph 29, and Brzeziński, paragraph 40).
      
In the present case, it must be observed, first, that the Greek system of registration tax on imported vehicles is based on
         the wholesale price of the vehicle corresponding to the vehicle concerned current at the time when the latter was put into
         circulation on the international market. That price is reduced, to take account of wear caused by normal usage or in any other
         way, by the application of a depreciation percentage which varies according to the age of the vehicle. Mileage is taken into
         account only as concerns vehicles between and months old, insofar as only vehicles which have covered more than kilometres have depreciation of 7% applied to them.
      
As regards, first, the basis for calculation of the taxable value, the Court considers that while, as suggested by the Commission,
         the authorities of a Member State may refer to a guide indicating the average prices of second-hand vehicles in the national
         market or to a list of average current prices used as a reference in the sector (Gomes Valente, paragraph 25, and Weigel, paragraph 74), the Hellenic Republic cannot be criticised for taking as a basis the wholesale price of the corresponding
         vehicle current at the time when the imported vehicle was put into circulation on the international market.
      
The Court has held, in the context of assessing the compatibility of national legislation with Article EC, that national
         legislation may take the value of a new vehicle as the basis for determining the taxable value of an imported second-hand
         vehicle, provided that the vehicle used as a reference for calculating the tax on an imported second-hand car is a similar
         vehicle, which implies that account must be taken of the model, type and other characteristics such as propulsion method and
         equipment (see, to that effect, Tulliasiamies and Siilin, paragraphs to 76).
      
It is common ground that the wholesale prices of motor cars are determined by automobile manufacturers and are to be found
         in the official catalogues distributed by them. The Hellenic Republic stated at the hearing, and was not contradicted by the
         Commission, that those prices take account of engine capacity and the make of the vehicle concerned and also certain technical
         features, such as propulsion method, engine power, number of cylinders and number of car doors.
      
As regards, secondly, the depreciation scale, as stated in paragraph of this judgment, the depreciation of a vehicle starts
         as soon as it is purchased or put into use. Moreover, the Court has held that the charging on imported second-hand vehicles
         of a registration tax for which the basis of assessment is at least 90% of the value of the vehicle when new constitutes generally
         manifest overtaxation of those vehicles in comparison with the residual registration tax in the case of previously-registered
         second-hand cars bought on the national market, whatever their age or condition (see, to that effect, Commission v Denmark, paragraph 20).
      
As observed in paragraph of this judgment, the Court has set out, without intending the list to be exhaustive or obligatory,
         the objective criteria on which a fixed scale may be based. The Court has thus referred to the age of the vehicle, but also
         to its mileage, its general condition, its propulsion method, its make or model.
      
In the present case, it is common ground that the Greek legislation makes provision for depreciation only from when the vehicle
         is six months old and has covered more than kilometres. It follows, first, that the Hellenic Republic applies to second-hand
         cars imported from another Member State a system of taxation under which the tax due is equal to the tax chargeable on a similar
         new vehicle for the first six months counting from the date when those cars are put into circulation, whatever the number
         of kilometres covered. The same is true for imported second-hand cars between and months old which have covered less
         than kilometres.
      
Second, although the wholesale price which serves as the basis for the evaluation of imported second-hand cars does take account
         of the type of the vehicle, that is to say, of engine capacity, model and other technical features such as propulsion method,
         it is nevertheless clear that the scale of depreciation which is then applied in order to determine the taxable value is based
         on a single criterion, namely the age of the vehicle. Just because there is a condition that the vehicle should have covered
         more than kilometres if it is between and months old does not mean that the scale should be regarded as taking
         the mileage of a vehicle into account, especially since that represents a threshold of use below which no depreciation is
         applied if the vehicle is less than a year old.
      
However, where a vehicle is used intensively in its first few years, wear and, accordingly, depreciation will be much more
         significant than where the vehicle is subject to so‑called ‘normal’ use. Since the legislation at issue does not take mileage
         into account in the calculation of depreciation of such a vehicle, the rate of depreciation corresponding to its age will
         be applied to it. In that event, the value of the vehicle concerned, which is the basis of the registration tax, will obviously
         be set at an overly high level, and that will lead to the charging of a tax the amount of which, calculated without taking
         into account the actual depreciation of the vehicle, will exceed the amount of the residual tax incorporated in the value
         of similar second-hand vehicles already registered on national territory.
      
Contrary to the Hellenic Republic’s assertion, the fact that, in such cases of intensive use of a vehicle, it is open to the
         owner to challenge the application of the fixed scale is not sufficient to prevent a system of taxation from contravening
         Article EC.
      
As is clear from paragraph of this judgment, while a Member State may avoid the administrative burden of an assessment
         system based on the expert examination of each vehicle by resorting to a fixed scale, such a scale must nevertheless enable
         a value to be established for second-hand vehicles that will, as a general rule, be very close to their actual value.
      
It follows from the foregoing that, given the failure to take account of mileage, the scale adopted by the legislation at
         issue does not, as a general rule, lead to a reasonable approximation of the actual value of imported second-hand vehicles.
      
In such circumstances the argument put forward by the Hellenic Republic to the effect that the increase in the number of imported
         second-hand passenger vehicles proves that the legislation at issue has not had a deterrent effect on imports cannot be accepted.
         That increase does not establish that the taxation system at issue enables, in accordance with the case-law cited in paragraph
         of this judgment, a value to be established for second-hand vehicles that will, as a general rule, be very close to their
         actual value.
      
Moreover, regardless of the case of vehicles which have been subject to intensive use in their first years in circulation,
         the Commission argues that the way in which certain aspects of the Greek taxation system are structured does not ensure the
         absence of any discriminatory effect.
      
In that regard, firstly, for such a system to be compatible with the first paragraph of Article EC, the criteria on which
         the fixed method of calculating the depreciation of vehicles is based must be made known to the public (Tulliasiamies and Siilin, paragraph 87).
      
In the present case, it must be pointed out that the criteria for calculating the depreciation of second-hand passenger vehicles
         are mentioned in Article 126(1) of Law 2960/and the factors to enable the complaints commissions to assess the actual
         condition of the vehicles presented to them are set out in Article of Decree F.112/of the State Secretary for Economic
         Affairs and Finance of January 2004.
      
Further, even if, as the Hellenic Republic argues, divulging to third parties the wholesale price lists submitted to the customs
         authorities by automobile distributors would infringe administrative and business confidentiality, it is clear from the replies
         to questions put by the Court at the hearing that, in accordance with Article 5(2) of Law 2960/establishing the Code
         of Administrative Procedure, any person who has a legitimate interest may, on request, be given access to private documents
         held by the public authorities relating to a case involving that person which is pending before, or which has been dealt with
         by, those authorities. Thus, a person may obtain from the competent authorities the wholesale price which will serve as the
         basis for the determination of the value of the vehicle.
      
Since the wholesale price must be regarded as being brought to the knowledge of the public in that way, the Commission’s argument
         that it should be replaced by the prices published in the magazines of automobile clubs cannot succeed. In that regard, as
         stated by the Hellenic Republic, without being challenged by the Commission, in the event that a person liable to tax notes
         a substantial difference between the indicative retail sale prices to be found in such magazines and the value adopted during
         the customs clearance of his vehicle, and appeals to the complaints commission, the prices published in the press will be
         taken into account so that, in accordance with the Greek legislative provisions, the registration tax due will not be higher
         than the amount of the residual tax incorporated in the value of similar vehicles already registered on Greek territory.
      
Secondly, the compatibility with Article EC of a system of taxation of imported second-hand vehicles which takes account
         of the actual depreciation of the vehicles on the basis of general criteria presupposes that the owner of such a vehicle is
         able to challenge the application of such a fixed method of calculation to the vehicle in order to demonstrate that it leads
         to taxation exceeding the amount of the residual tax incorporated in the value of similar used vehicles already registered
         in the national territory (Tulliasiamies and Siilin, paragraph 88).
      
In setting up the complaints commissions the Greek legislature intended to comply with the case‑law of the Court.
The Commission claims however that the complaints procedure does not provide a real possibility of challenging the fixed method
         of calculation, since the person liable to the tax must pay a fee of EUR 300, an amount which, with regard to the tax due,
         is likely to be a disincentive to appealing to a complaints commission.
      
It must be held that such a fee is likely to deter a car owner from appealing to a complaints commission only if it represents
         a significant proportion of the amount of the registration tax challenged.
      
In that regard, the Hellenic Republic stated at the hearing that the rate of registration tax varies according to the engine
         capacity of the vehicle in question. Thus, the registration tax equals 20% of the taxable base for a vehicle with a capacity
         from up to cm3, 30% for a vehicle with a capacity from up to cm3, 40% for a vehicle with a capacity from up to cmand 50% for a vehicle with a capacity above cm3.
      
The Hellenic Republic has further stated, without being contradicted by the Commission, that the majority of imported second-hand
         vehicles are large-engined vehicles (cmand above), the value of which is quite high and on which, consequently, the amount of the registration tax is relatively
         high.
      
In those circumstances, it is clear that the fee in question generally represents only an insignificant amount in comparison
         with the amount of registration tax claimed.
      
Further, as stated by the Hellenic Republic at the hearing, without being challenged by the Commission, the fee in question
         is of an amount which on the whole is equivalent to, if not often less than, the cost of a private technical expert examination.
      
It must be held, therefore, that the Commission has not established that the fee is likely to deter a car owner from appealing
         to a complaints commission to ensure that the tax applied to his vehicle in accordance with the scale established by the Greek
         legislation is not higher than the amount of the residual tax incorporated in the value of a similar second-hand vehicle already
         registered in Greece.
      
In those circumstances, the complaint relating to the obligations of the Hellenic Republic under Article EC is upheld in
         that the system of calculating the registration tax of second-hand vehicles imported into that Member State is based on a
         single criterion of depreciation, namely the age of the vehicles, which does not ensure that the value of those vehicles is
         established at an amount that, as a general rule, is very close to their actual value. Accordingly that method of taxation
         does not exclude the possibility that, in certain cases, imported second-hand vehicles might be subject to tax of an amount
         which is higher than that of the residual tax incorporated in the value of similar second-hand vehicles already registered
         on Greek territory.
      
On the other hand, the failure of the Member State to fulfil its obligations is not established as regards the arrangements
         relating to the taxation system which are required if that system provides for a fixed method of calculation of the amount
         of the tax, namely the publicising of the criteria for calculation of the tax and the possibility of challenging the application
         of the fixed method of calculation in order to exclude any discriminatory effect.
      
In the light of all of the foregoing, it must be held that, by applying a single criterion of depreciation, based on the age
         of the vehicles, for the purpose of determining the taxable value of second-hand vehicles imported from another Member State
         into Greek territory in order to establish the registration tax, and by adopting a reduction in value of 7% for vehicles between
         and months old or 14% for vehicles more than a year old, which does not ensure that the tax due does not exceed, even
         if only in certain cases, the amount of the residual tax incorporated in the value of similar second-hand vehicles already
         registered in the national territory, the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC.
      
The remainder of the action must be dismissed.
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Under the first subparagraph of Article 69(3) of the Rules of Procedure,
         the Court may order that the costs be shared or that the parties bear their own costs if the parties are each unsuccessful
         on one or more heads of claim.
      
In the present case, since the Commission and the Hellenic Republic have each been unsuccessful in respect of certain heads
         of claim, each party must be ordered to bear its own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, by applying a single criterion of depreciation, based on the age of the vehicles, for the purpose of determining
            the taxable value of second-hand vehicles imported from another Member State into Greek territory in order to establish the
            registration tax, and by adopting a reduction in value of 7% for vehicles between and months old or 14% for vehicles
            more than a year old, which does not ensure that the tax due does not exceed, even if only in certain cases, the amount of
            the residual tax incorporated in the value of similar second-hand vehicles already registered in the national territory, the
            Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC;
2.      Dismisses the remainder of the action;
3.      Orders the Hellenic Republic and the Commission to bear their own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Greek.
      
Top  
 