
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-294/Granarolo SpAvComune di Bologna(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Tribunale civile di Bologna (Italy))
         
«(Agriculture – Health rules for the production and placing on the market of heat-treated milk – Free movement of goods – National law imposing a use-by date for high-temperature pasteurised milk)»
Opinion of Advocate General Léger delivered on March Judgment of the Court (Fifth Chamber), November Summary of the Judgment
Agriculture – Approximation of laws – Health rules for the production and placing on the market of raw milk, heat-treated milk and milk-based products – Directive 92/– National rules requiring a use-by date of four days for high-temperature pasteurised milk – Not permissible  (Arts EC and EC; Council Directive 92/46) Council Directive 92/laying down the health rules for the production and placing on the market of raw milk, heat-treated
         milk and milk-based products, as amended by Directive 94/71, and Articles EC and EC preclude national legislation which
         requires a use-by date of four days after preparation for high-temperature pasteurised milk.see para. 54, operative part
      
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)November (1)
((Agriculture – Health rules for the production and placing on the market of heat-treated milk – Free movement of goods – National law imposing a use-by date for high-temperature pasteurised milk))
In Case C-294/01, 
 REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Tribunale civile di Bologna (Italy) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings
            pending before that court between
            
 Granarolo SpA
and
 Comune di Bologna,
 on the interpretation of Council Directive 92/46/EEC of June laying down the health rules for the production and placing
            on the market of raw milk, heat-treated milk and milk-based products (OJ L 268, p. 1), as amended by Council Directive
            94/71/EC of December (OJ L 368, p. 33), of Council Directive 79/112/EEC of December on the approximation
            of the laws of the Member States relating to the labelling, presentation and advertising of foodstuffs (OJ L 33, p. 1),
            as amended by Directive 97/4/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of January (OJ L 43, p. 21), and
            of Council Directive 89/396/EEC of June on indications or marks identifying the lot to which a foodstuff belongs (OJ
            L 186, p. 21),
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),,
 composed of: C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Fourth Chamber, acting as President of the Fifth Chamber, P. Jann and S. von Bahr (Rapporteur), Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: P. Léger, Registrar: M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
 Granarolo SpA, by G. Forte, avvocato, 
               
─
 the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, assisted by M. Fiorilli, avvocato dello Stato, 
               
─
 the Commission of the European Communities, by C. Cattabriga and L. Visaggio, acting as Agents, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of Granarolo SpA, represented by G. Forte and C. Marinuzzi, avvocatessa, of the Italian
               Government, represented by M. Fiorilli, of the German Government, represented by W.-D. Plessing, acting as Agent, and of the
               Commission, represented by C. Cattabriga, at the hearing on September 2002,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By order of May 2001, received at the Court on July 2001, the Tribunale civile di Bologna (Civil District Court, Bologna)
         referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC a question on the interpretation of Council Directive
         92/46/EEC of June laying down the health rules for the production and placing on the market of raw milk, heat-treated
         milk and milk-based products (OJ L 268, p. 1), as amended by Council Directive 94/71/EC of December (OJ L 368, p. 33,  
         Directive 92/46), of Council Directive 79/112/EEC of December on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the
         labelling, presentation and advertising of foodstuffs (OJ L 33, p. 1), as amended by Directive 97/4/EC of the European
         Parliament and of the Council of January (OJ L 43, p. 21,  
         Directive 79/112), and of Council Directive 89/396/EEC of June on indications or marks identifying the lot to which a foodstuff belongs
         (OJ L 186, p. 21). 
         
            
 That question was raised in proceedings between Granarolo SpA (
         Granarolo), a company established in Bologna (Italy) and the Comune di Bologna (Municipality of Bologna) concerning the imposition
         by the latter of a fine on that company for failing to comply with the Italian legislation requiring a use-by date of four
         days for the conservation of high-temperature pasteurised milk. 
         
Legal background
 The Community legislation
         
            
 Under Article of Directive 92/46, the Member States are to ensure that heat-treated drinking milk is not placed on the market
         unless it meets certain conditions, set out inter alia in Annex C, Chapter I, to that directive. 
         
            
 Chapter I(A)(4)(a) of Annex C to Directive 92/provides:  Pasteurised milk  must:...
         
(ii)
 show a negative reaction to the phosphatase test and a positive reaction to the peroxidase test.  However, the production
         of pasteurised milk which shows a negative reaction to the peroxidase test is authorised, provided that the milk is labelled
         as  
         high-temperature pasteurised
         . 
         
            
 According to Chapter II(C), second indent, of Annex C to Directive 92/46, microbiological criteria applicable, under conditions
         managed and controlled by the operator or manager of the establishment, to the use-by date may be established where necessary
         in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article of that directive. 
         
            
 Chapter IV(B)(3) and (4) of Annex C to Directive 92/lays down certain requirements as regards labelling of milk products.
          Without prejudice to the provisions of Directive 79/112/EEC, the labelling must clearly show for inspection purposes the
         nature of any heat treatment applied at the end of the manufacturing process, and, for milk-based products in which growth
         of micro-organisms can occur, the use-by or minimum durability date. 
         
            
 Under Article 3(1)(4) of Directive 79/indication of certain particulars is compulsory on the labelling of foodstuffs,
         inter alia the date of minimum durability, or, in the case of foodstuffs which are highly perishable from a microbiological
         point of view, the use-by date. 
         
            
 Article 9(1) to (4) provides that the date of minimum durability of a foodstuff is the date until which the foodstuff retains
         its specific properties when properly stored.  That date must be preceded by the words  
         best before ... or  
         best before end ....  If need be, those particulars are to be followed by a description of the storage conditions which must be observed if the
         product is to keep for the specified period. 
         
            
 Article 9a, inserted by Council Directive 89/395/EEC of June amending Directive 79/112/EEC (OJ L 186, p. 17),
         provides that, in the case of foodstuffs which, from the microbiological point of view, are highly perishable and are therefore
         likely after a short period to constitute an immediate danger to human health, the date of minimum durability is to be replaced
         by the use-by date.  That date is to be preceded by the words  
         use by.  Those particulars are to be followed by a description of the storage conditions which must be observed.  That date is to
         consist of the day, the month and, possibly, the year, in that order and in uncoded form. 
         
            
 Under Article of Directive 79/112: Member States shall refrain from laying down requirements more detailed than those already contained in Articles to concerning
         the manner in which the particulars provided for in Article and Article 4(2) are to be shown.
         
            
 Article of Directive 79/provides: 1. Member States may not forbid trade in foodstuffs which comply with the rules laid down in this directive by the application
         of non-harmonised national provisions governing the labelling and presentation of certain foodstuffs or of foodstuffs in general.2. Paragraph shall not apply to non-harmonised national provisions justified on grounds of:
         
─
 protection of public health, 
         
─
 prevention of fraud, unless such provisions are liable to impede the application of the definitions and rules laid down by
            this directive, 
         
─
 protection of industrial and commercial property rights, indications of provenance, registered designations of origin and
            prevention of unfair competition.
         
 The national legislation
         
            
 Article of Law entitled  
         Disciplina del trattamento e della commercializzazione del latte alimentare vaccino (law laying down rules on the treatment and marketing of cow's milk for human consumption), of May (GURI No of
         May 1989, p. 1996,  
         Law 169/89), defines the properties of milk intended for direct human consumption.  In particular, it must have undergone at least one
         permitted heat treatment or an authorised treatment with equivalent effect in a milk treatment establishment. 
         
            
 Article of Law 169/provides that the types of heat treatment permitted for milk intended for direct human consumption
         are: 
         
(a)
 pasteurisation: heat treatment in continuous flow for at least seconds at a temperature lower than boiling point but higher
         than degrees centigrade or for a time and at a temperature ensuring an equivalent amount of heat, so as to ensure the destruction
         of all pathogenic micro-organisms and a significant proportion of the saprophyte microbial flora, with limited alteration
         of chemical, physical and organoleptic properties; 
         
(b)
 sterilisation: heat treatment which guarantees the destruction of all micro-organisms present in milk or definitively prevents
         their proliferation.
         
            
 Under Article of Law 169/89, other treatments may be authorised by decree of the Minister for Health by agreement with the
         Minister for Agriculture and Forestry, in line with, inter alia, technological development or Community legislation. 
         
            
 Article of Law 169/defines the term  
         pasteurised milk as follows: Milk treated by pasteurisation which shows, on consumption,
         
(a)
 a negative reaction to the alkaline phosphatase test; 
         
(b)
 an undenatured soluble protein serum content of less than 11% of total protein.
         
            
 The definition of  
         fresh pasteurised milk is set out in Article of Law 169/89, according to which: Fresh pasteurised milk means milk which arrives in a raw state at the treatment plant and undergoes a single heat treatment within hours of milking
         and shows, on consumption
         
(a)
 a negative reaction to the alkaline phosphatase test, 
         
(b)
 an undenaturated soluble protein serum content of not less than 14% of total protein, and 
         
(c)
 a positive reaction to the peroxidase test.
         
            
 Under Article of Law 169/89, fresh pasteurised milk can be defined as  
         high quality fresh pasteurised milk if it shows, on consumption, an undenaturated soluble protein serum content of not less than 15.5% of total protein, and
         if it was obtained from stables or collection centres (cooperatives and milk consortiums) and meets certain health standards
         and content requirements set by an ad hoc ministerial decree. 
         
            
 The third paragraph of Article of Law 169/89, headed  
         General provisions on milk treated by pasteurisation, provides: The name of the type of milk, as defined in Articles and 4, must appear in full and be visible on the same part of the packaging
         as that on which the durability date is given indicated by the words  
         use by followed by the date expressed in terms of day, month and year.  The durability date may not exceed four days after treatment.
         
            
 The provisions of Article of the Decreto del Presidente della Repubblica No 54, Regolamento recante attuazione delle direttive
         92/46/EEC e 92/47/EEC in materia di produzione e immissione sul mercato di latte e di prodotti a base di latte (Regulation
         implementing Directives 92/46/EEC and 92/47/EEC concerning the production and placing on the market of milk and milk-based
         products) of January (ordinary supplement to GURI No 59, of March 1997, p. 1200,  
         Decree 54/97), concerning the production, processing, labelling, storage and transport of heat-treated milk, are comparable in content
         to those of Article of Directive 92/46.  That decree reproduces in Annex C the provisions of Chapter I(A)(4)(a) to (d) of
         Annex C to Directive 92/and those of Chapter IV(B) of that Annex. 
         
            
 Decreto legislativo No 109, Attuazione delle direttive 89/395/EEC e 89/396/EEC concernenti l'etichettatura, la presentazione
         e la pubblicità dei prodotti alimentari (legislative decree implementing Directives 89/395/EEC and 89/396/EEC relating to
         labelling, presentation and advertising of foodstuffs), of January (ordinary supplement to GURI No 39, of February
         1992, p. 501,  
         legislative decree 109/92), implements Directives 89/and 89/in Italian law. 
         
            
 Article 3(1)(d) of legislative decree 109/reproduces Article 3(1)(4) of Directive 79/verbatim. 
         
            
 Article of legislative decree 109/92, which implements Articles and 9a of Directive 79/112, provides: 
         
1.
 The date of minimum durability of a foodstuff shall be the date until which the foodstuff retains its specific properties
         when properly stored; it shall be preceded by the words  
         best before followed by the date or a reference to where on the packaging it is to be found.
         
2.
 The use-by date of a foodstuff shall be the date until which the foodstuff may be consumed; it shall be indicated by the words
          
         use by followed by the date or a reference to where on the packaging it is to be found.
         
3.
 The date shall consist of the day, the month and the year, in that order and in uncoded form.
         
The main proceedings and the question referred
            
 In Granarolo marketed in Italy high-temperature pasteurised milk produced in Germany. 
         
            
 The Comune di Bologna imposed an administrative fine of ITL on Granarolo for marking on the packaging of that milk
         a use-by date of more than the four days after the date of treatment required by Article of Law 169/89. 
         
            
 Granarolo appealed against that fine before the Tribunale civile di Bologna.  In that appeal it submitted that Article of
         Law 169/was contrary to Community law and, in particular, to Directives 92/46, 89/and 89/396. 
         
            
 Granarolo submitted that high-temperature pasteurised milk was produced by a special method of pasteurisation called the Falling
         Stream Heater system (a steam infusion procedure) which was more powerful than traditional pasteurisation and results in milk
         with a longer shelf-life but with organoleptic and nutritional qualities comparable to those of fresh pasteurised milk. 
         
            
 Granarolo stated that the concept of high-temperature pasteurised milk was introduced in Italy by Decree 54/which implemented
         Directive 92/46.  It argued that the application to this type of milk of the short date provided for by the third paragraph
         of Article of Law 169/undermined the effect of Decree 54/and, as a result, of Directive 92/46.  It submitted that
         the use-by date should be fixed by the producer according to the actual length of time the product keeps on the basis of Article
         of legislative decree 109/92.  That decree implemented Directives 89/and 89/in Italian law. 
         
            
 Taking the view that the fine imposed on Granarolo by the Municipality of Bologna would have to be cancelled if Directives
         92/46, 89/and 89/were interpreted as Granarolo argued, the Tribunale civile di Bologna decided to stay proceedings
         and refer the following question to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling: Is application of the combined provisions of Council Directive 92/46/EEC of June laying down the health rules for
         the production and placing on the market of raw milk, heat-treated milk and milk-based products (implemented in Italy by Decree
         54/of January 1997) and Directives 89/395/EEC and 89/396/EEC, which concern the labelling, presentation and advertising
         of foodstuffs (implemented in Italy by legislative decree 109/of January 1992) limited by the content of a piece of
         national legislation (in particular Article 5(3), in relation to Article 3, of Law 169/of May 1989), with the result
         that (according to the interpretation which has been given thereto in the present case) a  
         best before date of four days after preparation would apply to milk pasteurised at high temperature (a type of milk contemplated and
         governed solely by Directive 92/and Decree 54/97)?
         Preliminary observation
            
 The Italian Government submits that the interpretation of national law in the order for reference is incorrect on certain
         points.  According to that government Law 169/is not applicable to high-temperature pasteurised milk. 
         
            
 It is to be remembered in this regard that it is not for the Court of Justice to rule on the interpretation and applicability
         of provisions of national law or to establish the relevant facts for the settlement of the dispute in the main proceedings.
         
         
            
 It is for the Court to take account, under the division of jurisdiction between the Community courts and the national courts,
         of the factual and legislative context, as described in the order for reference, in which the question put to it is set (Case
         C-475/Ambulanz Glöckner  [2001] ECR I-8089, paragraph 10). 
         
            
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling must therefore be considered in the legislative context defined and interpreted
         by the Tribunale civile di Bologna in its order for reference. 
         The question referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 By its question the referring court seeks essentially to know whether Community law and, in particular, the provisions of
         Directives 92/46, 79/and 89/preclude a national provision such as Article of Law 169/which lays down a use-by
         date of four days after preparation for milk pasteurised at high temperature. 
         
            
 The Court has consistently held that, in interpreting a provision of Community law, it is necessary to consider not only its
         wording but also the context in which it occurs and the objects of the rules of which it forms part (Case C-223/Adidas  [1999] ECR I-7081, paragraph 23; Case C-301/KVS International  [2000] ECR I-3583, paragraph 21; Case C-156/Germany  v  
          Commission  [2000] ECR I-6857, paragraph 50; Case C-191/Kvaerner  [2001] ECR I-4447, paragraph 30, and Case C-491/British American Tobacco and Imperial Tobacco (Investments)  [2002] ECR I-11453, paragraph 203). 
         
            
 Directive 89/lays down, as its title suggests, rules on indications or marks identifying the lot to which a foodstuff
         belongs.  Under Article of that directive, when the date of minimum durability or use-by date appears on the label, no indication
         identifying the lot need appear on the foodstuff.  That provision is not in any way intended to fix the use-by date of a foodstuff.
          Moreover, the directive contains no other provision concerning, directly or indirectly, the establishment of such a date
         for milk products. 
         
            
 Directive 79/112, according to Article thereof, concerns the labelling of foodstuffs to be delivered as such to the ultimate
         consumer and certain aspects relating to the presentation and advertising thereof.  That directive lays down methods of labelling,
         the list of compulsory particulars and, where appropriate, the way in which those particulars must be worded. 
         
            
 As the Advocate General pointed out in point of his Opinion, Directive 79/lays down rules of a procedural nature concerning
         the compulsory indications to be given on the labelling of foodstuffs and lays down no substantive rules on the content of
         such indications.  Although Article 3(1) of that directive provides that the labelling must include the date of minimum durability
         of those foodstuffs or, in the case of highly perishable foodstuffs, the use-by date and the wording which must be used to
         indicate it, it contains no rule whereby the date of minimum durability or the use-by date of such foodstuffs may be directly
         or indirectly determined. 
         
            
 Finally, Directive 92/46, according to Article thereof, lays down health rules for the production and placing on the market
         of raw milk, heat-treated drinking milk, milk for the manufacture of milk-based products and milk-based products intended
         for human consumption. 
         
            
 It is also clear from the second and fifth recitals in the preamble to Directive 92/that those rules were laid down at
         Community level in order to ensure the rational development of the milk sector and to create the conditions for the gradual
         establishment of the internal market. 
         
            
 Under Chapter II of Directive 92/46, headed  
         Rules governing Community production, the products covered by that directive, in other words, raw milk, heat-treated milk and milk-based products, must meet the
         conditions laid down in Annexes A to C thereto in order to be used in the manufacture of other products and, in the case of
         heat-treated milk, in order to be placed on the market. 
         
            
 Thus, Annex A to Directive 92/lays down requirements relating to the acceptance of raw milk at milk treatment and/or processing
         establishments.  The provisions of Annex B to that directive lay down general conditions for approval of such treatment establishments
         and processing establishments and hygiene standards for premises, equipment and staff of such establishments.  Annex C, Chapter
         I, lays down requirements for the manufacture of heat-treated milk and milk-based products.  In that connection, it must be
         pointed out that Chapter I(A)(4)(a)(ii) of Annex C to Directive 92/authorises the production of high-temperature pasteurised
         milk.  Chapter II of Annex C sets out the microbiological criteria for milk-based products and drinking milk.  Chapters III
         and IV of that Annex lay down rules on packaging, wrapping and labelling of the products covered by Directive 92/46.  Chapter
         V of that Annex sets out storage and transport requirements for those products.  Finally, under Chapter VI of Annex C, the
         establishments concerned are subject to health checks carried out by the competent authority. 
         
            
 As the Advocate General observed in point of his Opinion, Directive 92/governs all the stages in the milk production
         process, from animal health to the transport of products to various sales outlets. 
         
            
 It must be held that, although it lays down very detailed rules as regards the different stages of the production and marketing
         of milk, Directive 92/is not intended to fix the date of minimum durability or the use-by date of the products it covers.
          Apart from a provision contained in Chapter II(C) of Annex C to that directive, according to which microbiological criteria
         applicable to the use-by date may be adopted at Community level, the directive contains no provision on that subject.  Nor
         can it be inferred from the directive that it is for the producers to fix those dates. 
         
            
 Against that background, it must be concluded that, in the absence of provisions adopted at Community level, the determination
         of the use-by date for milk products is generally the responsibility of each Member State acting in accordance with the rules
         set out in Articles and 9a of Directive 79/112. 
         
            
 Although the Member States are generally responsible for fixing the use-by date of products covered by Directive 92/46, they
         must refrain from taking any measures liable seriously to compromise achievement of the result prescribed by the directive.
         
         
            
 As is clear from the preamble to and the general structure of the provisions of Directive 92/46, it is intended inter alia
         to facilitate the marketing and free movement of milk products covered by it. 
         
            
 Achievement of the result prescribed by Directive 92/might be seriously compromised if a Member State fixed a use-by date
         for one of those milk products which was liable to constitute a serious obstacle to the marketing of that product in that
         State. 
         
            
 In fact, Article of Law 169/fixed the same use-by date for high-temperature pasteurised milk as for fresh pasteurised
         milk, namely four days after preparation of the product.  However, the advantage of marketing high-temperature pasteurised
         milk is that it has a long shelf-life, longer than the four days after preparation of the product provided for by Article
         of Law 169/and significantly longer than that of fresh pasteurised milk. 
         
            
 Fixing such a use-by date appears liable to constitute a serious obstacle to the marketing and free movement of that type
         of milk in Italy and thus seriously compromise achievement of the result prescribed by Directive 92/46. 
         
            
 It must therefore be held that Directive 92/precludes national legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings
         which fixes the use-by date for high-temperature pasteurised milk in such a way that it cannot be longer than four days after
         preparation of the product in question. 
         
            
 In any event, national legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings constitutes a restriction on the free movement
         of goods within the meaning of Article EC. 
         
            
 Although it is true that the determination of the use-by date for milk falls within the remit of the Member States' health
         policy, the Italian Government put forward no argument to establish that the use-by date fixed by the national legislation
         was necessary to ensure the protection of public health or safeguard some other public interest. 
         
            
 The use-by date of four days laid down by Law 169/appears in any event to be disproportionate to the objective of protecting
         public health as it has not been established on the basis of objective evidence that high-temperature pasteurised milk has
         as short a shelf-life as fresh pasteurised milk. 
         
            
 Accordingly, the answer to the question referred must be that Directive 92/and Articles EC and EC preclude national
         legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which requires a use-by date of four days after preparation for
         high-temperature pasteurised milk. 
         
Costs
            
 The costs incurred by the Italian Government and by the Commission, which have submitted observations to the Court, are not
         recoverable.  Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the
         national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
 in answer to the question referred to it by the Tribunale civile di Bologna by order of May 2001, hereby rules: 
         
Timmermans
Jann 
von Bahr 
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on November 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
V. Skouris  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: Italian.
Top  
 