
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-113/Criminal proceedingsagainstParanova Oy(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Högsta förvaltningsdomstolen (Finland))
         
«(Interpretation of Article EC and Article EC – Medicinal products – Withdrawal of parallel import licence in consequence of waiver of the marketing authorisation for the medicinal product of
               reference)»
            
Opinion of Advocate General Jacobs delivered on December I - Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber), May I - Summary of the Judgment
Free movement of goods – Quantitative restrictions – Measures having equivalent effect – Medicinal products – Withdrawal of a parallel import licence solely because of the withdrawal of the reference marketing authorisation at the request
                     of the holder – Not permissible – Justification – Protection of public health – Risk to the health of humans as a result of the continued existence of the medicinal product on the market of the Member State
                     concerned  
                  (Arts EC and EC)Article EC and Article EC preclude national legislation under which the withdrawal, at the request of its holder, of
         a marketing authorisation of reference of itself entails the withdrawal of the parallel import licence granted for the medicinal
         product in question.However, those provisions do not preclude restrictions on parallel imports of the medicinal product in question where there
         is in fact a risk to the health of humans as a result of the continued existence of that medicinal product on the market of
         the importing Member State.see para. 34, operative part
      
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)May (1)
((Interpretation of Article EC and Article EC – Medicinal products – Withdrawal of parallel import licence in consequence of waiver of the marketing authorisation for the medicinal product of
                  reference))
               
In Case C-113/01, 
            REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by Högsta förvaltningsdomstolen (Finland) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings
            pending before that court brought by
            
 Paranova Oy
on the interpretation of Article EC and Article EC,
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
composed of: J.-P. Puissochet, President of the Chamber, C. Gulmann (Rapporteur), F. Macken, N. Colneric and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: F.G. Jacobs, Registrar: H.A. Rühl, Principal Administrator, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
the Finnish Government, by E. Bygglin, acting as Agent, 
               
─
the Danish Government, by J. Molde, acting as Agent, 
               
─
the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster, acting as Agent, 
               
─
the Norwegian Government, by T. Nordby, acting as Agent, 
               
─
the Commission of the European Communities, by L. Ström, acting as Agent, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of the Finnish Government, represented by E. Bygglin, of the Danish Government, represented
               by J. Molde, of the Netherlands Government, represented by J. Bakel, acting as Agent, of the Norwegian Government, represented
               by T. Nordby, and of the Commission, represented by L. Ström, at the hearing on October 2002,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on December 2002, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
By order of March 2001, received at the Court on March 2001, the Högsta förvaltningsdomstolen (Supreme Administrative
         Court, Finland) referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC three questions on the interpretation
         of Article EC and Article EC.  
         
            
Those questions were raised in proceedings between Paranova Oy (
         Paranova) and the Läkemedelsverket (Finnish Medical Products Agency) concerning the consequences of the withdrawal of a marketing
         authorisation on the parallel import into Finland by Paranova of a medicinal product. 
         
Legal framework
Community law
         
            
Under Article EC quantitative restrictions on imports and all measures having equivalent effect are prohibited between
         Member States.  However, according to Article EC, prohibitions or restrictions on import between Member States which are
         justified on the ground,  
          inter alia , of the protection of health of humans are authorised so long as they do not constitute a means of arbitrary discrimination
         or a disguised restriction on trade between Member States. 
         
            
According to Article of Directive 65/65/EEC of the Council of January on the approximation of provisions laid down
         by law, regulation or administrative action relating to proprietary medicinal products (OJ, English Special Edition 1965-(I), p. 17), as amended by Council Directive 93/39/EEC of June (OJ L 214, p. 22,  
         Directive 65/65), no medicinal product may be placed on the market in a Member State unless a marketing authorisation has been issued by
         the competent authority of that Member State. 
         
            
Article of Directive 65/defines the procedure, documents and information necessary for the issue of a marketing authorisation.
         
         
            
Article of Directive 65/states that the marketing authorisation is to be refused if after verification of the particulars
         and documents listed in Article it appears that the medicinal product is harmful in the normal conditions of use, or that
         its therapeutic efficacy is lacking or is insufficiently substantiated by the applicant, or that its qualitative and quantitative
         composition is not as declared. 
         
            
According to Chapter Va of the Second Council Directive 75/319/EEC of May on the approximation of provisions laid
         down by law, regulation or administrative action relating to proprietary medicinal products (OJ L 147, p. 13), as amended
         by Directive 93/39, the Member States are to set up a pharmacovigilance system which, amongst other things, imposes obligations
         on the holder of a marketing authorisation relating to the registration and notification of all adverse reactions to those
         medicinal products in humans.  To that end reports must be submitted to the competent authorities at regular intervals and
         must be accompanied by a scientific evaluation. 
         National law
         
            
Under Article of the Läkemedelslagen (Finnish Medicinal Products Law No 395/1987), the Läkemedelsverket may prohibit the
         importation, manufacture, distribution and sale or any other transfer for consumption of a medicinal product if the conditions
         for a marketing authorisation or for a registration or the requirements or obligations that concern the manufacture or the
         importation of the medicinal product are no longer fulfilled or if there is reason to believe that such is the case. 
         
            
Under Regulation 1/of the Läkemedelsverket on the parallel importation of medicinal products, parallel imports are possible
         only of medicinal products which are already covered by a marketing authorisation valid in Finland.  Such products must also
         be covered by a marketing authorisation valid in the country of supply.  That country must belong to the European Economic
         Area.  When dealing with an application for the parallel import of a medicinal product, the Läkemedelsverket has to establish
         that the medicinal products are sufficiently similar to be considered to be identical products. 
         
            
Under the first subparagraph of paragraph 4.of that regulation, authorisation for parallel imports (a  
         parallel import licence) is granted for five years.  However, the validity of that licence depends on that of the marketing authorisations granted
         both in Finland and in the country of supply for the directly imported medicinal product and it remains in force only so long
         as those authorisations themselves remain valid.  It is for the parallel importer to ensure that each consignment imported
         to Finland is covered by a marketing authorisation valid in that Member State and in the country of supply.  If the marketing
         authorisation expires in the country of supply, the parallel importer must inform the Läkemedelsverket immediately. 
         The main proceedings and the questions referred
            
Suomen Astra Oy (
         Astra) held the marketing authorisation in Finland for the medicinal product known as  
         Losec enterokapslar (Losec enteric capsules, hereinafter the  
         capsules or  
         the old version of the product), while Paranova held a parallel import licence for the capsules.  The product is used to treat conditions caused by stomach
         acid. 
         
            
By letter sent to the Läkemedelsverket on September 1998, Astra sought revocation of the marketing authorisation granted
         to it for the capsules, explaining that it intended to sell in Finland a new variant of that product called  
         Losec MUPS enterotabletter (Losec MUPS enteric tablets, hereinafter the  
         tablets) in place of the capsules.  Subsequently, the Läkemedelsverket withdrew the marketing authorisation held by Astra for the
         capsules with effect from September 1998. 
         
            
The capsules continued to be sold in other Member States, under the marketing authorisations granted in those States. 
         
            
The two versions of Losec are therapeutic equivalents, that is to say that both versions contain the same dose of the active
         ingredient which is absorbed by the body at the same rate and to the same extent when taken orally. 
         
            
The active ingredient of the capsules contains omeprazole acid.  The tablets contain magnesium salt of omeprazole acid.  The
         salt dissolves more easily in water and is more stable.  It is thus easier to manufacture tablets than capsules.  
         
            
In a letter sent to Paranova on October 1998, the Läkemedelsverket gave notice that it had withdrawn the marketing authorisation
         held by Astra for the capsules and that the validity of the licence which Paranova held for the capsules expired on the same
         date, that is to say, September 1998. 
         
            
On November the Läkemedelsverket gave notice that the parallel import licence held by Paranova for the capsules was
         no longer valid, with immediate effect, regardless of any objection by Paranova.  In the grounds for the decision the Läkemedelsverket
         pointed out that the parallel import licence did not meet the conditions set out in Regulation 1/1997, since the validity
         of the parallel import licence depends on that of the marketing authorisation granted for the medicinal product at issue in
         Finland and remains in force only as long as that authorisation is itself valid. 
         
            
Paranova appealed against that decision before the Högsta förvaltningsdomstolen, claiming that it is incompatible with Article
         EC and Article EC.  It argued that it became aware of the revocation of the marketing authorisation which Astra held
         when its own parallel import licence became invalid.  It thus did not have the time necessary to adapt its stock and sale
         contracts concluded before the new situation arose.  For parallel importers, securing a supply which is consistent with consumption
         of the medicinal product constitutes one of the most important commercial criteria. 
         
            
The Läkemedelsverket countered that parallel import licences are granted for five years.  However, their validity is limited
         by that of the marketing authorisation of reference in Finland and in the country of origin of the medicinal product imported
         as a parallel import.  It is thus for the parallel importer to check that each consignment imported is covered by a marketing
         authorisation in both States.  The Läkemedelsverket also contends that the two medicinal products are essentially the same
         if they have the same qualitative and quantitative composition in terms of active principles, if they have the same pharmaceutical
         form and, where appropriate, if they are  
         bioequivalent.  However, as the capsules and the tablets have different pharmaceutical forms, they cannot constitute the same medicinal
         product. 
         
            
It is against that background that the Högsta förvaltningsdomstolen decided to stay proceedings and refer the following questions
         to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling: 
         
1.
 Is it compatible with Articles EC and EC for a national agency to decide that a marketing authorisation for a medicinal
         product imported as a parallel import automatically comes to an end if the original marketing authorisation for the medicinal
         product has been withdrawn at the holder's request for reasons unconnected with the effectiveness or the safety of the medicinal
         product and despite the fact that the product has a valid marketing authorisation in the Member State from which the parallel
         imports come? 
          2. If Community law imposes restrictions or conditions on the right of a national agency to decide that a marketing authorisation
         for parallel imports comes to an end in the situation referred to in Question 1, what importance should be accorded to the
         facts that 
         
(a)
 the holder of the original marketing authorisation has obtained a new marketing authorisation for a medicinal product designed
         to replace the original medicinal product but that new product is not in the same pharmaceutical form (tablets instead of
         capsules) and the active ingredient is not exactly the same (magnesium Omeprazole instead of Omeprazole); on the other hand,
         the national agency considers that the medicinal products are bioequivalent and that they have the same therapeutic effect;
         
         
(b)
 subsequent control of the effectiveness and safety of the medicinal product is possibly made more difficult by the fact that
         the marketing authorisation for the original medicinal product has been withdrawn; 
         
(c)
 the medicinal product imported as a parallel import has been widely used over many years in Member States and it is improbable
         that its continued sale presents a danger to public health? 
          3. If, in the situation referred to in Question 1, Articles EC and EC allow it to be found that the marketing authorisation
         granted for a parallel import has expired, may it be decided that the marketing authorisation for the parallel import expired
         immediately the original marketing authorisation was withdrawn, without allowing the parallel importer any time to adapt his
         activity?  Do any of the circumstances referred to in Question affect the question whether it may be decided that the marketing
         authorisation for a parallel import expires immediately?
         The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
As a preliminary point it must be observed that:  ─ the parallel import licence for the capsules (the old version of the medicinal product) was issued by reference to the
         marketing authorisation granted by the national authorities for that same medicinal product;  ─ that marketing authorisation was withdrawn at the request of its holder for reasons unconnected with the safety of the
         product;  ─ that holder obtained a marketing authorisation for a new variant of that medicinal product, and  ─ the old version of the medicinal product is still marketed legally in other Member States under marketing authorisations
         which have not been revoked. 
         
            
In those circumstances, the question arises as to whether Article EC and Article EC preclude national legislation under
         which the withdrawal, at the request of its holder, of the marketing authorisation granted for the old version of a medicinal
         product of itself entails the withdrawal of the parallel import licence for that same product. 
         
            
It must be noted at the outset that the cessation of the validity of a parallel import licence following the withdrawal of
         the marketing authorisation of reference constitutes a restriction on the free movement of goods contrary to Article EC
         (Case C-172/Ferring  [2002] ECR I-6891, paragraph 33). 
         
            
However, such a restriction may be justified by reasons relating to the protection of public health, in accordance with the
         provisions of Article EC (
          Ferring , cited above, paragraph 33). 
         
            
It is for the national authorities responsible for the operation of the legislation governing the production and marketing
         of medicinal products ─ legislation which, as is made clear in the first recital of Directive 65/65, has as its primary objective
         the safeguarding of public health ─ to ensure that it is fully complied with.  Nevertheless, the principle of proportionality,
         which is the basis of the last sentence of Article EC, requires that the power of the Member States to prohibit imports
         of products from other Member States be restricted to what is necessary in order to achieve the aims concerning the protection
         of health that are legitimately pursued.  Thus, national legislation or practice cannot benefit from the derogation laid down
         in Article EC when the health and life of humans can be protected equally effectively by measures less restrictive of intra-Community
         trade (
          Ferring , paragraph 34). 
         
            
No reason has been put before the Court to justify why the mere fact that a marketing authorisation of reference was withdrawn
         at the request of its holder should entail the automatic withdrawal of the parallel import licence issued for the medicinal
         product in question (see, to that effect,  
          Ferring , paragraph 35). 
         
            
First, it must be observed that the withdrawal of a marketing authorisation of reference does not mean in itself that the
         quality, efficacity and non-toxicity of the old version of the medicinal product is called into question.  In that respect
         it must be noted that that version continues to be lawfully marketed in the Member State of exportation under the marketing
         authorisation issued in that State (
          Ferring , paragraph 36). 
         
            
Next, although the competent authorities of the Member State of importation can, and indeed must, adopt the measures necessary
         for the purpose of verifying the quality, efficacity and non-toxicity of the old version of the medicinal product, it does
         not appear that that objective cannot be attained by other measures having a less restrictive effect on the import of medicinal
         products than the automatic cessation of the validity of the parallel import licence in consequence of the withdrawal of the
         marketing authorisation of reference (
          Ferring , paragraph 37). 
         
            
Although adequate monitoring of the old version of the medicinal product remains necessary and may in certain cases mean that
         information is requested from the importer, it must be pointed out that pharmacovigilance satisfying the relevant requirements
         of Directive 75/as amended can ordinarily be guaranteed for medicinal products that are the subject of parallel imports,
         such as those in question in the main proceedings, through cooperation with the national authorities of the other Member States
         by means of access to the documents and data produced by the manufacturer or other companies in the same group, relating to
         the old version in the Member States in which that version is still marketed on the basis of a marketing authorisation still
         in force (
          Ferring , paragraph 38). 
         
            
In that connection, it must be observed that the  
         Note for Guidance on Procedure for Competent Authorities on the Undertaking of Pharmacovigilance Activities (CPMP/PhVWP/175/95), published in June by the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products, requires, in
         its paragraph 3.1.4, that the terminologies used to code medicinal products, adverse reactions to them and diseases should
         ensure compatibility of reports between Member States and in particular ensure that reports entered into a database should
         be coded according to internationally approved terminologies or with mutually accepted terms allowing connections to be made
         with such terminologies. 
         
            
Finally, it must also be observed that, while it cannot be ruled out that there are reasons relating to the protection of
         public health which require a parallel import licence for medicinal products to be linked to a marketing authorisation of
         reference, no such reasons are apparent from the observations put before the Court. 
         
            
If there are no reasons of a general nature which could explain why the withdrawal of the marketing authorisation of reference
         should entail that of the parallel import licence, that does not preclude the existence, in specific circumstances, of reasons
         relating to the protection of public health which could justify the withdrawal of the parallel import licence. 
         
            
As the Court has held, such reasons could arise, for example, where there is in fact a risk to public health arising from
         the coexistence of two versions of the same medicinal product on the market of the importing Member State (
          Ferring , paragraph 43). 
         
            
In the light of those considerations the answer to the first question should be that Article EC and Article EC preclude
         national legislation under which the withdrawal, at the request of its holder, of the marketing authorisation of reference
         of itself entails the withdrawal of the parallel import licence granted for the medicinal product in question.  However, those
         provisions do not preclude restrictions on parallel imports of the medicinal product in question if there is in fact a risk
         to the health of humans as a result of the continued existence of that medicinal product on the market of the importing Member
         State. 
         
            
In the light of that reply, there is no need to reply to the second question.  Similarly, it is not necessary to consider
         the third question in which the referring court essentially seeks to know whether the parallel import licence loses its validity
         immediately on withdrawal of the marketing authorisation of reference. 
         
Costs
            
The costs incurred by the Finnish, Danish, Netherlands and Norwegian Governments and by the Commission, which have submitted
         observations to the Court, are not recoverable.  Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step
         in the action pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
in answer to the questions referred to it by the Högsta förvaltningsdomstolen by order of March 2001, hereby rules: 
         
Puissochet
Gulmann 
Macken 
Colneric
Cunha Rodrigues 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on May 2003. 
         
R. Grass
J.-P. Puissochet  
Registrar
President of the Sixth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: Swedish.
Top  
 