
Order of the Court (Third Chamber) of October – Olsen v Commission
(Case C‑320/P)
Appeal – State aid – Maritime transport – Maritime cabotage – Existing aid – New aid – Aid that may be declared compatible with the common market – Service of general economic interest – Appeal in part manifestly inadmissible and in part manifestly unfounded
1.                     Appeals – Grounds – Mistaken assessment of the facts – Inadmissibility – Review by the Court of Justice of the assessment
            of the evidence – Possible only where the clear sense of the evidence has been distorted (Art. 225(1), EC; Statute of the
            Court of Justice, Art. 58, first para.) (see paras 47, 69-70)
2.                     Appeals – Grounds – Mere repetition of the pleas and arguments put forward before the Court of First Instance – Inadmissibility
            – Challenge to the interpretation or application of Community law made by the Court of First Instance – Whether admissible
            (Art. 225(1), EC; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 58, first para.; Rules of Procedure of the Court, Art. 112(1)(c))
            (see paras 48-50)
3.                     Appeals – Grounds – Review by the Court of refusal by the Court of First Instance to order measures of inquiry – Scope (Rules
            of Procedure of the Court of First Instance, Art. 66(1)) (see paras 63-64)
4.                     Appeals – Grounds – Inadequate statement of reason – Whether admissible (see para. 111)
Re: 
Appeal against the judgment of the Court of First Instance (Second Chamber, Extended Composition) of June in Case
                  T-17/Olsen
 v 
Commission
, in which the Court rejected the action for annulment of the Commission’s decision of July relating to State aid
                  file NN 48/– Spain – Aid for the Transmediterránea shipping company (OJ C 96, p. 4).
               
Operative part: 
 
The appeal is dismissed.
 
Fred Olsen SA is ordered to pay the costs.
 
The Kingdom of Spain is ordered to bear its own costs.
Top  
 