
Case C-309/Agrana Zucker GmbH
v
Bundesminister für Land- und Forstwirtschaft, Umwelt und Wasserwirtschaft
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Verwaltungsgerichtshof)
(Sugar – Temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry in the European Community – Regulation (EC) No 320/– Article – Revenue surplus in the restructuring fund – Assignment to the EAGF – Principle of conferral and principle of proportionality – Obligation to state reasons – Unjust enrichment)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Sugar – Temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry –
            Temporary restructuring amount owed by undertakings
(Council Regulation No 320/2006, Arts 1(3) second para., and 11)
2.        Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Sugar – Temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry –
            Temporary restructuring amount owed by undertakings 
(Art. EC; Council Regulation No 320/2006, Art. 11)
3.        Acts of the institutions – Statement of reasons – Obligation – Scope – Regulation establishing temporary scheme for the restructuring
            of the sugar industry
(Art. EC; Council Regulation No 320/2006, Recital 2, and Arts 1(3) second para., and 11)
4.        Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Sugar – Temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry –
            Temporary restructuring amount owed by undertakings 
(Council Regulation No 320/2006, Art. 11)
5.        Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Sugar – Temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry –
            Temporary restructuring amount owed by undertakings 
(Council Regulation No 320/2006, Art. 11)
1.        Article of Regulation No 320/establishing a temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry in the Community
         and amending Regulation No 1290/on the financing of the common agricultural policy is to be interpreted as meaning that
         the temporary amount must be raised in full, even if there were to be a revenue surplus in the temporary restructuring fund.
      
First, Article 11(1) of Regulation No 320/provides that undertakings to which a quota has been allocated are to pay a
         temporary amount per marketing year, that temporary amount being fixed as to quantum, for the marketing years 2006/2007, 2007/and 2008/2009, in Article 11(2) of that regulation. Second, the possibility that the revenue accruing from that temporary
         amount could exceed the expenditure linked to the financing of the restructuring measures for which it is intended was provided
         for by the Union legislature in the second subparagraph of Article 1(3) of that regulation, according to which any amount
         that may be available in the restructuring fund after the financing of that expenditure is to be assigned to the European
         Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund (EAGGF). Thus, it is clear from the wording of Article and from the general scheme
         of Regulation No 320/that the temporary amount must be paid in full by the undertakings concerned for every marketing
         year referred to.
      
(see paras 20-22, operative part 1)
2.        Article of Regulation No 320/establishing a temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry in the Community
         and amending Regulation No 1290/on the financing of the common agricultural policy is not contrary to the principle of
         conferral.
      
Intended to contribute to the restructuring of the sugar industry in the Community, the raising of the temporary restructuring
         amount owed by undertakings, pursuant to Article of Regulation No 320/2006, is a common agricultural policy measure lawfully
         adopted on the basis of Article EC. The fact that a revenue surplus may arise on the expiry of such a temporary multiannual
         restructuring scheme, and that that surplus is assigned to the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund (EAGF) pursuant
         to the second subparagraph of Article 1(3) of Regulation No 320/2006, does not call into question the competence of the EU
         legislature to adopt that measure; nor does it divest the measure of its character as an agricultural measure. Any surplus
         continues to be earmarked for financing common agricultural policy measures only.
      
(see paras 29-30, 32-33, operative part 2)
3.        Article of Regulation No 320/establishing a temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry in the Community
         and amending Regulation No 1290/on the financing of the common agricultural policy is not flawed by any unlawful element
         with regard to the obligation to state reasons.
      
Admittedly, the second recital in the preamble, concerning the financial details of that scheme, does not explain the reasons
         for which, as provided for under the second subparagraph of Article 1(3) of that regulation, any amount that may be available
         in the restructuring fund after the financing of the expenditure is to be assigned to the European Agricultural Guidance and
         Guarantee Fund (EAGF). However, at the relevant date for the purposes of assessing the legality of that measure – that is
         to say, the date of its adoption – it was possible to predict only that a residual amount of surplus might arise in the restructuring
         fund after that expenditure had been effected. The decision to assign that surplus to the EAGF, of which the restructuring
         fund forms part, should therefore be regarded as merely a technical choice, for which no specific statement of reasons can
         be required.
      
(see paras 37-39, operative part 2)
4.        Article of Regulation No 320/establishing a temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry in the Community
         and amending Regulation No 1290/on the financing of the common agricultural policy, and the raising of the temporary
         amount pursuant to that provision, cannot be regarded as contrary to the principle of proportionality.
      
Where the EU legislature is obliged to assess the future effects of rules to be adopted and those effects cannot be accurately
         foreseen, its assessment is open to criticism only if it appears manifestly incorrect in the light of the information available
         to it at the time when the rules in question were adopted. The temporary amount was determined on the basis of the future
         effects of the restructuring scheme set up by that regulation, when it was not possible to predict with accuracy what those
         effects would be. Since the assessment of the expenditure and of the revenue necessary to meet that expenditure did not appear
         to be manifestly incorrect in the light of the information available to the Community legislature at the time when Regulation
         No 320/was adopted, the size of that surplus not being a factor sufficient to prove the existence of such an error, the
         determination of the temporary amount was not manifestly inappropriate for the purposes of attaining the intended purpose
         of the financing, by the producers, of that temporary scheme.
      
(see paras 45-46, 48, 50-51, operative part 2)
5.        The raising of the second instalment of the temporary amount for the marketing year 2008/2009, provided for under Article
         11(2) of Regulation No 320/establishing a temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry in the Community
         and amending Regulation No 1290/on the financing of the common agricultural policy, notwithstanding the appearance of
         a surplus in the restructuring fund, is not without valid legal foundation. Consequently, it does not constitute unjust enrichment
         of the Union which may properly found a claim for restitution and, in any case, cannot be relied upon for the purposes of
         assessing the validity of Article of the regulation as the legal basis for raising that instalment. A claim for restitution
         based on unjust enrichment of the Union requires, in order to succeed, proof of enrichment on the part of the Union for which
         there is no legal basis and of impoverishment on the part of the applicant which is linked to that enrichment.
      
(see paras 53-54, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Eighth Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Sugar – Temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry in the European Community – Regulation (EC) No 320/– Article – Revenue surplus in the restructuring fund – Assignment to the EAGF – Principle of conferral and principle of proportionality – Obligation to state reasons – Unjust enrichment )
In Case C‑309/10,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the Verwaltungsgerichtshof (Austria), made by decision of June 2010, received at the Court on June 2010, in the proceedings
      
Agrana Zucker GmbH
v
Bundesminister für Land- und Forstwirtschaft, Umwelt und Wasserwirtschaft,
THE COURT (Eighth Chamber),
composed of K. Schiemann, President of the Chamber, C. Toader and E. Jarašiūnas (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: K. Malacek, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on March 2011,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Agrana Zucker GmbH, by P. Pallitsch and C. Pitschas, Rechtsanwälte,
–        the Greek Government, by E. Leftheriotou and K. Tsagkaropoulos, acting as Agents, assisted by V. Mereas, legal counsel, 
–        the Swedish Government, by A. Falk and S. Johannesson, acting as Agents,
–        the Council of the European Union, by E. Sitbon and Z. Kupčová, acting as Agents,
–        the European Commission, by G. von Rintelen and P. Rossi, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation and validity of Article of Council Regulation (EC)
         No 320/of February establishing a temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry in the Community
         and amending Regulation (EC) No 1290/on the financing of the common agricultural policy (OJ L 58, p. 42).
      
The reference has been made in proceedings brought by Agrana Zucker GmbH (‘Agrana Zucker’) against a decision of the Bundesminister
         für Land- und Forstwirtschaft, Umwelt und Wasserwirtschaft (Federal Minister for Agriculture and Forestry, Environment and
         Water Management) of December 2009, concerning the raising of the second instalment of the temporary restructuring amount
         (‘the temporary amount’) for the 2008/marketing year.
      
 Legal context
Recitals 1, and in the preamble to Regulation No 320/state inter alia as follows:
      
‘(1)      … To bring the Community system of sugar production and trading in line with international requirements and ensure its competitiveness
         in the future it is necessary to launch a profound restructuring process leading to a significant reduction of unprofitable
         production capacity in the Community. To this end, as a precondition for the implementation of a functioning new common market
         organisation for sugar, a separate and autonomous temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry in the Community
         should be established. ...
      
(2)      A temporary restructuring fund should be set up in order to finance the restructuring measures for the Community sugar industry.
         For reasons of sound financial management the fund should form part of the Guarantee Section of the EAGGF and thus be governed
         by the procedures and mechanisms of Council Regulation (EC) No 1258/of May on the financing of the common agricultural
         policy [OJ L 160, p. 103] and, as from January 2007, of the European Agricultural Guarantee Fund set up by Council
         Regulation (EC) No 1290/of June on the financing of the common agricultural policy [OJ L 209, p. 1].
      
...
4)      The restructuring measures provided for by this Regulation should be financed by raising temporary amounts from those sugar,
         isoglucose and inulin syrup producers which will eventually benefit from the restructuring process. As this amount falls outside
         the scope of the charges traditionally known in the framework of the common market organisation for sugar, the proceeds resulting
         from its collection should be considered as “assigned revenue” as provided for by Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1605/of June on the Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities [OJ L 248, p. 1]
         ...’
      
Article of Regulation No 320/provides:
      
‘1.      The temporary fund for the restructuring of the sugar industry in the Community (hereinafter referred to as “restructuring
         fund”) is hereby established. ...
      
The restructuring fund shall form part of the Guarantee Section of the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund.
         As from January it shall form part of the European Agricultural Guarantee Fund (EAGF).
      
2.      The restructuring fund shall finance the expenditure resulting from the measures provided for under Articles 3, 6, 7, and
         9.
      
3.      The temporary restructuring amount referred to in Article shall be revenue assigned to the restructuring fund in accordance
         with Article 18(2) of Regulation … No 1605/2002.
      
Any amount that may be available in the restructuring fund after the financing of the expenditure referred to in paragraph
         shall be assigned to the EAGF.
      
...’
Article of Regulation No 320/provides: 
      
‘1.      Any undertaking producing sugar … to which a quota has been allocated by July shall be entitled to a restructuring
         aid per tonne of quota renounced, provided that during one of the marketing years 2006/2007, 2007/2008, 2008/and 2009/it: 
      
(a)      renounces the quota assigned by it to one or more of its factories and fully dismantles the production facilities of the factories
         concerned;
      
(b)      renounces the quota assigned by it to one or more of its factories, partially dismantles the production facilities of the
         factories concerned and does not use the remaining production facilities of the factories concerned for the production of
         products covered by the common market organisation for sugar;
      
or
c)      renounces a part of the quota assigned by it to one or more of its factories and does not use the production facilities of
         the factories concerned for refining raw sugar.
      
...’
Articles to of Regulation No 320/provide, for their part, for various types of aid for diversification and transitional
         aid which, as is apparent from Article 10(1) and (3) of that regulation, are independent of the aid provided for in Article
         and, like that aid, may be granted during the marketing years 2006/to 2009/within the limit of the appropriations
         available in the restructuring fund.
      
Article of Regulation No 320/provides:
      
‘1.      A temporary … amount shall be paid per marketing year per tonne of quota by those undertakings to which a quota has been allocated
         ...
      
Quotas that have been renounced by an undertaking as from a given marketing year in accordance with Article 3(1) shall not
         be subject to the payment of the temporary … amount for this marketing year and subsequent marketing years.
      
2.      The temporary … amount for sugar … shall be set at:
–        EUR 126.per tonne of quota for the marketing year 2006/2007,
–        EUR 173.per tonne of quota for the marketing year 2007/2008,
–        EUR 113.per tonne of quota for the marketing year 2008/2009.
...’
Recital to Council Regulation (EC) No 1261/of October 2007, amending Regulation (EC) No 320/(OJ L 283,
         p. 8), by which certain measures were adopted in order to improve the functioning of the restructuring scheme, states:
      
‘Council Regulation … No 320/… was adopted with the aim of enabling the least competitive sugar producers to give up
         their quota production. However, the renunciation of quotas under that Regulation has not reached the level that was initially
         expected.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
By decision of the Agrarmarkt Austria (supervisory body) of September 2009, corrected by decision of October 2009, Agrana
         Zucker was called upon to pay the second instalment of the temporary amount for the marketing year 2008/2009, amounting to
         EUR 561.77. 
      
The complaint lodged by Agrana Zucker against that decision was rejected by decision of the Bundesminister für Land- und Forstwirtschaft,
         Umwelt und Wasserwirtschaft on December 2009, the latter decision being the subject of the action before the referring
         court.
      
It emerges from the order for reference that, in disputing the lawfulness of that decision, Agrana Zucker relies in particular
         on Case C-33/Agrana Zucker [2009] ECR I‑5035, which confirmed – as is apparent from the first subparagraph of Article 1(3) of Regulation No 320/and from recital thereto – that the proceeds derived from the temporary amount are ‘assigned revenue’ for the purposes of
         Regulation No 1605/and that they are intended to ensure the self-financing of the restructuring measures provided for
         in Regulation No 320/2006. Agrana Zucker infers from this that, according to a teleological interpretation of Article of
         that regulation, the temporary amount should not be levied if it is manifestly no longer needed to finance those measures.
         According to Agrana Zucker, that is the position with regard to the second instalment of the temporary amount for the marketing
         year 2008/2009, which would lead to a clear surplus in the restructuring fund.
      
Before the Verwaltungsgerichtshof, Agrana Zucker submits in particular that the temporary amount cannot be assigned to any
         other expenditure, notwithstanding the second subparagraph of Article 1(3) of Regulation No 320/2006, which provides that
         the balance of the restructuring fund after the financing of the restructuring measures is to be assigned to the EAGF.
      
Agrana Zucker argues that, if the collection of the second instalment of the temporary amount for the 2008/marketing
         year is not entirely cancelled, or if the final determination of that amount is not adjusted in the light of the final statement
         of the restructuring fund, Article of Regulation No 320/would infringe the principle of proportionality. Moreover,
         the European Union does not have competence to levy a general tax which is not going to be used to finance measures to restructure
         the European sugar market. 
      
In addition, Agrana Zucker claims that, if Article of Regulation (EC) No 320/were to be construed in the manner proposed
         by the defendant authority in the main proceedings, it would then be unlawful on grounds of breach of the obligation to state
         reasons.
      
The Verwaltungsgerichtshof observes that Agrana Zucker has shown that, contrary to the situation considered in the case which
         led to the judgment in Case C‑33/Agrana Zucker, the financing needs of the restructuring measures have already been fully covered. Accordingly, the Verwaltungsgerichtshof
         states that it is not in a position to respond, on the basis of the applicable rules and the case-law of the Court of Justice,
         to the questions of law raised in the case before it. 
      
In those circumstances, the Verwaltungsgerichtshof decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following questions to the
         Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1)      Is Article of … Regulation … No 320/… to be interpreted as meaning that the temporary restructuring amount, laid down
         in Article 11(2), of EUR 113.per tonne of quota for sugar and inulin syrup for the marketing year 2008/must in any
         case be imposed in full, even if such payment would result in a (significant) surplus in the restructuring fund and there
         appears to be no prospect of any further increase in financing requirements? 
      
2)      In the event that the reply to the first question is in the affirmative:
Does Article of Regulation … No 320/in that case infringe the principle of conferral, because Article could, by
         means of the temporary restructuring amount, introduce a general tax which is not limited to financing expenditure benefiting
         the persons called upon to pay the tax?’
      
 Consideration of the questions referred 
 The first question
By its first question, the referring court asks whether Article of Regulation No 320/is to be interpreted as meaning
         that the temporary amount must be levied in full, even if that would result in a revenue surplus in the restructuring fund.
      
Agrana Zucker argues, as does the Greek Government, that it follows from a teleological interpretation of Article of Regulation
         No 320/that the temporary amount may not be raised if it is clearly unnecessary for the financing of the restructuring
         measures provided for in that regulation. Accordingly, the sugar producing undertakings should not be obliged to pay the second
         instalment of the temporary amount for the 2008-marketing year because the raising of that instalment would lead the
         restructuring fund to accrue a surplus. According to Agrana Zucker, raising the instalment would be contrary, in particular,
         to the principle of self-financing on which the Court has already ruled in Case C‑33/Agrana Zucker, and in Joined Cases C‑5/and C‑23/to C‑36/Zuckerfabrik Jülich [2008] ECR I‑and Case C‑365/Agrana Zucker [2010] ECR I‑0000, and which implies that there must be a budgetary balance between expenditure incurred and revenue raised.
      
In the alternative, Agrana Zucker submits that a final statement must be established for the restructuring fund after the
         restructuring measures have been implemented and that the surplus must be repaid to the producers required to pay the temporary
         amount. It submits, in the further alternative, that, after the surplus has been transferred to the EAGF, it may be used only
         to finance the expenditure arising in the context of the organisation of the markets in the sugar sector.
      
In that regard, it is sufficient to note, first, that, under Article 11(1) of Regulation No 320/2006, undertakings to which
         a quota has been allocated are to pay a temporary amount per marketing year, that temporary amount being fixed as to quantum,
         for the marketing years 2006/2007, 2007/and 2008/2009, in Article 11(2) of that regulation, and, second, that the European
         Union (‘EU’) legislature has contemplated the possibility that the revenue accruing from the temporary amount could exceed
         the expenditure linked to the financing of the restructuring measures for which it is intended, by providing, in the second
         subparagraph of Article 1(3) of Regulation No 320/2006, that any amount that may be available in the restructuring fund after
         the financing of that expenditure is to be assigned to the EAGF.
      
Thus, contrary to the assertions made by Agrana Zucker and the Greek Government on the basis of a teleological interpretation
         of Regulation No 320/2006, it is clear from the wording of Article of that regulation and from its general scheme that
         the temporary amount must be paid in full by the undertakings concerned for every marketing year referred to, even if that
         gives rise to a revenue surplus in the restructuring fund following the implementation of the temporary restructuring scheme
         for the sugar industry established by that regulation. 
      
Consequently, the answer to the first question referred is that Article of Regulation No 320/is to be interpreted
         as meaning that the temporary amount must be raised in full, even if there were to be a revenue surplus in the restructuring
         fund.
      
 The second question
The second question referred concerns the validity of Article of Regulation No 320/2006, thus interpreted. Although that
         question refers expressly only to the principle of conferral, it is necessary, in the light of the order for reference and
         the observations lodged before the Court, to examine the validity of that provision also in relation to the obligation to
         state reasons, the principle of proportionality and the alleged unjust enrichment of the European Union.
      
 The validity of Article of Regulation No 320/in the light of the principle of conferral
The referring court asks whether Article of Regulation No 320/is contrary to the principle of conferral to the extent
         that it would permit the introduction of a general tax which is not limited to covering the financing expenditure for which
         the temporary amount is intended.
      
Agrana Zucker submits, as does the Greek Government, that the levying of a tax which is used to finance measures which fall
         outside the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector would vest that tax with the character of a general tax
         the imposition of which does not fall within the competence of the European Union.
      
In that regard, it should be noted that, as emerges from recital to Regulation No 320/2006, the Council of the European
         Union considered it necessary, in order to bring the Community system of sugar production and trading into line with international
         requirements and to ensure its competitiveness in the future, to launch a profound restructuring process of the sector leading
         to a significant reduction of unprofitable production capacity in the Community. To that end, it established, by that regulation,
         a separate and autonomous temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry in the Community (Case C-33/Agrana Zucker, paragraph 34).
      
Within the framework of that temporary scheme, Regulation No 320/established, as described in recital thereto, an economic
         incentive in the form of restructuring aid, intended for undertakings with the lowest productivity and designed to encourage
         them to give up their quota production. To that effect, Article of that regulation provides for restructuring aid for four
         marketing years – the years 2006/to 2009/– with the aim of reducing production to the extent necessary to reach
         a balanced market situation in the Community (Case C‑33/Agrana Zucker, paragraph 35).
      
In order to finance that restructuring aid, as well as the aid for diversification and the transitional aid referred to in
         Articles to of Regulation No 320/2006, the Council set up a temporary restructuring fund and in particular decided that,
         as is stated in recital to that regulation, the financing for those measures would be ensured by raising temporary amounts
         from those sugar, isoglucose and inulin syrup producers which will eventually benefit from the restructuring process. The
         proceeds resulting from its collection are considered to be ‘assigned revenue’ for the purposes of Council Regulation No 1605/(Case C-33/Agrana Zucker, paragraph 36).
      
Intended, accordingly, to contribute to the restructuring of the sugar industry in the Community, the raising of the temporary
         amount is a common agricultural policy measure lawfully adopted on the basis of Article EC (see, by analogy, Case 265/Schräder HS Kraftfutter [1989] ECR 2237, paragraph 9, and Case C‑8/Zardi [1990] ECR I‑2515, paragraph 9).
      
The fact that a revenue surplus may arise on the expiry of such a temporary multiannual restructuring scheme, inter alia because
         producers have ultimately had less recourse than expected to the restructuring aid offered in return for the renunciation
         of production quotas, and that that surplus is assigned to the EAGF pursuant to the second subparagraph of Article 1(3) of
         Regulation No 320/2006, does not call into question the competence of the EU legislature to adopt that measure; nor does it
         divest the measure of its character as an agricultural measure.
      
First, the legality of an EU measure must be assessed on the basis of the facts and the law as they stood at the time when
         the measure was adopted (see Joined Cases 15/and 16/France v Commission [1979] ECR 321, paragraph 7) and cannot in particular depend on retrospective considerations relating to its efficacy (Case
         C-449/P IECC v Commission [2001] ECR I‑3875, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Second, in so far as any surplus in the restructuring fund is assigned to the EAGF, of which that fund forms part, the surplus
         continues to be earmarked for financing common agricultural policy measures only.
      
It follows that Article of Regulation No 320/is not contrary to the principle of conferral.
      
 The validity of Article of Regulation No 320/in the light of the obligation to state reasons 
Agrana Zucker submits in essence, as does the Greek Government, that, according to the preamble to Regulation No 320/2006,
         the temporary amount mechanism was to be set up in order to finance the measures for restructuring the Community sugar industry.
         The statement of reasons for that regulation would therefore be incorrect or incomplete if the proceeds generated by that
         mechanism could be assigned to the financing of other measures, thereby shedding their temporary character.
      
In that regard, it should be observed that, although the statement of reasons required under Article TFEU must show clearly
         and unequivocally the reasoning of the EU authority which adopted the measure in question, so as to make it possible for the
         persons concerned to ascertain the reasons for the measure and to enable the Court to exercise its power of review, it is
         not required to go into every relevant point of fact and law. Compliance with the obligation to state reasons must be assessed
         with reference not only to the wording of the measure but also to its context, and to the whole body of legal rules governing
         the matter in question. If the contested measure clearly discloses the essential objective pursued by the institution, it
         would be excessive to require a specific statement of reasons for each of the technical choices made by the institution (see,
         inter alia, Joined Cases C-154/and C‑155/Alliance for Natural Health and Others [2005] ECR I‑6451, paragraphs and 134).
      
In the present case, the objective of the temporary scheme set up by Regulation No 320/for the restructuring of the sugar
         industry and the means deployed for attaining that objective – the establishment of an economic incentive to give up quotas
         and the financing of restructuring measures through the raising of the temporary amount – are covered, in particular, in the
         preamble to Regulation No 320/2006, by the reasons set out in paragraphs to above.
      
Regarding the financial details of that scheme, recital to Regulation No 320/explains that a temporary restructuring
         fund should be set up in order to finance the measures for restructuring the Community sugar industry and that, for reasons
         of sound financial management, that fund should form part of the Guarantee Section of the European Agricultural Guidance and
         Guarantee Fund and, as from January 2007, of the EAGF, set up by Council Regulation (EC) No 1290/2005. 
      
Admittedly, that recital does not explain the reasons for which, as provided for under the second subparagraph of Article
         1(3) of Regulation No 320/2006, any amount that may be available in the restructuring fund after the financing of the expenditure
         is to be assigned to the EAGF. However, it should be noted, first, that the recital does state that it is for reasons of sound
         financial management that that fund should form part of the EAGF, which was set up in order to ensure the financing of various
         common agricultural policy measures, including those relating to the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector.
         Second, it should be noted that, on a financial level, Regulation No 320/is essentially designed to ensure that all the
         expenditure for the restructuring which that regulation is designed to bring about in practice, in order to reduce unprofitable
         production capacity by providing an incentive for producers to give up their quota production, is covered. Accordingly, at
         the relevant date for the purposes of assessing the legality of that measure – that is to say, as was stated in paragraph above, the date of its adoption – it was possible to predict only that a residual amount of surplus might arise in the restructuring
         fund after that expenditure had been effected. The decision to assign that surplus to the EAGF, of which the restructuring
         fund forms part, should therefore be regarded as merely a technical choice, for which no specific statement of reasons can
         be required.
      
It follows from the foregoing that Article of Regulation No 320/is not flawed by any unlawful element with regard
         to the obligation to state reasons. 
      
 The validity of Article of Regulation No 320/in the light of the principle of proportionality 
Agrana Zucker submits that Article of Regulation No 320/is contrary to the principle of proportionality if the proceeds
         from the second instalment of the temporary amount for the marketing year 2008/is not earmarked for specific purposes
         and can be used to finance expenditure which falls outside the organisation of the markets in the sugar sector. According
         to recital to that regulation, the objective of the temporary amount is to require the producers to bear the cost of the
         restructuring measures, in accordance with the principle of self-financing. Since that second instalment is not, in Agrana
         Zucker’s view, necessary for the financing of those measures, the raising of that instalment, which would give rise to a considerable
         surplus, is manifestly inappropriate for attaining the objectives pursued. In addition, it results in a disproportionate burden
         for European sugar producers.
      
According to the Greek Government, the raising of the temporary amount infringes the principle of proportionality if it is
         manifestly inappropriate for attaining the objectives pursued, which would be the case if the revenue accrued were to exceed
         the expenditure linked to the restructuring measures. The transfer of that surplus to the EAGF constitutes a serious infringement
         of that principle because, in the view of the Greek Government, the measure constitutes a disproportionate burden on producers
         and is used to pursue objectives other than the restructuring of the sugar industry.
      
In that regard, it should be recalled that, in accordance with the principle of proportionality, which is one of the general
         principles of EU law, the acts adopted by EU institutions must not exceed the limits of what is appropriate and necessary
         in order to attain the legitimate objectives pursued by the legislation in question; where there is a choice between several
         appropriate measures, recourse must be had to the least onerous; and the disadvantages caused must not be disproportionate
         to the aims pursued (Case C-33/Agrana Zucker, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
As regards judicial review of the implementation of that principle, in view of the wide discretion enjoyed by the EU legislature
         where the common agricultural policy is concerned, the lawfulness of a measure adopted in that sphere can be affected only
         if the measure is manifestly inappropriate in relation to the objective which the competent institution is seeking to pursue
         (see Case C-33/Agrana Zucker, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Thus, what must be ascertained is not whether the measure adopted by the legislature was the only measure possible or the
         best measure possible, but whether it was manifestly inappropriate (Case C-33/Agrana Zucker, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
In addition, it should be recalled that, as is stated in paragraph above, the lawfulness of an EU measure must be assessed
         on the basis of the facts and the law as they stood at the time when the measure was adopted and cannot in particular depend
         on retrospective considerations of its efficacy. Where the EU legislature is obliged to assess the future effects of rules
         to be adopted and those effects cannot be accurately foreseen, its assessment is open to criticism only if it appears manifestly
         incorrect in the light of the information available to it at the time when the rules in question were adopted (Joined Cases
         C‑267/to C‑285/Wuidart and Others [1990] ECR I‑435, paragraph 14; Joined Cases C‑133/93, C‑300/and C‑362/Crispoltoni and Others [1994] ECR I‑4863, paragraph 43; and Case C‑189/Jippes and Others [2001] ECR I‑5689, paragraph 84).
      
In the present case, it follows from what is stated in paragraphs to above that the purpose of the temporary amount
         provided for in Article of Regulation No 320/is the financing, by the producers, of the temporary scheme for restructuring
         the sugar industry in the European Union, which implies that there must be a budgetary balance between the expenses incurred
         and the revenue raised during the four marketing years in question (see Case C-33/Agrana Zucker, paragraph 37).
      
To that end, the revenue required to finance the restructuring aid paid to undertakings which decide to give up their quota
         during one of those marketing years was determined on the basis of a provisional evaluation of the expenditure linked to that
         aid, carried out – according to the Council and the European Commission – on the basis, in particular, of a quantitative objective
         of eliminating quota sugar. The actual implementation of that expenditure depended, however, on the choices made by undertakings,
         because Regulation No 320/establishes only an economic incentive for the giving up of quotas.
      
In those circumstances, it must be held that the temporary amount was determined on the basis of the future effects of the
         restructuring scheme set up by that regulation, when it was not possible to predict with accuracy what those effects would
         be.
      
As it is, concerning those effects, there is no dispute that, as is stated in recital to Regulation No 1261/2007, the renunciation
         of quotas has not reached the level that was initially expected and that, because of that fact, notwithstanding the measures
         enacted by that regulation to improve the functioning of the restructuring scheme with the aim of increasing the renunciation
         of quotas, the restructuring fund has a revenue surplus which was not foreseen.
      
However, it is not apparent from the case-file that the assessment of the expenditure and of the revenue necessary to meet
         that expenditure was manifestly incorrect in the light of the information available to the Community legislature at the time
         when Regulation No 320/was adopted, the size of that surplus not being a factor sufficient to prove the existence of
         such an error.
      
Accordingly, the determination of the temporary amount was not manifestly inappropriate for the purposes of attaining the
         objective pursued. In consequence, Article of Regulation No 320/and the raising of the temporary amount pursuant to
         that provision cannot be regarded as contrary to the principle of proportionality.
      
 The validity of Article of Regulation No 320/in the light of the alleged unjust enrichment of the European Union 
On the view that Article of Regulation No 320/is invalid on grounds of lack of competence, lack of reasoning and infringement
         of the principle of proportionality, Agrana Zucker submits that the raising of the second instalment of the temporary amount
         for the marketing year 2008/constitutes unjust enrichment of the European Union and that the sugar producing undertakings
         are therefore justified in calling for the repayment of that second instalment, which was unlawfully levied. 
      
However, a claim for restitution based on unjust enrichment of the European Union requires, in order to succeed, proof of
         an enrichment on the part of the European Union for which there is no legal basis and of impoverishment on the part of the
         applicant which is linked to that enrichment (see, to that effect, Case C‑47/P Masdar (UK) v Commission [2008] ECR I‑9761, paragraphs and 49).
      
In the present case, it follows from the findings made above that Article of Regulation No 320/is valid in the light,
         specifically, of the principles of conferral and of proportionality and that the raising of the second instalment of the temporary
         amount for the 2008/marketing year, notwithstanding the appearance of a surplus in the restructuring fund, is therefore
         not without valid legal foundation. Consequently, the raising of that instalment does not constitute unjust enrichment of
         the European Union which may properly found a claim for restitution and, in any case, cannot be relied upon for the purposes
         of assessing the validity of Article of the regulation as the legal basis for raising that instalment.
      
In the light of all of the foregoing, the answer to the second question is that an examination of that question has not revealed
         anything which might affect the validity of Article of Regulation No 320/2006.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable. 
      
On those grounds, the Court (Eighth Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 320/of February establishing a temporary scheme for the restructuring
            of the sugar industry in the Community and amending Regulation (EC) No 1290/on the financing of the common agricultural
            policy is to be interpreted as meaning that the temporary amount must be raised in full, even if there were to be a revenue
            surplus in the temporary restructuring fund.
2.      The examination of the second question referred for a preliminary ruling has not revealed anything which might affect the
            validity of Article of Regulation No 320/2006.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 