
Judgment of the Court (Seventh Chamber) of May – Commission v Poland
(Case C‑311/09)
Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Taxation – VAT – International carriage of persons – Flat-rate taxation of transporters domiciled outside the national territory
1.                     Member States – Obligations – Failure to fulfil obligations – Justification (Art. EC) (see para 18)
2.                     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Right of the Commission to bring judicial proceedings – To be exercised at its
            discretion (Art. EC) (see para 19)
3.                     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Examination of the merits by the Court – Situation to be taken into consideration
            – Situation on expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion (Art. EC) (see para 31)
4.                     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Proof of failure – Burden of proof on Commission (Art. EC) (see point 34)
5.                     Tax provisions – Harmonisation of laws – Turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax – Taxable amount – Deduction of
            input tax – Obligations of persons liable for payment of the tax (Council Directive 2006/112, Arts 73, and 273) (see para
            39, operative part)
Re: 
Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Infringement of Articles 73, and of Council Directive 2006/112/EC
                  of November on the common system of value added tax (OJ L 347, p. 1) – International carriage of persons by road
                  – National rules requiring transporters domiciled abroad to pay VAT under a flat-rate system based only on the number of persons
                  transported to the national territory and which does not allow any right to deduct tax paid at an earlier stage.
               
Operative part:
The Court: 
1.
	Declares that, by charging value added tax in the manner set out in Chapter 13, Paragraph 35(1), (3), (4) and (5), of the
                     Regulation of the Minister for Finance of April on the implementation of certain provisions of the Law on the taxation
                     of goods and services, the Republic of Poland has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles 73, and of Council
                     Directive 2006/112/EC of November on the common system of value added tax;
                  
2.
	Orders the Republic of Poland to pay the costs.
Top  
 