
Case C-582/European Commission
v
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Value added tax – Directive 2006/112/EC – Articles to – Thirteenth Directive 86/560/EEC – Article – Refund – Taxable person not established in the European Union – Insurance transactions – Financial transactions)
Summary of the Judgment
Tax provisions – Harmonisation of laws – Turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax – Refund of tax to taxable persons
            not established in European Union territory
(Council Directives 86/560, Art. 2(1), and 2006/112, Art. 169(c), and 171)
A Member State which excludes the refund of input value added tax for insurance and financial transactions referred to in
         Article 169(c) of Directive 2006/on the common system of value added tax made by taxable persons not established in the
         territory of the European Union does not fail to fulfil its obligations under Articles to of Directive 2006/and
         Article 2(1) of the Thirteenth VAT Directive 86/on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover
         taxes.
      
The provisions of the Thirteenth Directive and, in particular Article 2(1) thereof, which makes no reference to the transactions
         referred to in Article 169(c) of Directive 2006/112, must be considered as a lex specialis as compared with Articles and of Directive 2006/112, preventing the right to a refund, set out in general terms in
         Article 170, from overriding the clear and precise wording of Article 2(1) of the Thirteenth Directive.
      
Even if the absence of any reference in Article 169(c) of Directive 2006/is an error by the legislature of the European
         Union, it is not for the Court to make an interpretation with the aim of correcting Article 2(1). Furthermore, a Member State,
         whose law complies with the clear and precise wording of Article 2(1), cannot be accused of failing to fulfil its obligations
         specifically arising from that provision because it allegedly failed to interpret that provision with the aim of correcting
         it, in order to comply with the overall logic of the common system of VAT and to remedy an error of the legislature of the
         European Union. In that connection, the principle of legal certainty requires the rules of the European Union to enable those
         concerned to know precisely the extent of the obligations imposed on them. Individuals must be able to ascertain unequivocally
         what their rights and obligations are and take steps accordingly. That principle is also relevant in the context of the transposition
         of a directive in the area of taxation. The Court may not, in the face of the clear and precise wording of a provision such
         as Article 2(c), interpret that provision with the intention of correcting it and thereby extending the obligations of the
         Member States relating to it.
      
(see paras 35, 46, 48-51)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Value-added tax –Directive 2006/112/EC – Articles to – Thirteenth Directive 86/560/EEC – Article – Refund – Taxable person not established in the European Union – Insurance transactions – Financial transactions)
In Case C‑582/08,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on December 2008,
European Commission, represented by R. Lyal and M. Afonso, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, represented by I. Rao and S. Hathaway, acting as Agents, and K. Lasok QC, 
      
defendant,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, E. Juhász, G. Arestis, T. von Danwitz (Rapporteur) and D. Šváby, Judges,
Advocate General: N. Jääskinen,
Registrar: M.-A. Gaudissart, Head of Unit,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on February 2010,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on May 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities asks the Court for a declaration that, by denying recovery
         of input value added tax (‘VAT’) in respect of certain transactions carried out by taxable persons not established in the
         territory of the European Union, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland has failed to comply with its obligations
         under Articles to of Council Directive 2006/112/EC of November on the common system of value added tax (OJ
         L 347, p. 1) (‘the VAT Directive’), and with Article 2(1) of the Thirteenth VAT Directive 86/560/EEC of November on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes – Arrangements for the refund of value added
         tax to taxable persons not established in Community territory (OJ L 326, p. 40) (‘the Thirteenth Directive’).
      
 Legal background
 European Union legislation
Article 17(3) and (4) of Sixth Council Directive 77/388/EEC of May on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member
         States relating to turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax: uniform basis of assessment (OJ L 145, p. 1), as
         amended by Council Directive 2004/66/EC of April (OJ L 168, p. 35) (‘the Sixth Directive’), in the version resulting
         from Article 28f(1) thereof, provides:
      
‘3.      Member States shall also grant every taxable person the right to the deduction or refund of the [VAT] referred to in paragraph
         in so far as the goods and services are used for the purposes of:
      
(a)      transactions relating to the economic activities referred to in Article 4(2), carried out in another country, which would
         be deductible if they had been performed within the territory of the country;
      
(b)      transactions which are exempt pursuant to Articles 14(1)(g) and (i), 15, (1)(B), (C), (D) or (E) or (2) or 28c(A) and (C);
(c)      any of the transactions exempt pursuant to Article 13(B)(a) and (d)(1) to (5), when the customer is established outside the
         Community or when those transactions are directly linked with goods to be exported to a country outside the Community.
      
4.      The refund of [VAT] referred to in paragraph shall be effected:
–      to taxable persons who are not established within the territory of the country but who are established in another Member State
         in accordance with the detailed implementing rules laid down in Directive 79/1072/EEC,
      
–      to taxable persons who are not established within the territory of the Community, in accordance with the detailed implementing
         rules laid down in Directive 86/560/EEC.
      
…’
Article 17(4) of the Sixth Directive provided, in its initial version:
      
‘The Council shall endeavour to adopt before December 1977, on a proposal from the Commission and acting unanimously, Community
         rules laying down the arrangements under which refunds are to be made in accordance with paragraph to taxable persons not
         established in the territory of the country. Until such Community arrangements enter into force, Member States shall themselves
         determine the method by which the refund concerned shall be made. Where the taxable person is not resident in the territory
         of the Community, Member States may refuse the refund or impose supplementary conditions.’
      
Articles to of the VAT Directive replaced Article 17(3) and (4) of the Sixth Directive from January 2007. 
      
Article of the VAT Directive provides:
      
‘In addition to the deduction referred to in Article 168, the taxable person shall be entitled to deduct the VAT referred
         to therein in so far as the goods and services are used for the purposes of the following: 
      
(a)      transactions relating to the activities referred to in the second subparagraph of Article 9(1), carried out outside the Member
         State in which that tax is due or paid, in respect of which VAT would be deductible if they had been carried out within that
         Member State; 
      
(b)      transactions which are exempt pursuant to Articles 138, or 144, Articles to 149, Articles 151, 152, or 156, Article
         157(1)(b), Articles to or Article 164; 
      
(c)      transactions which are exempt pursuant to points (a) to (f) of Article 135(1), where the customer is established outside the
         Community or where those transactions relate directly to goods to be exported out of the Community.’ 
      
Article of the VAT Directive provides:
      
‘All taxable persons who, within the meaning of Article of Directive 79/1072/EEC, Article of Directive 86/560/EEC and
         Article of this Directive, are not established in the Member State in which they purchase goods and services or import
         goods subject to VAT shall be entitled to obtain a refund of that VAT in so far as the goods and services are used for the
         purposes of the following:
      
(a)      transactions referred to in Article 169;
(b)      Transactions for which the tax is solely payable by the customer in accordance with Articles to or Article 199.’
Article of the VAT Directive states:
      
‘1.      VAT shall be refunded to taxable persons who are not established in the Member State in which they purchase goods and services
         or import goods subject to VAT but who are established in another Member State, in accordance with the detailed implementing
         rules laid down in Directive 79/1072/EEC.
      
…
2.      VAT shall be refunded to taxable persons who are not established within the territory of the Community in accordance with
         the detailed implementing rules laid down in Directive 86/560/EEC.
      
…
3.      Directives 79/1072/EEC and 86/560/EEC shall not apply to the supply of goods which is, or may be, exempted pursuant to Article
         where the goods thus supplied are dispatched or transported by or on behalf of the person acquiring the goods.’
      
The exempt transactions referred to in Article 169(c) of the VAT Directive concern particularly, according to Article 135(1)(a)
         to (f), insurance and financial transactions such as those specified by the latter provision.
      
Article of Eighth Council Directive 79/1072/EEC of December on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States
         relating to turnover taxes – Arrangements for the refund of value added tax to taxable persons not established in the territory
         of the country (OJ L 331, p. 11) (‘the Eighth Directive’), provides:
      
‘Each Member State shall refund to any taxable person who is not established in the territory of the country but who is established
         in another Member State, subject to the conditions laid down below, any [VAT] charged in respect of services or movable property
         supplied to him by other taxable persons in the territory of the country or charged in respect of the importation of goods
         into the country, in so far as such goods and services are used for the purposes of the transactions referred to in Article
         17(3)(a) and (b) of Directive 77/388/EEC and of the provision of services referred to in Article 1(b).’
      
Article of the Eighth Directive, which was repealed by Article of the Thirteenth Directive, provided:
      
‘In the case of taxable persons not established in the territory of the Community, Member States may refuse refunds or impose
         special conditions. 
      
Refunds may not be granted on terms more favourable than those applied in respect of taxable persons established in the territory
         of the Community.’
      
The Explanatory Memorandum in the Proposal for the Eighth Council Directive (COM (77) final of January 1978, p. 3) (‘Proposal
         for the Eighth Directive’), submitted by the Commission, states as regards Article of that proposal: 
      
‘The reference in Article 17(4) of the Sixth Directive (“in accordance with paragraph 3”) has the effect that the refund is
         to be made solely in respect of the tax charged on the purchases of goods and services or on the importation of goods used
         by the foreign taxable person for the activities specified in Article 17(3) of the Directive. Of the three cases referred
         to in subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) of this paragraph, only the first two would seem to be relevant.
      
...
As for the cases covered by subparagraph (c) of Article 17(3) of the Directive, a person from a member country carrying out
         insurance or banking transactions referred to in that paragraph can never, since such transactions invariably occur in a third
         country, be regarded as carrying out a transaction in the country of refund: consequently, these cases rank with those referred
         to in subparagraph (a) (foreign taxable person not carrying out any taxable transaction in the country of refund) and are
         governed by the rules set out therein.’
      
Article in the version of the Proposal for the Eighth Directive, which was approved by the European Parliament, referred
         to the refund of VAT in respect of goods and services ‘in so far as such goods and services are used for the purposes of the
         transactions referred to in Article 17(3) of the Sixth Council Directive of May 1977’.
      
The second recital in the preamble to the Thirteenth Directive states:
      
‘Whereas there is a need to ensure the harmonious development of trade relations between the Community and third countries
         based on the provisions of Directive 79/1072/EEC, while taking account of the varying situations encountered in third countries.’
      
Article of the Thirteenth Directive provides:
      
‘1.      Without prejudice to Articles and 4, each Member State shall refund to any taxable person not established in the territory
         of the Community, subject to the conditions set out below, any [VAT] charged in respect of services rendered or moveable property
         supplied to him in the territory or the country by other taxable persons or charged in respect of the importation of goods
         into the country, in so far as such goods and services are used for the purposes of the transactions referred to in Article
         17(3)(a) and (b) of Directive 77/388/EEC or of the provision of services referred to in point 1(b) of Article of this Directive.
      
2.      Member States may make the refunds referred to in paragraph conditional upon the granting by third States of comparable
         advantages regarding turnover taxes.
      
…’
Article of the Thirteenth Directive provides: 
      
‘1.      For the purposes of this Directive, eligibility for refunds shall be determined in accordance with Article of Directive
         77/388/EEC as applied in the Member State where the refund is paid. 
      
2.      Member States may, however, provide for the exclusion of certain expenditure or make refunds subject to additional conditions.
         
      
3.      This Directive shall not apply to supplies of goods which are or may be exempted under point of Article of Directive
         77/388/EEC.’
      
According to Article of Council Directive 2008/9/EC of February laying down detailed rules for the refund of value
         added tax, provided for in Directive 2006/112/EC, to taxable persons not established in the Member State of refund but established
         in another Member State (OJ L 44, p. 23), which replaced the Eighth Directive with effect from January 2010:
      
‘Each Member State shall refund to any taxable person not established in the Member State of refund any VAT charged in respect
         of goods or services supplied to him by other taxable persons in that Member State or in respect of the importation of goods
         into that Member State, in so far as such goods and services are used for the purposes of the following transactions:
      
(a)      transactions referred to in Article 169(a) and (b) of Directive 2006/112/EC;
(b)      transactions to a person who is liable for payment of VAT in accordance with Articles to and Article of Directive
         2006/112/EC as applied in the Member State of refund.
      
Without prejudice to Article 6, for the purposes of this Directive, entitlement to an input tax refund shall be determined
         pursuant to Directive 2006/112/EC as applied in the Member State of refund.’
      
 National legislation
As a result of Sections and of the Value Added Tax Act 1994, article of the Value Added Tax (Input Tax) (Specified
         Supplies) Order and regulation of the Value Added Tax Regulations in the version thereof following the Value
         Added Tax (Amendment) (No. 4) Regulations 2004, traders not established in the European Union are not entitled to recover
         input tax charged on the transactions referred to in Article 169(c) of the VAT Directive.
      
 Pre-litigation procedure
On January 2006, the Commission informed the United Kingdom authorities of its view that Article 2(1) of the Thirteenth
         Directive should not be understood as excluding the refund of VAT charged on goods or services used for the purposes of the
         insurance and financial transactions mentioned in Article 17(3)(c) of the Sixth Directive, the contents of which have been
         repeated in Article 169(c) of the VAT Directive. By e-mail of May 2006, the United Kingdom expressed the opposite view,
         maintaining that its legislation was in compliance with the applicable European Union legislation.
      
The Commission therefore decided to initiate the procedure under Article EC and sent the United Kingdom a letter of formal
         notice on October accusing the United Kingdom of having failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 17(3) and (4)
         of the Sixth Directive and under Article 2(1) of the Thirteenth Directive.
      
Since it was not convinced by the arguments put forward by the United Kingdom in its letter of December 2006, the Commission,
         by letter of June 2007, issued a reasoned opinion to the United Kingdom inviting it to take the necessary measures to comply
         with the requirements of Articles to of the VAT Directive and Article 2(1) of the Thirteenth Directive within two
         months of its receipt. 
      
The United Kingdom replied to the reasoned opinion by letter of August 2007, in which it confirmed its interpretation of
         the Thirteenth Directive and of Articles to of the VAT Directive. The Commission, disagreeing with that interpretation
         and maintaining its own position concerning the incompatibility of the United Kingdom’s legislation in that respect with the
         requirements of European Union law, decided to bring the present action.
      
 The action
As a preliminary point, it must be observed that it is common ground that, under United Kingdom law, traders established outside
         the European Union are not entitled to recover input tax in that Member State in respect of goods or services used for the
         purposes of transactions falling within the categories mentioned in Article 169(c) of the VAT Directive, namely certain insurance
         and financial transactions.
      
Therefore, this action concerns solely the question whether Articles to of the VAT Directive and Article 2(1) of the
         Thirteenth Directive confer such a right on traders established outside the European Union.
      
According to Article 2(1) of the Thirteenth Directive, each Member State is to refund to any taxable person not established
         in the territory of the European Union any VAT charged in respect of services rendered or moveable property supplied to him
         in the territory of the country by other taxable persons or charged in respect of the importation of goods into the country,
         in so far as such goods and services are used for the purposes of the transactions referred to in Article 17(3)(a) and (b)
         of the Sixth Directive.
      
As far as concerns the reference to Article 17(3)(a) and (b) of the Sixth Directive in Article 2(1) of the Thirteenth Directive,
         it must be observed, first, that the wording of the Thirteenth Directive was not altered after the entry into force of the
         VAT Directive, Article 169(a) and (b) of which replaced Article 17(3)(a) and (b) of the Sixth Directive. Article 2(1) of the
         Thirteenth Directive must, therefore, be understood as referring to Article 169(a) and (b) of the VAT Directive.
      
Second, it must be observed that the insurance and banking transactions at issue in the present case are referred to in Article
         169(c) of the VAT Directive. 
      
The United Kingdom, relying on the wording of Article 2(1) of the Thirteenth Directive, which expressly mentions only the
         transactions referred to in Article 169(a) and (b), contends that there is no entitlement to a refund of VAT with respect
         to the transactions referred to in Article 169(c) thereof.
      
On the other hand, the Commission, while accepting that Article 2(1) of the Thirteenth Directive does not refer to the transactions
         covered by Article 169(c) of the VAT Directive, submits, relying on arguments derived from the drafting history, the general
         scheme and the purpose of the relevant provisions, that Article 2(1) of the Thirteenth Directive, read in conjunction with
         Article to of the VAT Directive, must be understood as also conferring a right to a refund of VAT with respect to
         the transactions referred to in Article 169(c) of the VAT Directive.
      
Therefore, it must be determined whether the arguments put forward by the Commission in support of its interpretation of Article
         2(1) of the Thirteenth Directive and Articles to of the VAT Directive are capable of justifying an interpretation
         to the effect that those articles confer a right to a refund of VAT for the transactions covered by Article 169(c) of the
         VAT Directive even though the wording of Article 2(1) of the Thirteenth Directive is clear and precise and refers only to
         Article 169(a) and (b) of the VAT Directive. 
      
The Commission argues that the right of traders established outside the European Union to recover the input tax paid in a
         Member State for the purposes of the transactions referred to in Article 169(c) of the VAT Directive derives from Articles
         to of that directive. Article establishes that right with respect to all the transactions referred to in Article
         and does not provide for any derogation. Since the VAT Directive lays down the basic rules, while the Thirteenth Directive
         contains only implementing provisions regulating the arrangements for refund, the unconditional wording of Article of
         the VAT Directive must take precedence over the wording of Article of the Thirteenth Directive. 
      
It is true that Article of the VAT Directive provides, in general terms, as did Article 17(3) of the Sixth Directive,
         for a right to the refund of input tax where the goods and services subject to VAT are used for the ‘transactions referred
         to in Article 169’ of the VAT Directive.
      
Similarly, it is common ground that the purpose of the Eighth Directive is to lay down detailed arrangements for the refund
         of VAT paid in a Member State by taxable persons established in another Member State, its objective being therefore to harmonise
         the right to refund as provided for in Article 17(3) of the Sixth Directive (see, inter alia, Case C‑136/Monte dei Paschi Di Siena [2000] ECR I‑6109, paragraph 20, and Case C-35/Reemtsma Cigarettenfabriken [2007] ECR I-2425, paragraph 26); that is also the case with respect to the Thirteenth Directive as far as concerns taxable
         persons established in non‑member countries.
      
However, it cannot be concluded therefrom, as the Commission submits, that Article of the VAT Directive permits a derogation
         from the clear and precise wording of Article 2(1) of the Thirteenth Directive.
      
The Thirteenth Directive does not merely regulate the formal arrangements for implementing the right to the refund of VAT,
         but provides for a number of derogations from that right, as the Commission acknowledges in its written observations without
         challenging the validity. Among those derogations, in accordance with Article 2(2) of the Thirteenth Directive, is the Member
         States’ power to make the refund conditional upon the granting by third States of comparable advantages and, in accordance
         with Article 4(2) thereof, to provide for the exclusion of certain expenditure or to make refunds subject to additional conditions.
      
Therefore, the provisions of the Thirteenth Directive and, in particular, Article 2(1) thereof, must be considered as a lex specialis as compared with Articles and of the VAT Directive, preventing the right to a refund, set out in general terms in
         Article 170, from overriding the clear and precise wording of Article 2(1) of the Thirteenth Directive.
      
It follows that the question whether the Member States are required to grant a right to the refund of VAT for the transactions
         referred to in Article 169(c) of the VAT Directive to taxable persons established outside the European Union must be determined
         solely by reference to Article 2(1) of the Thirteenth Directive.
      
As regards the interpretation of Article 2(1) of that directive, the Commission submits, first of all, that it is clear from
         the drafting history that it cannot be presumed that the legislature of the European Union, by just mentioning in Article 2(1)
         of the Thirteenth Directive the transactions referred to in Article 169(a) and (b), wished to exclude the refund of VAT for
         the transactions referred to in Article 169(c). The wording of Article 2(1) of the Thirteenth Directive is based on an erroneous
         interpretation by the legislature of the European Union when it adopted Article of the Eighth Directive, which is in almost
         identical terms to, and served as a model for, the drafting of the former provision.
      
In that connection, the Commission relies, first, on the Explanatory Memorandum to the Proposal for the Eighth Directive and
         asserts that the legislature, when drafting the Eighth Directive, did not refer to Article 17(3)(c) of the Sixth Directive
         because it erroneously considered that the transactions concerned were already taken into account in Article 17(3)(a) thereof,
         as referred to in Article of the Eighth Directive. 
      
Next, according to the Commission, the logic of the VAT system requires a right to a refund of VAT to be granted for the transactions
         referred to in Article 169(c) of the VAT Directive. According to that logic and international practice, no tax should be due
         when goods or services are exported. As regards, in particular, exempt transactions such as the insurance and financial transactions
         for which it is not usually possible to recover input tax, Article 169(c) of the VAT Directive is intended to make possible
         the recovery of the VAT inherent in the price of purchasing goods and services used for the performance of those transactions.
         Thus, the grant of a right to a refund of VAT prevents the trader established in the European Union from being disadvantaged
         compared with his competitors outside the Union. 
      
Finally, the Commission takes the view that the comparison made between Article 2(1) of the Thirteenth Directive and Article
         of the Eighth Directive shows that those two provisions must be interpreted in the same way. Notwithstanding the almost
         identical wording of those provisions, the United Kingdom construes Article of the Eighth Directive as including the transactions
         mentioned in Article 169(c) of the VAT Directive, the position thus adopted by that Member State being therefore inconsistent.
         According to the Commission, if the interpretation of Article 2(1) of the Thirteenth Directive put forward by the United Kingdom
         were correct, it should also apply to Article of the Eighth Directive, which would lead to repercussions for all the Member
         States which adopt such an interpretation of that article.
      
First of all, the latter argument must be dismissed as irrelevant. 
      
The present action for failure to fulfil obligations only concerns whether the United Kingdom has failed to fulfil its obligations
         under Articles to of the VAT Directive and Article 2(1) of the Thirteenth Directive by refusing the recovery of input
         tax for the transactions referred to in Article 169(c) of the VAT Directive carried out by taxable persons not established
         in the territory of the European Union.
      
Neither the fact that the United Kingdom and the other Member States grant such a right to a refund of VAT to traders established
         within the European Union, by virtue of the Eighth Directive, nor the absence of any reasons justifying a divergent practice
         as regards the traders referred to by that directive, on the one hand, and those covered by the Thirteenth Directive, on the
         other, nor any repercussions at Member State level in the absence of such reasons, are factors capable of supporting the Commission’s
         interpretation of Article 2(1) of the Thirteenth Directive.
      
Next, as regards the argument based on the drafting history, it should be noted that Article of the Proposal for the Eighth
         Directive, in which the Explanatory Memorandum referred to by the Commission appears, made reference, without further explanation,
         to ‘transactions referred to in Article 17(3) of the Sixth Directive’. Therefore, it cannot be regarded as established that
         the – according to the Commission – incorrect assessment in the Explanatory Memorandum was in fact the basis for the wording
         of Article of the Eighth Directive or that of Article 2(1) of the Thirteenth Directive. 
      
Furthermore, Article of Directive 2008/9, which replaced the Eighth Directive, refers, like Article of the Eighth Directive,
         to Article ‘(a) and (b)’ of the VAT Directive. Therefore, the Commission’s argument implies, first, that the legislature
         of the European Union committed an error when it adopted the Eighth Directive, which was reproduced in the Thirteenth Directive
         and, second, that the legislature committed the same error when it adopted Directive 2008/9.
      
As regards the alleged error and the Commission’s argument that its reading of the relevant provision is also consistent with
         the logic of the common system of VAT, it must be observed that, even assuming the Commission’s submissions are correct, it
         is not for the Court, as the Advocate General observed in point of his Opinion, to make such an interpretation with the
         aim of correcting Article 2(1) of the Thirteenth Directive.
      
In that connection, the Court held in Case C-475/Commission v Greece [2004] ECR I-that the Hellenic Republic could legitimately base its national legislation on the clear wording of Article
         23(2) of Council Directive 92/83/EEC of October on the harmonisation of the structures of excise duties on alcohol
         and alcoholic beverages (OJ L 316, p. 21) authorising it to apply to OUZO a rate of excise duty lower than the minimum
         rate. Thus, the Court dismissed the Commission’s action alleging a failure by that Member State to fulfil its obligations
         under the first subparagraph of Article EC, and in which it submitted that even where there is an explicit authorisation
         in secondary legislation, the Member States were in no way dispensed from the obligation to comply with primary legislation,
         so that, where a national provision was irreconcilable with primary legislation, the Member State was not entitled to rely
         on that authorisation.
      
In the same way, the United Kingdom, whose national law complies with the clear and precise wording of Article 2(1) of the
         Thirteenth Directive, cannot be accused of failing to fulfil its obligations specifically arising from that provision because
         it allegedly failed to interpret that provision with the aim of correcting it, in order to comply with the overall logic of
         the common system of VAT and to remedy an error of the legislature of the European Union alleged by the Commission which,
         it claims, is apparent from the Explanatory Memorandum in the Proposal for the Eighth Directive.
      
According to settled case-law, the principle of legal certainly requires that Community rules enable those concerned to know
         precisely the extent of the obligations which are imposed on them. Individuals must be able to ascertain unequivocally what
         their rights and obligations are and take steps accordingly (see Case C-345/Heinrich [2009] ECR I‑1659, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
It is true that that case-law refers to the relationship between individuals and public authorities. However, as the Advocate
         General observed in point of his Opinion, that case-law is also relevant in the context of the transposition of a directive
         in the area of taxation.
      
The Court cannot, in the face of the clear and precise wording of a provision such as Article 2(1) of the Thirteenth Directive,
         interpret that provision with the intention of correcting it and thereby extending the obligations of the Member States relating
         to it (see, by analogy, Case C‑48/Les Vergers du Vieux Tauves [2008] ECR I-10627, paragraph 44).
      
It follows from all of the foregoing that the Commission’s action must be dismissed.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the United Kingdom has applied for costs and the Commission has been
         unsuccessful in its pleas, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby:
1.      Dismisses the action;
2.      Orders the European Commission to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 