
Case C-53/Synetairismos Farmakopoion Aitolias & Akarnanias (Syfait) and Others
v
GlaxoSmithKline plc
and
GlaxoSmithKline AEVE, formerly Glaxowellcome AEVE
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Epitropi Antagonismou)
(Admissibility — Meaning of court or tribunal of a Member State — Abuse of a dominant position — Refusal to supply pharmaceutical products to wholesalers — Parallel trade)
Opinion of Advocate General Jacobs delivered on October Judgment of the Court (Grand Chamber), May Summary of the Judgment
Questions referred for a preliminary ruling — Reference to the Court — National court or tribunal for the purposes of Article
            EC — Meaning — ‘Epitropi Antagonismou’ (Greek Competition Commission) — Excluded
(Art. EC)
In order to determine whether a body making a reference is a court or tribunal for the purposes of Article EC, which is
         a question governed by Community law alone, the Court takes account of a number of factors, such as whether the body is established
         by law, whether it is permanent, whether its jurisdiction is compulsory, whether its procedure is inter partes, whether it
         applies rules of law and whether it is independent. In addition, a body may refer a question to the Court only if there is
         a case pending before it and if it is called upon to give judgment in proceedings intended to lead to a decision of a judicial
         nature. 
      
The Epitropi Antagonismou (Greek Competition Commission) does not satisfy those criteria. First of all, it is subject to the
         supervision of the Minister for Development, which implies that that minister is empowered, within certain limits, to review
         the lawfulness of its decisions. Next, even though its members enjoy personal and operational independence, there are no particular
         safeguards in respect of their dismissal or the termination of their appointment, which does not appear to constitute an effective
         safeguard against undue intervention or pressure from the executive on those members. In addition, its President is responsible
         for the coordination and general policy of its secretariat and is the supervisor of the personnel of that secretariat, with
         the result that, by virtue of the operational link between the Epitropi Antagonismou, a decision-making body, and its secretariat,
         a fact-finding body on the basis of whose proposal it adopts decisions, the Epitropi Antagonismou is not a clearly distinct
         third party in relation to the State body which, by virtue of its role, may be akin to a party in the course of competition
         proceedings. Finally, a competition authority such as the Epitropi Antagonismou is required to work in close cooperation with
         the Commission and may, pursuant to Article 11(6) of Regulation No 1/on the implementation of the rules on competition
         laid down in Articles and of the Treaty, be relieved of its competence by a decision of the Commission, with the consequence
         that the proceedings initiated before it will not lead to a decision of a judicial nature.
      
(see paras 29-37)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
May (*)
      
(Admissibility – Meaning of court or tribunal of a Member State – Abuse of a dominant position – Refusal to supply pharmaceutical products to wholesalers – Parallel trade)
In Case C-53/03,
REFERENCE under Article EC for a preliminary ruling, by the Epitropi Antagonismou (Greece), by decision of January
         2003, received at the Court on February 2003, in the proceedings
      
Synetairismos Farmakopoion Aitolias & Akarnanias (Syfait) and Others,
Panellinios syllogos farmakapothikarion,
Interfarm – A. Agelakos & Sia OE and Others,
K.P. Marinopoulos Anonymos Etairia emporias kai dianomis farmakeftikon proïonton and Others,
v
GlaxoSmithKline plc,
GlaxoSmithKline AEVE,  formerly Glaxowellcome AEVE,
      
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Rosas and R. Silva de Lapuerta, Presidents of Chambers,
         C. Gulmann (Rapporteur), R. Schintgen, N. Colneric and S. von Bahr, Judges
      
Advocate General: F.G. Jacobs,
Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on May 2004,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Synetairismos Farmakopoion Aitolias & Akarnanias (Syfait) and Others, by P. Kaponis and S. Orfanoudakis, dikigoroi,
–       Panellinios syllogos farmakapothikarion and K.P. Marinopoulos Anonymos Etairia emporias kai dianomis farmakeftikon proïonton
         and Others, by L. Roumanias and G. Papaïoannou, dikigoroi, and W. Rehmann, Rechtsanwalt,
      
–       Farmakeftikos Syndesmos Anonymi Emporiki Etairia, by D. Chatzinikolis, dikigoros,
–       Interfarm A. Agelakos & Sia OE and Others, by G. Mastorakos, dikigoros,
–       GlaxoSmithKline plc and GlaxoSmithKline AEVE, by D. Kyriakis, dikigoros, I. Forrester QC and A. Schulz, Rechtsanwalt,
–       the Swedish Government, by A. Kruse, acting as Agent,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by T. Christoforou and F. Castillo de la Torre, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on October 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
This request for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article EC.
The request was made in proceedings before the Epitropi Antagonismou (the Greek Competition Commission), between the complainants,
         Synetairismos Farmakopoion Aitolias & Akarnanias (Syfait) and Others (‘Syfait and Others’), Panellinios syllogos farmakapothikarion
         (‘PSF’), Interfarm – A. Agelakos & Sia OE and Others (‘Interfarm and Others’) and K.P. Marinopoulos Anonymos Etairia emporias
         kai dianomis farmakeftikon proïonton and Others (‘Marinopoulos and Others’), and GlaxoSmithKline plc (‘GSK plc’), a United
         Kingdom company, and its subsidiary incorporated under Greek law, GlaxoSmithKline AEVE, formerly Glaxowellcome AEVE (‘GSK
         AEVE’), concerning the latter two companies’ refusal to meet orders for certain pharmaceutical products on the Greek market.
      
 Law
 Community law
Article EC provides:
‘Any abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position within the common market or in a substantial part of it shall
         be prohibited as incompatible with the common market in so far as it may affect trade between Member States.
      
Such abuse may, in particular, consist in:
(a)      directly or indirectly imposing unfair purchase or selling prices or other unfair trading conditions; 
(b)      limiting production, markets or technical development to the prejudice of consumers; 
(c)      applying dissimilar conditions to equivalent transactions with other trading parties, thereby placing them at a competitive
         disadvantage; 
      
(d)      making the conclusion of contracts subject to acceptance by the other parties of supplementary obligations which, by their
         nature or according to commercial usage, have no connection with the subject of such contracts.’
      
 National law
Article of Law No 703/on the control of monopolies and oligopolies and the protection of free competition (FEK (Official
         Gazette) A’ 278), as amended by Law No 2941/(FEK A’ 201, hereafter ‘Law No 703/1977’), essentially corresponds to Article
         EC. 
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Syfait and Others are associations of pharmacists established in Greece whose main activity is the operation of a joint wholesale
         repository for pharmaceutical products, which they purchase from various pharmaceutical companies in order to ensure the supply
         of their members.
      
PSF is an association of wholesalers of pharmaceutical products established in Greece, which defends the interests of its
         members.
      
Interfarm and Others are wholesalers of pharmaceutical products established in Greece. Marinopoulos and Others are distributors
         of pharmaceutical products operating in Greece.
      
GSK AEVE is established in Greece and is wholly owned by GSK plc, a manufacturer of pharmaceutical products established in
         the United Kingdom resulting from the merger in of Glaxowellcome plc and SmithKline Beecham.
      
GSK AEVE imports and distributes numerous proprietary medicinal products including Imigran, Lamictal and Serevent. Those are
         newly created medicines resulting from research and technology and are classified as prescription medicines.
      
The members of Syfait and Others, and of PSF, and Interfarm and Others and Marinopoulos and Others buy those medicines, amongst
         others, in all forms from GSK AEVE and then distribute them on the national market and abroad.
      
Until November 2000, GSK AEVE met all orders which it received. A large proportion of the supplies corresponding to those
         orders was re-exported to other Member States, especially to the United Kingdom because of the much lower price of Imigran,
         Lamictal and Serevent in Greece.
      
From early November 2000, invoking significant shortages on the Greek market, which it attributed to re-exports by third parties,
         GSK AEVE changed its system of distribution in Greece and stopped meeting the orders of the complainants in the main proceedings
         and of third parties, stating that it would supply hospitals and pharmacies directly.
      
In February 2001, considering that the supply of medicinal products had to some extent been normalised, and that the stocks
         of hospitals and pharmacies had been rebuilt, GSK AEVE replaced the previous sales system with another system of distribution.
         
      
The complainants in the main proceedings brought before the Epitropi Antagonismou the question of GSK AEVE’s marketing of
         Imigran, Lamictal and Serevent on the Greek market under successive systems of distribution since November 2000. They alleged
         that that company had not met in full the orders it had received and that such conduct is an abuse of a dominant position
         within the meaning of Article of Law No 703/and Article EC.
      
By Decision No 193/of August ordering interim measures, the Epitropi Antagonismou temporarily required GSK AEVE,
         pending adoption of the decision in the main proceedings, to meet the orders for the three medicinal products in question.
         GSK AEVE applied to the Diikitiko Efetio Athinon (Administrative Appeal Court, Athens) for an order suspending that decision,
         but it was confirmed on January and was still in force at the date of the referring decision.
      
The Epitropi Antagonismou states that GSK AEVE complied with the interim measures prescribed by Decision No 193/at least
         to the extent that that company was supplied by GSK plc. That supply exceeded the consumption needs of the domestic market.
         The evidence provided to the Epitropi Antagonismou by GSK AEVE shows, however, that orders were considerably higher than that
         level, in particular in September 2001, so that not all orders could be met. 
      
In the referring decision, the Epitropi Antagonismou states that GSK AEVE and GSK plc comply with the circular adopted on
         November by the Ethnikos Organismos Farmakon (National Organisation for Medicines), which provides that all participants
         in the distribution of prescribed medicines ‘must supply to the domestic market quantities at least equal to current prescription
         levels … plus an amount (25%) to cover any emergencies and changes of circumstance’.
      
Furthermore, on December 2001, GSK AEVE applied to the Epitropi Antagonismou for negative clearance under Article of
         Law No 703/in respect of its refusal to cover more than 125% of Greek demand. 
      
Faced simultaneously with that application by GSK AEVE for negative clearance and the complaints from Syfait and Others, PSF,
         Interfarm and Others and Marinopoulos and Others against GSK AEVE and GSK plc, the Epitropi Antagonismou asks to what extent
         the refusal by the latter two companies to meet in full the orders placed by the complainants constitutes an abuse of a dominant
         position within the meaning of Article EC. If it is not an abuse, the Epitropi Antagonismou states that it will be in a
         position to consider whether the conditions for the grant of the negative clearance sought by GSK AEVE are satisfied.
      
In those circumstances, the Epitropi Antagonismou decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to
         the Court for a preliminary ruling: 
      
‘1.      Where the refusal of an undertaking holding a dominant position to meet fully the orders sent to it by pharmaceutical wholesalers
         is due to its intention to limit their export activity and, thereby, the harm caused to it by parallel trade, does the refusal
         constitute per se an abuse within the meaning of Article EC? Is the answer to that question affected by the fact that the
         parallel trade is particularly profitable for the wholesalers because of the different prices, resulting from State intervention,
         in the Member States of the European Union, that is to say by the fact that pure conditions of competition do not prevail
         in the pharmaceuticals market, but a regime which is governed to a large extent by State intervention? Is it ultimately the
         duty of a national competition authority to apply Community competition rules in the same way to markets which function competitively
         and those in which competition is distorted by State intervention?
      
2.      If the Court holds that limitation of parallel trade, for the reasons set out above, does not constitute an abusive practice
         in every case where it is engaged in by an undertaking holding a dominant position, how is possible abuse to be assessed?
         
      
In particular:
(a)      Do the percentage by which normal domestic consumption is exceeded and/or the loss suffered by an undertaking holding a dominant
         position compared with its total turnover and total profits constitute appropriate criteria? If so, how are the level of that
         percentage and the level of that loss determined (the latter as a percentage of turnover and total profits), above which the
         conduct in question may be abusive?
      
(b)      Is an approach entailing the balancing of interests appropriate, and, if so, what are the interests to be compared? 
         In particular:
(i)      is the answer affected by the fact that the ultimate consumer/patient derives limited financial advantage from the parallel
         trade? and
      
(ii)      is account to be taken, and to what extent, of the interests of social insurance bodies in cheaper medicinal products?
(c)      What other criteria and approaches are considered appropriate in the present case?’
 The jurisdiction of the Court
As a preliminary point, it is necessary to ascertain whether the Epitropi Antagonismou is a court or tribunal within the meaning
         of Article EC and whether the Court therefore has jurisdiction to make a ruling on the questions referred to it.
      
 The national law governing the Epitropi Antagonismou
Article 8(1) of Law No 703/provides:
‘An Epitropi Antagonismou shall be established which shall operate as an independent authority. Its members shall enjoy personal
         and operational independence and shall be bound in the exercise of their duties only by the law and their conscience. The
         Epitropi Antagonismou shall be administratively and economically autonomous subject to the supervision of the Ministry for
         … [Development].’
      
The Epitropi Antagonismou has nine members appointed pursuant to Article 8(3) of Law No 703/1977. Four members and their deputies
         are chosen by the minister from lists of three persons which are submitted by each of four professional bodies. The other
         members include a member of the government legal service or a judge of the highest rank, two academics, one a lawyer and the
         other an economist, and two persons of acknowledged repute with experience of economic law and competition policy. According
         to Article 8(5) of Law No 703/1977, the members of the Epitropi Antagonismou and their deputies are appointed by the Minister
         for Development for a term of three years.
      
Article 8(6) of the same law provides:
‘The president of the Epitropi Antagonismou and his deputy shall be appointed by the Minister [for Development] from amongst
         the members of the [Epitropi Antagonismou]… The president of the Epitropi Antagonismou shall be a member of the national civil
         service and shall exclusively perform that task for the duration of his term of office …’
      
Article 8(7) of Law No 703/provides:
‘During their term of office, the President and the members shall not carry on, whether for remuneration or otherwise, any
         other public function or professional activity, whether or not in-house, which is incompatible with the role and duties of
         a member of the Epitropi Antagonismou.’
      
As regards relations between the Epitropi Antagonismou and its secretariat, Article 8C(1)(b) of the same law provides: 
‘The President shall coordinate and direct the secretariat of the [Epitropi Antagonismou].’
Article 8C(1)(d) of the same law provides:
‘The President is the immediate superior of the personnel of the secretariat of the Epitropi Antagonismou and shall exercise
         disciplinary power over them.’ 
      
According to Article 8C(3), the President of the Epitropi Antagonismou may authorise the Director General or the directors
         of the secretariat of the Epitropi Antagonismou to exercise some of his powers. The Director General is to be appointed for
         three years, and the appointment is renewable by decision of the Minister for Development subject to the assent of the Epitropi
         Antagonismou, as laid down by the second sentence of Article 8D(1) of Law No 703/1977.
      
 Findings of the Court
According to settled case-law, in order to determine whether a body making a reference is a court or tribunal for the purposes
         of Article EC, which is a question governed by Community law alone, the Court takes account of a number of factors, such
         as whether the body is established by law, whether it is permanent, whether its jurisdiction is compulsory, whether its procedure
         is inter partes, whether it applies rules of law and whether it is independent (see, in particular, Case C‑54/Dorsch Consult [1997] ECR I-4961, paragraph 23, Joined Cases C-110/to C-147/Gabalfrisa and Others [2000] ECR I-1577, paragraph 33, Case C-195/Österreichischer Gewerkschaftsbund [2000] ECR I‑10497, paragraph 24, and Case C-516/Schmid [2002] ECR I-4573, paragraph 34). Moreover, a national court may refer a question to the Court only if there is a case pending
         before it and if it is called upon to give judgment in proceedings intended to lead to a decision of a judicial nature (see,
         in particular, Case C‑134/Victoria Film [1998] ECR I-7023, paragraph 14, and Österreichischer Gewerkschaftsbund, paragraph 25).
      
It should be noted, first of all, in this regard that the Epitropi Antagonismou is subject to the supervision of the Minister
         for Development. Such supervision implies that that minister is empowered, within certain limits, to review the lawfulness
         of the decisions adopted by the Epitropi Antagonismou.
      
Next, whilst it is true that the members of the Epitropi Antagonismou enjoy personal and operational independence and are
         bound in the exercise of their duties only by the law and their conscience within the meaning of Law No 703/1977, it nevertheless
         remains that there are no particular safeguards in respect of their dismissal or the termination of their appointment. That
         system does not appear to constitute an effective safeguard against undue intervention or pressure from the executive on the
         members of the Epitropi Antagonismou (see, to that effect, Case C-103/Köllensperger and Atzwanger [1999] ECR I-551, paragraph 21).
      
It should also be noted that under Article 8C(1)(b) and (d) of Law No 703/1977, the President of the Epitropi Antagonismou
         is responsible for the coordination and general policy of the secretariat, is the immediate superior of the personnel of that
         secretariat and exercises disciplinary power over them.
      
It should be noted in this regard that the Tribunales Económico-Administrativos (Economic and Administrative Courts) (Spain)
         were found by the Court, in paragraphs and of the Gabalfrisa judgment, to be third parties in relation to the departments of the tax authority responsible for the management, clearance
         and recovery of VAT, particularly given the separation of functions between them. However, in so far as there is an operational
         link between the Epitropi Antagonismou, a decision-making body, and its secretariat, a fact-finding body on the basis of whose
         proposal it adopts decisions, the Epitropi Antagonismou is not a clearly distinct third party in relation to the State body
         which, by virtue of its role, may be akin to a party in the course of competition proceedings.
      
Lastly, it should be noted that a competition authority such as the Epitropi Antagonismou is required to work in close cooperation
         with the Commission of the European Communities and may, pursuant to Article 11(6) of Council Regulation (EC) No 1/of
         December on the implementation of the rules on competition laid down in Articles and of the Treaty (OJ L 1, p. 1), be relieved of its competence by a decision of the Commission. It should moreover be noted in this context that
         Article 11(6) of Regulation No 1/essentially maintains the rule in Article 9(3) of Council Regulation No of February
         1962, First Regulation implementing Articles [81] and [82] of the Treaty (OJ, English Special Edition, 1959-p. 87), that
         the competition authorities of the Member States are automatically relieved of their competence where the Commission initiates
         its own proceedings (see in that connection the 17th recital in the preamble to Regulation No 1/2003).
      
A body may refer a question to the Court only if there is a case pending before it and if it is called upon to give judgment
         in proceedings intended to lead to a decision of a judicial nature (see Victoria Film, paragraph 14, and Österreichischer Gewerkschaftsbund, paragraph 25).
      
Whenever the Commission relieves a national competition authority such as the Epitropi Antagonismou of its competence, the
         proceedings initiated before that authority will not lead to a decision of a judicial nature.
      
It follows from the factors examined, considered as a whole, that the Epitropi Antagonismou is not a court or tribunal within
         the meaning of Article EC.
      
Accordingly, the Court has no jurisdiction to answer the questions referred by the Epitropi Antagonismou.
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the Epitropi Antagonismou,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that body. The costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the
         costs of those parties, are not recoverable. 
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby rules:
The Court of Justice of the European Communities has no jurisdiction to answer the questions referred by the Epitropi Antagonismou
            by decision of January 2003.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Greek.
      
Top  
 