
Case C-346/Staat der Nederlanden
v
Denkavit Nederland BV and Others
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Gerechtshof ’s-Gravenhage)
(Agriculture – Animal health – Directive 90/425/EEC – National temporary regulation intended to combat the spread of bovine spongiform encephalopathy by prohibiting the production
         of and trading in processed animal proteins for feeding to farmed animals – Application of that regulation before the entry into force of Decision 2000/766/EC requiring such prohibition – Application of that regulation to two products eligible for exemption from the prohibition required by that decision – Compatibility with Directive 90/425/EEC and Decisions 94/381/EC and 2000/766/EC)
      
Summary of the Judgment
Agriculture – Approximation of laws on animal health – Veterinary and zootechnical checks in intra-Community trade in live
            animals and products of animal origin – Protection measures against bovine spongiform encephalopathy 
(Council Directive 90/425, Art. 10(1) and (4); Council Decision 2000/766; Commission Decision 94/381)
The law of the European Union, in particular Directive 90/concerning veterinary and zootechnical checks applicable in
         intra-Community trade in certain live animals and products with a view to the completion of the internal market, Decision
         94/concerning certain protection measures with regard to bovine spongiform encephalopathy and the feeding of mammalian
         derived protein and Decision 2000/concerning certain protection measures with regard to transmissible spongiform encephalopathies
         and the feeding of animal protein, does not preclude national legislation which, with a view to affording protection against
         bovine spongiform encephalopathy, imposed a temporary prohibition on the production of and trading in processed animal proteins
         for feeding to farmed animals if the situation in the Member State concerned was so urgent as to justify the immediate adoption
         of such measures on serious grounds of public or animal health. It is for the referring court to establish whether that condition
         was met and the principle of proportionality observed.
      
The adoption by the Commission of a decision which is not immediately applicable cannot, as such, be regarded as precluding
         a Member State from itself taking interim protective measures pursuant to the fourth subparagraph of Article 10(1) of Directive
         90/425.
      
(see paras 66, 70, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
June (*)
      
(Agriculture – Animal health – Directive 90/425/EEC – National temporary regulation intended to combat the spread of bovine spongiform encephalopathy by prohibiting the production
         of and trading in processed animal proteins for feeding to farmed animals – Application of that regulation before the entry into force of Decision 2000/766/EC requiring such prohibition – Application of that regulation to two products eligible for exemption from the prohibition required by that decision – Compatibility with Directive 90/425/EEC and Decisions 94/381/EC and 2000/766/EC)
      
In Case C‑346/09,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Gerechtshof ’s-Gravenhage (Netherlands), made by decision
         of August 2009, received at the Court on August 2009, in the proceedings
      
Staat der Nederlanden
v
Denkavit Nederland BV and Others,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, President of the Chamber, A. Arabadjiev, A. Rosas (Rapporteur), U. Lõhmus and A. Ó Caoimh,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: P. Cruz Villalón,
Registrar: R. Şereş, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on September 2010,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Denkavit Nederland BV and Others, by H. Ferment, advocaat,
–        the Netherlands Government, by C. Wissels and M. de Ree, acting as Agents,
–        the German Government, by M. Lumma, J. Möller and N. Graf Vitzthum, acting as Agents,
–        the Swedish Government, by A. Falk and A. Engman, acting as Agents,
–        the European Commission, by F. Jimeno Fernández and B. Burggraaf, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on November 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of the law of the European Union on the feeding of processed
         animal proteins to animals and more particularly of the following measures:
      
–        Council Directive 90/425/EEC of June concerning veterinary and zootechnical checks applicable in intra-Community trade
         in certain live animals and products with a view to the completion of the internal market (OJ L 224, p. 29);
      
–        Commission Decision 94/381/EC of June concerning certain protection measures with regard to bovine spongiform encephalopathy
         and the feeding of mammalian derived protein (OJ L 172, p. 23);
      
–        Council Decision 2000/766/EC of December concerning certain protection measures with regard to transmissible spongiform
         encephalopathies and the feeding of animal protein (OJ L 306, p. 32), and
      
–        Commission Decision 2001/9/EC of December concerning control measures required for the implementation of Decision
         2000/(OJ L 2, p. 32).
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between the Netherlands State and Denkavit Nederland BV and Others (‘Denkavit and
         Others’), which are various companies producing feedstuffs for animals and a company which distributes raw materials for such
         feedstuffs. Those proceedings concern the conformity with the law of the European Union of a national temporary regulation
         imposing, with a view to establishing protection against bovine spongiform encephalopathy (‘BSE’), a prohibition on the production
         of and trading in processed animal proteins in feedstuffs for farmed animals, where that prohibition, first, was enacted and
         entered into force after the adoption, but before the entry into force of a decision of the European Union requiring such
         a prohibition and, second, was applied, before that decision entered into force, to fishmeal and dicalcium phosphate, although
         those products were eligible for exemption from the prohibition imposed by that decision. 
      
 Legal context
 European Union legislation
 Directive 90/According to the second recital in the preamble to Directive 90/425, it is appropriate to dismantle the zootechnical and veterinary
         barriers to the development of intra-Community trade in animals and products of animal origin in order to promote the harmonious
         operation of the common organisation of the market in animals and products of animal origin.
      
According to the tenth recital, protective measures must be provided for to that effect and, especially for reasons of effectiveness,
         responsibility in this area must rest firstly with the State of dispatch.
      
The twelfth recital in the preamble to Directive 90/states that, pending Community rules, animals and products that are
         not the subject of harmonised rules should comply with the requirements of the State of destination provided that the latter
         are in conformity with Article of the EEC Treaty (which became Article of the EC Treaty, which itself became, after
         amendment, Article EC). 
      
The first paragraph of Article of that directive provides:
      
‘Member States shall ensure that the veterinary checks to be carried out on live animals and products which are covered by
         the Directives listed in Annex A or on those referred to in the first paragraph of Article and which are intended for 
         trade are no longer carried out, without prejudice to Article 7, at frontiers but are carried out in accordance with this
         Directive.’
      
Article 10(1) of that directive is worded as follows:
      
‘Each Member State shall immediately notify the other Member States and the Commission of any outbreak in its territory, in
         addition to an outbreak of diseases referred to in Directive 82/894/EEC, of any zoonoses, diseases or other cause likely to
         constitute a serious hazard to animals or to human health.
      
The Member State of dispatch shall immediately implement the control or precautionary measures provided for in Community rules,
         in particular the determination of the buffer zones provided for in those rules, or adopt any other measure which it deems
         appropriate.
      
The Member State of destination or transit which, in the course of a check referred to in Article 5, has established the existence
         of one of the diseases or causes referred to in the first subparagraph may, if necessary, take the precautionary measures
         provided for in Community rules, including the quarantining of the animals.
      
Pending the measures to be taken in accordance with paragraph 4, the Member State of destination may, on serious public or
         animal health grounds, take interim protective measures with regard to the holdings, centres or organisations concerned or,
         in the case of an epizootic disease, with regard to the buffer zone provided for in Community rules.
      
The measures taken by Member States shall be notified to the Commission and to the other Member States without delay.’
Under Article 10(4), the Commission is to adopt, in accordance with the comitology procedure laid down in Article 17, the
         necessary measures for animals, products and derived products. It is to monitor the situation and, by the same procedure,
         amend or repeal the decisions taken, depending on how the situation develops.
      
 Directive 90/667/EEC
Article 13(1) of Council Directive 90/667/EEC of November laying down the veterinary rules for the disposal and processing
         of animal waste, for its placing on the market and for the prevention of pathogens in feedstuffs of animal or fish origin
         and amending Directive 90/(OJ L 363, p. 51) reads thus:
      
‘Directive [90/425] shall apply, in particular with respect to the organisation and following-up of checks carried out by
         the Member State of destination and the protective measures to be applied.’
      
Directive 92/118/EEC
Article 2(1) of Council Directive 92/118/EEC of December laying down animal health and public health requirements
         governing trade in and imports into the Community of products not subject to the said requirements laid down in specific Community
         rules referred to in Annex A(I) to Directive 89/662/EEC and, as regards pathogens, to Directive 90/425/EEC (OJ L 62,
         p. 49), is worded as follows: 
      
‘For the purposes of this Directive: 
…
(e)      processed animal protein intended for animal consumption means animal protein which has been treated so as to render it suitable for direct use as a feedingstuff or as an ingredient
         in a feedingstuff for animals. It includes fishmeal, meatmeal, bonemeal, hoofmeal, hornmeal, bloodmeal, feathermeal, dry greaves
         and other similar products including mixtures containing these products;
      
…’
Under Article 7(2) of that directive, Article of Directive 90/applies to the products covered by that former directive.
      
 Decision 94/The Commission adopted Decision 94/on the basis of Directive 90/425, and in particular of its Article 10(4).
      
Under Article 1(1) of that decision, Member States were to prohibit the feeding of protein derived from mammalian tissues
         to ruminant species. Article 1(2) provided, however, that Member States which enforced a system that makes it possible to
         distinguish between animal protein from ruminant and non-ruminant species were to be authorised, by the Commission under the
         procedure provided for by Article of Directive 90/425, to permit the feeding of protein from species other than ruminants
         to ruminants.
      
 Decision 2000/On December 2000, the Council of the European Union adopted Decision 2000/on the basis of Directive 90/425, and, in
         particular, of its Article 10(4) and of Council Directive 97/78/EC of December laying down the principles governing
         the organisation of veterinary checks on products entering the Community from third countries (OJ L 24, p. 9) and, in
         particular, of its Article 22.
      
Under Article of that decision:
      
‘1. Member States shall prohibit the feeding of processed animal proteins to farmed animals which are kept, fattened or bred
         for the production of food.
      
2. The prohibition referred to in paragraph shall not apply to the feeding of:
–        fishmeal to animals other than ruminants, in accordance with control measures to be fixed in accordance with the procedure
         laid down in Article of Council Directive 89/662/EEC of December concerning veterinary checks in intra-Community
         trade with a view to the completion of the internal market (OJ L 395, p. 13),
      
–        gelatine of non-ruminants for coating additives within the meaning of Council Directive 70/524/EEC of November concerning
         additives in feedingstuffs (OJ L 270, p. 1), 
      
–        dicalcium phosphate and hydrolysed proteins obtained in accordance with the conditions to be fixed in accordance with the
         procedure laid down in Article of Directive 89/662/EEC,
      
–        milk and milk products to farmed animals which are kept, fattened or bred for the production of food.’
Article of that decision provided: 
      
‘1. With the exception of the derogations laid down in Article 2(2) the Member States shall:
(a)      prohibit the placing on the market, the trade, the importation from third countries and the exportation to third countries
         of processed animal proteins intended for the feeding of farmed animals which are kept, fattened or bred for the production
         of food,
      
(b)      ensure that all processed animal proteins intended for the feeding of farmed animals which are kept, fattened or bred for
         the production of food are withdrawn from the market, distribution channels and from on-farm storage.
      
2. Member States shall ensure that animal waste as defined by Directive [90/667] is collected, transported, processed, stored
         or disposed of in accordance with that Directive …’
      
Decision 2000/entered into force, in accordance with its Article 4, on January and was applicable until June
         2001.
      
 Decision 2001/Decision 2001/9, adopted by the Commission on December 2000, laid down the detailed conditions for applying the exception
         to the prohibitions relating to fishmeal, dicalcium phosphate and hydrolysed proteins under Article 2(2) of Decision 2000/766.
         Decision 2001/entered into force on January 2001.
      
Article 1(1) and (2) of Decision 2001/provided: 
      
‘1. Member States shall authorise the feeding of fishmeal to animals other than ruminants, only in accordance with the conditions
         laid down in Annex I.
      
2. Member States shall authorise the feeding of dicalcium phosphate to animals other than ruminants only in accordance with
         the conditions laid down in Annex II.’
      
 National legislation
The temporary regulation prohibiting animal proteins in all feedingstuffs intended for farmed animals (Tijdelijke regeling
         verbod dierlijke eiwitten in alle diervoerders landbouwhuisdieren, ‘the national temporary regulation’), adopted on December
         by the Minister van Landbouw, Natuurbeheer en Visserij (Minister for Agriculture, Nature Management and Fisheries, Nederlandse Staatscourant 2000, No 239), referred, in its cited legal base, to Directive 90/and Decision 2000/766. Its Article provided:
      
‘1. Contrary to Article of the Regulation prohibiting the use of animal meals in animal feedingstuffs, the preparation,
         processing, supply, taking delivery, delivery, transport, offering for sale, purchase and disposal of processed animal proteins
         intended for the feeding of farmed animals are prohibited.
      
2. Paragraph shall not apply to [the following products]:
–        fishmeal in feedingstuffs intended for animals other than ruminants, in accordance with checks to be established in accordance
         with the procedure laid down in Article of Directive 89/662/EEC …,
      
–        gelatine of non-ruminants for coating additives …,
–        dicalcium phosphate and hydrolysed protein obtained in accordance with the conditions fixed in accordance with the procedure
         laid down in Article of Directive 89/662/EEC,
      
–        milk and dairy products.’
Article of that regulation is in the following terms:
      
‘1. Without prejudice to Article 2, the following shall be prohibited from January 2001:
(a)      the feeding of processed animal proteins to farmed animals;
(b)      the transport of processed animal proteins out of or into the Netherlands;
(c)      the presence or storage of processed animal proteins on holdings where farmed animals are kept and on holdings which produce,
         trade, store or transship feedingstuffs for farmed animals.
      
2. The holders or owners of processed animal proteins who, to the satisfaction of Our Minister, notify the Rijksdienst voor
         de keuring van Vee en Vlees [(National Livestock and Meat Inspectorate)] of the nature, quantity and location of the processed
         animal proteins in their keeping and immediately inform that inspectorate of any changes in the nature, quantity and location
         thereof shall be exempted from the prohibition referred to in paragraph 1(c) until March 2001.’
      
Under Article of that regulation, it entered into force on December 2000.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling 
At the level of the European Union, measures have been taken since to combat the spread of BSE. Those measures were adopted
         on the basis, in particular, of Directive 90/425.
      
On the June 1994, the Commission adopted Decision 94/381, the aim of which was to prohibit the feeding of protein derived
         from mammalian tissue to ruminants.
      
Having recorded cases of BSE in animals born after Decision 94/had entered into force, the Scientific Steering Committee
         established by Commission Decision 97/404/EC of June (OJ L 169, p. 85) (‘the Scientific Steering Committee’)
         issued, on and November 2000, an opinion acknowledging for the first time that there was a risk of cross-contamination
         of cattle feed with feed intended for other animals and which contains animal proteins possibly contaminated by the BSE agent
         and recommending that new measures be adopted.
      
On December 2000, the Council, seeking further to minimise the risk of the spread of BSE, adopted Decision 2000/766. By
         that decision, the feeding of processed animal proteins to all farmed animals was prohibited from January for a maximum
         period of six months. That decision required the prohibition of the placing on the market, the trade, the importation from
         third countries and the exportation to third countries of processed animal proteins and their withdrawal from the market,
         distribution channels and from on-farm storage. Those prohibitions were subject to various exceptions concerning, in particular,
         the feeding of fishmeal to animals other than ruminants and the feeding of dicalcium phosphate.
      
Four days later, on December 2000, the Minister van Landbouw, Natuurbeheer en Visserij adopted the national temporary regulation
         prohibiting, in Article 2(1) thereof, the preparation, processing, supply, taking delivery, delivery, transport, offering
         for sale, purchase and disposal of processed animal proteins intended for feeding to farmed animals.
      
Article 2(2) thereof laid down exceptions to that prohibition for, among other things, fishmeal and dicalcium phosphate. The
         application of those exceptions was subject to the adoption of control measures to be fixed in accordance with the procedure
         laid down in Article of Directive 89/662. 
      
Under Article of the national temporary regulation, it entered into force on December 2000, that is to say days prior
         to the entry into force of Decision 2000/766. That regulation was notified to the Commission on January 2001.
      
On December 2000, the Commission adopted Decision 2001/laying down the conditions under which the feeding of, among other
         things, fishmeal and dicalcium phosphate to animals was authorised. That decision entered into force at the same time as Decision
         2000/766, that is on January 2001.
      
Denkavit and Others brought an action before the Rechtbank ’s-Gravenhage (District Court, The Hague), seeking a declaration
         that Article of the national temporary regulation was vitiated by illegality.
      
Denkavit and Others claimed before that court that the Netherlands State had acted illegally in their regard, primarily, by
         imposing, during the period from December to January 2001, prohibitions in respect of feedstuffs for animals more
         restrictive than those required by Decision 94/or, alternatively, by imposing during that period, prohibitions in respect
         of feedstuffs for animals containing animal proteins other than fishmeal and dicalcium phosphate.
      
The Rechtbank ’s-Gravenhage upheld that action on the ground that in the light of the wording of Decision 2000/766, its aim
         was that the prohibitions concerned should enter into force precisely on January 2001, neither before nor after. In that
         court’s view, the Netherlands State had therefore acted illegally in imposing prohibitions from December 2000.
      
The Netherlands State appealed to the Gerechtshof ’s-Gravenhage (Regional Court of Appeal, The Hague), which considered that
         the dispute before it raised questions concerning the interpretation of certain provisions of European Union law.
      
In those circumstances, the Gerechtshof ’s-Gravenhage decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following question to
         the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Must Community law, and specifically Directive 90/425/EEC, Decision 94/381/EC and Decision 2000/766/EC, be interpreted as
         meaning that any national prohibition, such as that laid down in Article of the [national temporary regulation] which, with
         a view to affording protection against BSE, prohibits the production of and trading in processed animal proteins intended
         for feeding to farmed animals, is incompatible with [Community law] if such a national prohibition
      
–        entered into force on December (and so before Decision 2000/766/EC) and
–        also applied temporarily (until Decision [2001/9] of December entered into force) to fishmeal and dicalcium phosphate?’
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
By its question, the referring court is asking, in essence, whether European Union law, in particular Directive 90/and
         Decisions 94/and 2000/766, precludes national legislation which, with a view to affording protection against BSE, imposed
         a temporary prohibition on the production of and trading in processed animal proteins for feeding to farmed animals, where
         that prohibition, first, was enacted and entered into force after the adoption, but before the entry into force of a decision
         of the European Union requiring such a prohibition and, second, was applied, before that decision entered into force, to fishmeal
         and dicalcium phosphate, although those products were eligible for exemption from the prohibition imposed by that decision.
         
      
As a preliminary point, it is appropriate to recall that, as regards the combat against the spread of diseases likely to constitute
         a serious hazard to animals or to human health, such as BSE, the Court has already held that Article of Directive 90/brings about the complete harmonisation of the precautionary measures against such diseases and defines precisely the respective
         obligations and tasks of the Member States and of the Commission in this field (see, to that effect, Case C‑52/Commission v Portugal [1993] ECR I-2961, paragraph 19).
      
In fact, the Commission is, under that provision, to adopt the necessary measures after reviewing the situation in the Standing
         Veterinary Committee. Member States may, if they detect a disease in the course of a check, only take the preventive measures
         provided for in the Community rules and, on serious public or animal health grounds, may take strictly limited interim protective
         measures pending the measures to be taken by the Commission (see, to that effect, Commission v Portugal, paragraph 9).
      
It follows from the twelfth recital in the preamble to Directive 90/that the directive applies to animals and products
         which have been made subject to the harmonised rules set forth in Annex A to that directive.
      
As the Advocate General pointed out in paragraph of his opinion, it is appropriate, consequently, to determine whether
         the products covered by the national temporary regulation, namely processed animal proteins intended for feeding to farmed
         animals, fell, at the time of the adoption of that regulation, within the scope of Directive 90/425.
      
In that regard, the EU legislation on feedstuffs for animals has evolved into a complex and advanced harmonisation. As the
         Advocate General pointed out in paragraphs to of his opinion, processed animal proteins have been the object of several
         instruments of harmonisation, as animal waste, as ingredients in feedstuffs for animals or as being subject to prohibition.
         
      
Indeed, following the adoption of Directive 90/667, Annex A to Directive 90/was amended so that the products covered by
         Directive 90/667, namely animal waste, should be subject to the precautionary measures established by Directive 90/425. 
      
Next, under Article 7(2) of Directive 92/118, the precautionary measures required by Article of Directive 90/applied
         to the products of animal origin covered by Directive 92/118, namely the products of animal origin not subject, as regards
         the animal and public health requirements governing trade in and imports into the European Community, to the specific Community
         rules referred to in Annex A(I) to Directive 89/and, as regards pathogens, in Directive 90/425.
      
Decision 94/was adopted on June with the aim of prohibiting the feeding of proteins derived from mammalian tissue
         to ruminants. 
      
In addition, by Commission Decision 91/516/EEC of September establishing a list of ingredients whose use is prohibited
         in compound feedingstuffs (OJ L 281, p. 23), as amended by Commission Decision 97/582/EC of July (OJ L 237,
         p. 39), such prohibition was imposed as regards protein products from mammalian tissue used as ingredients in compound feedingstuffs
         for ruminants.
      
Finally, the feeding of processed animal proteins to all farmed animals, including non-ruminants which are kept, fattened
         or bred for the production of food was prohibited by Decision 2000/766.
      
Furthermore, the legal basis of that decision, the validity of which has not been called into question, was Article of
         Directive 90/425. 
      
It follows from all those considerations that, at the time of the adoption of the national temporary regulation, a Member
         State was not entitled to prohibit, otherwise than within the system of safeguards established by Article of Directive
         90/425, the production of or trading in processed animal proteins intended for feeding to farmed animals. 
      
It is therefore necessary to establish whether the national temporary regulation can be regarded as a precautionary measure
         under that provision.
      
Under the first subparagraph of Article 10(1) of Directive 90/425, each Member State must immediately notify the other Member
         States and the Commission of the outbreak of any zoonoses, diseases or other cause likely to constitute a serious hazard to
         animals or to human health.
      
As regards the question whether there was, at the time when the national temporary regulation was adopted, an outbreak of
         a zoonosis, disease or other cause likely to constitute a serious hazard to animals or to human health within the meaning
         of that provision, that condition is likely to be met when new information significantly alters the perception of the danger
         represented by the disease (Case C-220/Lennox [2003] ECR I‑7091, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
The national temporary regulation was enacted ten days after the publication of an opinion of and November of the
         Scientific Steering Committee (‘the Scientific Steering Committee’s opinion’) which pointed out a risk of cross-contamination
         of cattle feed with feed intended for other animals which contains animal proteins possibly contaminated by the BSE agent.
         That opinion recommended that consideration be given to a temporary prohibition on animal proteins in feedstuffs for animals.
      
Given that, since 1994, various measures had been taken against BSE but new cases of the disease had regularly appeared and
         that, therefore, the extent and significance of the risk of the spread of the disease were still uncertain, the Scientific
         Steering Committee’s opinion significantly altered the perception of the danger represented by BSE and, therefore, justified
         the adoption of precautionary measures under Article 10(1) of Directive 90/425.
      
The Netherlands Government submits that the national temporary regulation was adopted by the Kingdom of the Netherlands in
         its capacity as both Member State of dispatch and Member State of destination. 
      
It is true that Article 10(1) of Directive 90/provides for several types of measures. Under the second subparagraph of
         that provision, the Member State of dispatch is immediately to implement the control or precautionary measures provided for
         in Community rules, in particular the determination of the buffer zones provided for in those rules, or to adopt any other
         measure which it deems appropriate. Under the fourth subparagraph of that provision, pending the measures to be taken in accordance
         with Article 10(4), the Member State of destination may, on serious public or animal health grounds, take interim protective
         measures with regard to the holdings, centres or organisations concerned or, in the case of an epizootic disease, with regard
         to the buffer zone provided for in Community rules.
      
The Netherlands Government submits that the distinction thus drawn in Article 10(1) of Directive 90/between the Member
         State of dispatch and the Member State of destination is not relevant in this case. In its submission, the national temporary
         regulation regulates not intra-Community trade but, more generally, the production of and trading in feedstuffs for animals,
         so that the regulation was adopted by the Kingdom of the Netherlands in its capacity as both the Member State of dispatch
         and the Member State of destination.
      
The other Governments which submitted observations and the Commission submit, on the contrary, that the Kingdom of the Netherlands
         adopted the national temporary regulation in its capacity as the Member State of destination. 
      
In that regard, given that the temporary national regulation was intended to regulate not only production of, but also trading
         in feedingstuffs in general, including the taking delivery and purchase thereof, that regulation was likely to affect, at
         least, imports of those products.
      
It is therefore necessary to consider whether the national temporary regulation can be regarded as a protective measure adopted
         by a Member State of destination on the basis of the fourth subparagraph of Article 10(1) of Directive 90/425.
      
As regards the condition relating to the existence of serious public or animal health grounds within the meaning of that provision,
         that condition, as noted in paragraph of the present judgment, is likely to be met when new information significantly alters
         the perception of the danger represented by the disease.
      
Here, as is apparent from the first three recitals in the preamble to Decision 2000/766, cases of BSE had been recorded in
         animals born in 1995, that is subsequent to the adoption on June of Decision 94/381, which comprised the first Community
         rules on checks on processed mammalian-derived proteins used to feed ruminant species. As held in paragraph of the present
         judgment, the Scientific Steering Committee’s opinion noting, for the first time, a risk of cross-contamination of cattle
         feed with feed intended for other animals and which contains animal proteins possibly contaminated by the BSE agent, significantly
         altered the perception of the danger represented by that disease. 
      
The adoption of Decision 2000/766, to which the national temporary regulation expressly referred, depended therefore, in essence,
         on establishing the need, as a precautionary measure, to prohibit on a temporary basis the feeding of animal proteins to all
         farmed animals kept, fattened or bred for the production of food. The Scientific Steering Committee’s opinion, which justified
         the adoption of that decision, could therefore likewise justify the adoption of the national temporary regulation, as the
         Netherlands, German and Swedish Governments and the Commission submit.
      
Under the fourth subparagraph of Article 10(1) of Directive 90/425, interim protective measures may be adopted pending the
         measures to be adopted by the Commission under Article 10(4).
      
The national temporary regulation was enacted on December 2000, that is four days after the Council adopted Decision 2000/766,
         which was specifically intended to prohibit animal proteins from being fed to animals from January 2001.
      
Thus, the measures at European Union level had been adopted but not yet entered into force when the Kingdom of the Netherlands
         enacted the national temporary regulation.
      
In that regard, the Court has already held that the adoption by the Commission of a decision which is not immediately applicable
         cannot, as such, be regarded as precluding a Member State from itself taking interim protective measures pursuant to the fourth
         subparagraph of Article 9(1) of Directive 89/(Case C-477/Eurostock [2000] ECR I-10695, paragraph 58). The interim protective measures at EU level at issue in Eurostock are equivalent to those referred to in the fourth subparagraph of Article 10(1) of Directive 90/425.
      
A Member State may therefore adopt national prohibitions such as those enacted by the national temporary regulation if the
         situation in that Member State is so urgent as to justify the immediate adoption of such measures on serious grounds of public
         or animal health.
      
However, it is for the referring court, which alone has jurisdiction to determine the facts of the case before it, to establish
         whether the situation in the Netherlands at the time of the adoption of the national temporary regulation was of such urgency.
      
Were that court to conclude that such was the case and that the national temporary regulation could, in principle, be treated
         as an interim protective measure complying with the fourth subparagraph of Article 10(1) of Directive 90/425, it would still
         have to establish whether the principle of proportionality had been observed (see, to that effect, Joined Cases C-96/and
         C-97/Tempelman and van Schaijk [2005] ECR I‑1895, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
It follows from all the foregoing that the law of the European Union, in particular Directive 90/and Decisions 94/and 2000/766, does not preclude national legislation which, with a view to affording protection against BSE, imposed a temporary
         prohibition on the production of and trading in processed animal proteins for feeding to farmed animals if the situation in
         the Member State concerned was so urgent as to justify the immediate adoption of such measures on serious grounds of public
         or animal health. It is for the referring court to establish whether that condition was met and the principle of proportionality
         observed.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
The law of the European Union, in particular Council Directive 90/425/EEC of June concerning veterinary and zootechnical
            checks applicable in intra-Community trade in certain live animals and products with a view to the completion of the internal
            market, Commission Decision 94/381/EC of June concerning certain protection measures with regard to bovine spongiform
            encephalopathy and the feeding of mammalian derived protein and Council Decision 2000/766/EC of December concerning
            certain protection measures with regard to transmissible spongiform encephalopathies and the feeding of animal protein, does
            not preclude national legislation which, with a view to affording protection against bovine spongiform encephalopathy, imposed
            a temporary prohibition on the production of and trading in processed animal proteins for feeding to farmed animals if the
            situation in the Member State concerned was so urgent as to justify the immediate adoption of such measures on serious grounds
            of public or animal health. It is for the referring court to establish whether that condition was met and the principle of
            proportionality observed. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Dutch.
      
Top  
 