
Avis juridique important
|
62000JJudgment of the Court (Fourth Chamber) of March 2002.  -  Commission of the European Communities v Italian Republic.  -  Failure by a Member State to fulfil its obligations - Directive 76/768/EEC - Provision of national law concerning the information that must be given on the packaging of cosmetic products - Natural or artificial origin of perfume essences or fragrances contained in cosmetic products.  -  Case C-365/00.  
European Court reports Page I-Parties
Grounds
Decision on costs
Operative part
Keywords
Member States - Obligations - Implementation of directives - Failure to fulfil obligations not contested(Art. EC) 
Parties
In Case C-365/00,Commission of the European Communities, represented by R.B. Wainwright and R. Amorosi, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,applicant,vItalian Republic, represented by U. Leanza, acting as Agent, assisted by I.M. Braguglia, avvocato dello Stato, with an address for service in Luxembourg,defendant,APPLICATION for a declaration that, by having enacted and maintained in force Article of Law No of April making provision for the implementation of obligations resulting from Italy's membership of the European Communities - Community Law 1995-1997, which makes it a requirement that the labels of cosmetic products state whether the perfume essences or fragrances contained in them are of natural or artificial origin, the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Council Directive 76/768/EEC of July on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to cosmetic products (OJ L 262, p. 169), as amended by Council Directive 93/35/EEC of June (OJ L 151, p. 32), and, in particular, under the third subparagraph of Article 6(1)(g) thereof,THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),composed of: S. von Bahr, President of the Chamber, D.A.O. Edward (Rapporteur) and A. La Pergola, Judges,Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer,Registrar: R. Grass,having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur,after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on December 2001,gives the followingJudgment 
Grounds
By application lodged at the Court Registry on October 2000, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action under Article EC for a declaration that, by having enacted and maintained in force Article of Law No of April making provision for the implementation of obligations resulting from Italy's membership of the European Communities - Community Law 1995-(hereinafter Law No 128/98), which makes it a requirement that the labels of cosmetic products state whether the perfume essences or fragrances contained in them are of natural or artificial origin, the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Council Directive 76/768/EEC of July on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to cosmetic products (OJ L 262, p. 169), as amended by Council Directive 93/35/EEC of June (OJ L 151, p. 32; hereinafter Directive 76/768), and, in particular, under the third subparagraph of Article 6(1)(g) thereof.Legal contextThe Community legislationArticle of Directive 76/is intended to ensure uniformity as regards the information that must be given on the containers and packaging of cosmetic products.The third paragraph of Article 6(1)(g) provides that [p]erfume and aromatic compositions and their raw materials shall be referred to by the word "perfume" or "flavour", but does not refer to any other compulsory information.The Italian legislationArticle of Law No 128/makes it an express requirement that the labels of cosmetic products state whether the perfume essences or fragrances contained in them are of natural or artificial origin.The pre-litigation procedureIn accordance with the procedure laid down in the first paragraph of Article EC, the Commission, having given the Italian Republic an opportunity to submit its observations, sent that Member State a reasoned opinion by letter of July 1999, calling on it to take the measures necessary to comply with its obligations under the third subparagraph of Article 6(1)(g) of Directive 76/within two months of notification of that opinion.The Italian Government replied to the Commission by letter of November 1999, mentioning the proposed enactment of a draft provision which would abolish the requirement in Article of Law No 128/98.Since it did not subsequently receive any information from the Italian Government enabling it to conclude that such a provision had been definitively enacted and had entered into force, the Commission decided to bring this action.The actionThe Commission claims that, by preventing the free marketing within Italian territory of a cosmetic product not bearing any indication of whether the perfume essences or fragrances contained in it are of natural or artificial origin, Article of Law No 128/introduces an additional requirement, not provided for by Directive 76/and thus prohibited by it.In its defence the Italian Government indicates that it does not contest the charge made against it by the Commission and that a provision designed to abolish the requirement in Article of Law No 128/is to be included in the draft Community Law for 2001.In those circumstances, it must be held that, by having enacted and maintained in force Article of Law No 128/98, the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under the third subparagraph of Article 6(1)(g) of Directive 76/768. 
Decision on costs
CostsUnder Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party's pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Italian Republic has been unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs. 
Operative part
On those grounds,THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)hereby:1. Declares that, by having enacted and maintained in force Article of Law No of April making provision for the implementation of obligations resulting from Italy's membership of the European Communities - Community Law 1995-1997, which makes it a requirement that the labels of cosmetic products state whether the perfume essences or fragrances contained in them are of natural or artificial origin, the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under the third subparagraph of Article 6(1)(g) of Council Directive 76/768/EEC of July on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to cosmetic products, as amended by Council Directive 93/35/EEC of June 1993;2. Orders the Italian Republic to pay the costs. 
Top  
 