
Joined Cases C-329/and C-343/Arthur Wiedemann 
v
Land Baden-Württemberg
and
Peter Funk 
v
Stadt Chemnitz
(References for a preliminary ruling from the Verwaltungsgericht Sigmaringen and the Verwaltungsgericht Chemnitz)
(Directive 91/439/EEC – Mutual recognition of driving licences – Withdrawal of a licence in one Member State for use of narcotic drugs or alcohol – New licence issued in another Member State – Refusal to recognise right to drive in the first Member State – Residence not in accordance with Directive 91/439/EEC)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Transport – Road transport – Driving licences – Directive 91/(Council Directive 91/439, as amended by Regulation No 1882/2003, Arts 1(2), 7(1) and 8(2) and (4))
2.        Transport – Road transport – Driving licences – Directive 91/(Council Directive 91/439, as amended by Regulation No 1882/2003, Arts 1(2) and 8(2) and (4))
1.        On a proper construction of Articles 1(2), 7(1) and 8(2) and (4) of Directive 91/on driving licences, as amended by Regulation
         No 1882/2003, it is contrary to those provisions for a Member State to refuse to recognise in its territory the right to drive
         stemming from a driving licence subsequently issued by another Member State beyond any period in which the person concerned
         is forbidden to apply for a new licence and, therefore, to recognise the validity of that licence, so long as the licence-holder
         has not satisfied the necessary conditions in that first Member State for the issue of a new licence following the withdrawal
         of a previous licence, including the examination of fitness to drive certifying that the grounds justifying the withdrawal
         are no longer in existence. 
      
In the same circumstances, it is not contrary to those provisions for a Member State to refuse to recognise in its territory
         the right to drive stemming from a driving licence subsequently issued by another Member State, if it is established, on the
         basis of entries appearing in the driving licence itself or of other incontestable information supplied by the Member State
         of issue, that when that licence was issued its holder, who had been the object, in the territory of the first Member State,
         of a measure withdrawing an earlier licence, was not normally resident in the territory of the Member State of issue.
      
(see para. 73, operative part 1)
2.        It is contrary to Articles 1(2) and 8(2) and (4) of Directive 91/on driving licences, as amended by Regulation No 1882/2003,
         for a Member State bound, in accordance with that directive, to recognise the right to drive stemming from a driving licence
         issued by another Member State, to suspend that right temporarily while the latter Member State investigates the procedure
         followed in the issuing of that licence. In contrast, in that same context, it is not contrary to those provisions for a Member
         State to decide to suspend that right if it is clear from entries in that licence or from other incontestable information
         supplied by that other Member State that the condition of residence imposed in Article 7(1)(b) of that directive was not satisfied
         at the moment when that licence was issued. 
      
(see para. 86, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
June (*)
      
(Directive 91/439/EEC – Mutual recognition of driving licences – Withdrawal of a licence in one Member State for use of narcotic drugs or alcohol – New licence issued in another Member State – Refusal to recognise right to drive in the first Member State – Residence not in accordance with Directive 91/439/EEC)
In Joined Cases C‑329/and C‑343/06,
REFERENCES under Article EC for a preliminary ruling from the Verwaltungsgericht Sigmaringen (Germany) (C‑329/06) and
         the Verwaltungsgericht Chemnitz (Germany) (C‑343/06), made by decisions of June and August 2006, respectively, received
         at the Court on July and August 2006, in the proceedings
      
Arthur Wiedemann (C‑329/06)
v
Land Baden-Württemberg,
and
Peter Funk (C‑343/06)
v
Stadt Chemnitz,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of A. Rosas (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, J. Klučka, A. Ó Caoimh and A. Arabadjiev,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: Y. Bot,
Registrar: B. Fülöp, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on September 2007,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Mr Wiedemann, by G. Stöger, Rechtsanwalt,
–        Mr Funk, by A.M. Kohn, Rechtsanwalt,
–        the Land Baden-Württemberg, by F. Laux, acting as Agent,
–        the German Government, by M. Lumma and C. Schulze-Bahr, acting as Agents,
–        the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, and by S. Fiorentino, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Portuguese Government, by L. Fernandes and M. Ribes, acting as Agents,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by G. Braun and N. Yerrell, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on February 2008,
gives the following
Judgment
The references for a preliminary ruling concern the interpretation of Articles 1(2), 7(1) and 8(2) and (4) of Council Directive
         91/439/EEC of July on driving licences (OJ L 237, p. 1), as amended by Regulation (EC) No 1882/of the European
         Parliament and of the Council of September (OJ L 284, p. 1, ‘Directive 91/439’). 
      
Those references have been made in two sets of proceedings, one between Mr Wiedemann and the Land Baden-Württemberg (Case
         C-329/06) and the other between Mr Funk and the Stadt Chemnitz (Case C-343/06), concerning the Federal Republic of Germany’s
         refusal to recognise the driving licences obtained by Mr Wiedemann and Mr Funk in the Czech Republic after the administrative
         withdrawal of their German driving licences for consumption of drugs and of alcohol, respectively.
      
 Legal context
 The relevant provisions of Community law
The first recital in the preamble to Directive 91/439, which repealed First Council Directive 80/1263/EEC of December on the introduction of a Community driving licence (OJ L 375, p. 1), states, as from July 1996:
      
‘… [F]or the purpose of the common transport policy, and as a contribution to improving road traffic safety, as well as to
         facilitate the movement of persons settling in a Member State other than that in which they have passed a driving test, it
         is desirable that there should be a Community model national driving licence mutually recognised by the Member States without
         any obligation to exchange licences.’
      
It is stated in the fourth recital of the preamble to that directive:
      
‘… [O]n road safety grounds, the minimum requirements for the issue of a driving licence should be laid down.’
The last recital in the preamble to Directive 91/states:
      
‘… [F]or reasons connected with road safety and traffic, Member States should be able to apply their national provisions on
         the withdrawal, suspension and cancellation of driving licences to all licence holders having acquired normal residence in
         their territory.’ 
      
Article of Directive 91/provides:
      
‘1.      Member States shall introduce a national driving licence based on the Community model described in Annex I or Ia, in accordance
         with the provisions of this Directive …
      
2.      Driving licences issued by Member States shall be mutually recognised.
3.      Where the holder of a valid national driving licence takes up normal residence in a Member State other than that which issued
         the licence, the host Member State may apply to the holder of the licence its national rules on the period of validity of
         the licences, medical checks and tax arrangements and may enter on the licence any information indispensable for administration.’
      
In accordance with Article 7(1) of Directive 91/439, the issue of a driving licence is subject to the following conditions:
      
‘Driving licences shall, moreover, be issued only to those applicants:
(a)      who have passed a test of skills and behaviour and a theoretical test and who meet medical standards, in accordance with the
         provisions of Annexes II and III;
      
(b)      who have their normal residence in the territory of the Member State issuing the licence, or can produce evidence that they
         have been studying there for at least six months.’
      
In accordance with point of Annex III to the directive, headed ‘Minimum standards of physical and mental fitness for driving
         a power-driven vehicle’, alcohol consumption constitutes a major danger to road safety and in view of the scale of the problem
         the medical profession must be very vigilant. The first subparagraph of point 14.of that annex states that ‘[d]riving licences
         shall not be issued to, or renewed for, applicants or drivers who are dependent on alcohol or unable to refrain from drinking
         and driving’. The second subparagraph of Point 14.provides that ‘[a]fter a proven period of abstinence and subject to authorised
         medical opinion and regular medical check-ups, driving licences may be issued to, or renewed for, applicants or drivers who
         have in the past been dependent on alcohol’. 
      
Point of that annex provides that ‘[d]riving licences shall not be issued to or renewed for applicants or drivers who are
         dependent on psychotropic substances or who are not dependent on such substances but regularly abuse them, whatever category
         of licence is requested’. Point 15.states that ‘Driving licences shall not be issued to, or renewed for, applicants or drivers
         who regularly use psychotropic substances, in whatever form, which can hamper the ability to drive safely where the quantities
         absorbed are such as to have an adverse effect on driving. This shall apply to all other medicinal products or combinations
         of medicinal products which affect the ability to drive’. 
      
It is clear from point of that annex that the standards set by Member States for a medical examination before the issue
         or any subsequent renewal of driving licences may be stricter than those set out in the annex.
      
In accordance with Article 7(5) of the directive:
      
‘No person may hold a driving licence from more than one Member State.’
Article of Directive 91/provides: 
      
‘...
2.      Subject to observance of the principle of territoriality of criminal and police laws, the Member State of normal residence
         may apply its national provisions on the restriction, suspension, withdrawal or cancellation of the right to drive to the
         holder of a driving licence issued by another Member State and, if necessary, exchange the licence for that purpose. 
      
…
4.      A Member State may refuse to recognise the validity of any driving licence issued by another Member State to a person who
         is, in the former State’s territory, the subject of one of the measures referred to in paragraph 2. 
      
…’
The first paragraph of Article states that ‘normal residence’ means ‘the place where a person usually lives, that is for
         at least days in each calendar year, because of personal and occupational ties, or, in the case of a person with no occupational
         ties, because of personal ties which show close links between that person and the place where he is living’. 
      
Article 12(3) of Directive 91/provides: 
      
‘The Member States shall assist one another in the implementation of this Directive and shall, if need be, exchange information
         on the licences they have registered.’
      
 The relevant provisions of German law
 The legislation on recognition of driving licences issued by other Member States 
Paragraph 28(1), (4) and (5) of the regulation on access to driving on the highways (the regulation on driving licences) (Verordnung
         über die Zulassung von Personen zum Straßenverkehr (Fahrerlaubnis-Verordenung)) of August (BGBl. I, p. 2214,
         ‘the FeV’) provides:
      
‘(1)      Holders of a valid European Union or European Economic Area (“the EEA”) driving licence having their normal residence within
         the meaning of Paragraph 7(1) or (2) in Germany shall be authorised – subject to the restriction laid down in subparagraphs
         (2) to (4) – to drive motor vehicles in that country within the limits of the rights recognised. The conditions attached to
         foreign driving licences shall be observed in Germany also. The provisions of this regulation shall apply to those licences
         save as otherwise provided.
      
…
(4)      The authorisation referred to in subparagraph shall not apply to holders of a [European] Union or EEA driving licence,
…
3.      whose driving licence has, in Germany, been provisionally or definitively withdrawn by act of a court or tribunal or been
         withdrawn by an immediately enforceable or final decision of an administrative authority, or who have been refused a driving
         licence by immediately enforceable decision or whose driving licence has been withdrawn not solely because surrendered in
         the meantime 
      
…
(5)      The right to use an EU or EEA driving licence in Germany after one of the decisions mentioned in subparagraphs 4(3) and (4)
         shall be granted on application when the grounds justifying the withdrawal or prohibition of applying for a new licence no
         longer obtain.’
      
 The rules on withdrawal of a driving licence
According to Paragraph of the Criminal Code (Strafgesetzbuch), a criminal court is to order the withdrawal of a driving
         licence if it is apparent from the facts of the case that a defendant is unfit to drive a motor vehicle. In accordance with
         Paragraph 69a of that code, when a court orders withdrawal of a licence it is also to order that no application may be made
         for the issue of a new driving licence for a given period (‘the period of the prohibition’) which may vary from six months
         to five years and may even, in some circumstances, be ordered to last for life. 
      
By virtue of Article of the FeV, a provision implementing Paragraph of the Law on Road Traffic (the Straßenverkehrsgesetz),
         the driving licence authority is to withdraw the right to drive if it is shown that the holder of a licence is unfit to drive
         motor vehicles. In accordance with Paragraph 46(5), the right to drive is terminated by the act of withdrawal of the driving
         licence. If that licence was issued abroad, its withdrawal extinguishes the right to drive vehicles in Germany.
      
 The rules on fitness to drive
Paragraph of the FeV, headed ‘Fitness’, provides:
      
‘(1)      Applicants for a driving licence must satisfy the relevant physical and mental requirements. In particular, those requirements
         are not satisfied in the case of sickness or disability referred to in Annex or in Annex which excludes fitness [to drive
         motor vehicles] or entails only limited fitness …
      
(2)      Where circumstances exist which give rise to doubt as to the physical or mental fitness of an applicant for a driving licence,
         the competent authorities may order the applicant to produce a medical report as an inquiry preparatory to the decisions to
         be taken on the issue or extension of a driving licence or on the imposition of restrictions or conditions. ...
      
(3)      Production of a report made by an officially approved centre for the testing of fitness to drive (medical-psychological report)
         may be ordered in order to dispel doubts as to fitness to drive for the purposes of subparagraph [in particular]
      
...
4.      in the case of serious or repeated contraventions of the highway code or of road traffic offences or offences related to fitness
         to drive …
      
or
5.      on the new grant of a driving licence,
…
b.      when the withdrawal of the licence was based on one of the grounds set out in subparagraph 4.
…
(8)      If the person concerned refuses to be examined or if he does not within the period prescribed produce to the competent driving
         licence authority the medical report required by the latter, the competent authority is entitled to conclude in its decision
         that the person concerned is unfit to drive.’
      
Headed ‘Fitness in cases of alcohol problems’, Paragraph of the FeV gives the competent authorities power to order, in
         certain circumstances, the production of a medical-psychological report for the purposes of inquiries preparatory to the decisions
         to be taken either to issue or extend a driving licence or to impose restrictions or conditions relating to the right to drive.
         That is, in particular, the case when, according to medical opinion or on account of certain facts, there is evidence of abuse
         of alcohol or when road traffic offences have on several occasions been committed under the influence of alcohol.
      
Paragraph of the FeV, headed ‘Fitness in cases of narcotic drugs problems’, is worded as follows:
      
‘(1)      For the purposes of inquiries preparatory to the decisions to be taken to issue or extend a driving licence or to impose restrictions
         or conditions, the competent authorities shall order the production of a medical report (third sentence of Paragraph 11(2))
         when certain facts suggest 
      
1.      dependence on narcotics within the meaning of the Law on narcotics [(Gesetz ûber den Verkehr mit Betäubungsmitteln [Betäubungsmittelgesetz])]
         in the version published on March (BGBl. I, p. 358), … amended by Paragraph of the law of February (BGBl.
         [1998] I, p. 160), in the text applicable, or on any other substance with psychoactive effect, 
      
2.      consumption of narcotics within the meaning of the Law on narcotics, …
…
(2)      Production of a medical-psychological report shall be ordered for the purposes of subparagraph if 
1.      the driving licence has been withdrawn for one of the reasons set out in subparagraph or
2.      it is necessary to establish whether the person concerned is still dependent on narcotics or – while not dependent on them
         – continues to take substances mentioned in subparagraph 1.’
      
Paragraph 20(1) of the FeV provides that, when a new driving licence is issued following a withdrawal, the same provisions
         apply as for the first issue of a licence. Although, according to Paragraph 20(2) of the FeV, the competent authority may
         decide not to order the tests in relation to the issue of a licence when there is nothing to suggest that the applicant no
         longer possesses the knowledge or fitness required for that purpose, Paragraph 20(3) provides that such a decision does not
         alter the obligation to produce a medical-psychological report laid down in the fifth point of the first paragraph of Paragraph
         11(3) of the FeV. 
      
 The disputes in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 Case C-329/Mr Wiedemann, a German national, has lived in Germany since June 1995, residing first at Bad Waldsee and then at Wangen
         im Allgäu.
      
On April the Landratsamt Ravensburg (district administration, Ravensburg) issued him with a category B driving licence
         for a probationary period of two years. On September Mr Wiedemann was ordered to take part in a training seminar as
         the result of the commission of a road traffic offence. On March a test carried out on his urine revealed use of heroin
         and cannabis. On that occasion he admitted regular use of cannabis.
      
By decision of April the Landratsamt Ravensburg withdrew Mr Wiedemann’s driving licence on the ground that he was
         unfit to drive a motor vehicle on account of his drug use.
      
Mr Wiedemann’s appeal against that decision was rejected by the Regierungspräsidium Tübingen (Tübingen regional authority)
         by decision of August 2004, which became final on September 2004.
      
On September 2004, a Sunday, the competent driving licence authorities of the city of Karlovice (Czech Republic) adopted
         a decision recognising Mr Wiedemann’s right to drive. A category B Czech driving licence was issued to him on October 2004,
         indicating ‘Bad Waldsee, Germany’ as the holder’s place of residence.
      
In possession of that licence, Mr Wiedemann drove in Germany where he caused an accident on October 2004. On October
         that licence was taken away by the Ravensburg police. 
      
By decision of the Landratsamt Ravensburg of October 2004, Mr Wiedemann was deprived of his right to drive motor vehicles
         in Germany, that right arising from his Czech driving licence, on the ground that he had not, pursuant to German law, demonstrated
         that he was fit to drive such vehicles. The driving licence was returned to him after being endorsed as follows: ‘This driving
         licence does not authorise the holder to drive motor vehicles in Germany’.
      
The Czech Ministry of Transport was told by the German authorities that the competent Czech authorities had issued a driving
         licence without taking into account the fact that Mr Wiedemann had his main residence in Germany or the earlier withdrawal
         of his German driving licence on grounds of his unfitness to drive due to his use of drugs, which, moreover, had not ceased.
         
      
By letters of April and January the Czech Ministry of Transport declared that there would be an investigation
         of the decisions taken by the competent Czech authorities. 
      
His appeal against the decision of October having been unsuccessful, Mr Wiedemann brought an action on July before the Verwaltungsgericht Sigmaringen (Administrative Court of Sigmarigen), which has decided to stay the proceedings
         and to refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Are Articles 1(2) and 8(2) and (4) of Directive [EEC] 91/to be interpreted as meaning that the withdrawal of a driving
         licence by administrative authorities in the [Member] State of residence on the ground of unfitness to drive does not prevent
         another Member State from issuing a driving licence, and that in principle the [Member] State of residence must recognise
         such a driving licence?
      
(2)      Is Article 1(2), in conjunction with Articles 7(1)(a) and 8(2) and (4) of, and Annex III to, Directive [EEC] 91/439, to be
         interpreted as meaning that there is no obligation imposed on the [Member] State of residence to recognise a driving licence
         which, after his driving licence was withdrawn in his [Member] State of residence, the holder obtained fraudulently, by deliberately
         deceiving the competent driving licence authorities of the issuing [Member] State, without proving that he had become fit
         to drive again, or as a result of collusion with employees of the authorities of the issuing [Member] State?
      
(3)      On a proper construction of Articles 1(2) and 8(2) and (4) of Directive [EEC] 91/439, after a driving licence has been withdrawn
         by the administrative authorities of the [Member] State of residence, may that State temporarily suspend, or prohibit the
         use of, a driving licence issued by another Member State while that issuing State considers whether to revoke that driving
         licence fraudulently obtained?’
      
On April the Court was notified of a letter dated March addressed to the German Minister for Transport by
         his Czech counterpart, in which the latter confirmed that Mr Wiedemann’s Czech driving licence had been issued to him in accordance
         with the applicable rules. That letter, and a translation of it into German, were supplied to the Court by the court making
         the reference. In accordance with Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, those documents were notified to all
         the interested parties that had submitted written observations. 
      
 Case C-343/By final judgment of the Amtsgericht Chemnitz (Chemnitz local court) of May 2001, Mr Funk, the holder of a Category B driving
         licence issued in Germany on July 2000, was convicted of driving under the influence of alcohol. His authorisation to drive
         was annulled and his driving licence taken away, and it was ordered that he should not obtain a new German driving licence
         for a period of nine months expiring on February 2002. 
      
As one of the steps taken by Mr Funk in order to obtain a new driving licence, he underwent a medical-psychological examination.
         The resulting report, of February 2002, concluded that he was not fit to drive motor vehicles, on the ground that that there
         was a significant danger of his reoffending, his personality not having changed for the better. None the less, after following
         a course, Mr Funk obtained a new driving licence on March 2002. 
      
A check carried out on June established that Mr Funk was again under the influence of alcohol. Another report, drawn
         up on June in response to that check, having concluded that it was to be foreseen that Mr Funk would continue to drive
         vehicles under the influence of alcohol, the city of Chemnitz again withdrew his licence, by an uncontested decision of July 2003.
      
On December Mr Funk applied for a new licence. However, an unfavourable report having been prepared on February
         2004, he withdrew his application.
      
The decision for reference shows that on December when, according to the information he had supplied to the residents’
         registration office of the Stadt Chemnitz, he was resident in that locality exclusively, a fact he himself later confirmed,
         Mr Funk obtained a Category B driving licence in Teplice (Czech Republic). 
      
Informed of that fact, on February the Stadt Chemnitz ordered Mr Funk to submit a medical-psychological report establishing
         his fitness to drive motor vehicles. When he failed to comply with that order, the Stadt Chemnitz withdrew his right to use
         his Czech driving licence in Germany by decision of May and ordered him, on pain of paying a fine, to produce that
         licence so that that prohibition could be endorsed on it. By decision of May 2005, the fine payable for non-compliance
         with that order was fixed at EUR 500, Mr Funk being in addition warned that that licence might be withdrawn. 
      
His appeal against those decisions not being successful, Mr Funk brought an action before the Verwaltungsgericht Chemnitz
         (Administrative Court of Chemnitz), which has decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court
         for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      May a Member State, in accordance with Article 1(2) in conjunction with Article 8(2) and (4) of Directive [91/439], require
         the holder of a driving licence issued in another Member State to apply to the national authority of the first Member State
         for recognition of the right to use that licence in its territory when the holder of that licence has previously, in the territory
         of the first Member State, had his driving licence withdrawn or cancelled for some reason?
      
(2)      If it may not, is Article 1(2) in conjunction with Article 8(2) and (4) of Directive [91/439] to be interpreted as meaning
         that a Member State may refuse to recognise in its territory a driving licence issued by another Member State when the person
         concerned has had a previous driving licence [issued by that first Member State] withdrawn by the administrative authorities,
         where, according to the law of that first Member State, in the case of administrative measures for the withdrawal or cancellation
         of a driving licence, there is no period during which [a new driving licence] may not be issued and one of the fundamental
         conditions for entitlement to that issue is that the person concerned should, when so ordered by the administrative authorities,
         have supplied evidence of his fitness to drive in the form of a medical-psychological report the detailed rules governing
         which are laid down by national law?
      
(3)      If it is not, is Article 1(2) in conjunction with Article 8(2) and (4) of Directive [91/439] to be interpreted as meaning
         that a Member State may refuse to recognise in its territory a driving licence issued by another Member State when the holder
         has had a previous driving licence [issued by that first Member State] withdrawn or cancelled by the administrative authorities
         in that Member State, and when there are grounds for concluding, on the basis of objective evidence (non-residence in the
         Member State issuing the driving licence in question or the failure of an application for issue of a new licence in the first
         Member State), that the only reason for acquiring the foreign EU driving licence was to circumvent the strict substantive
         requirements of national procedure in the first Member State for the issue of a new driving licence, particularly the need
         for a medical‑psychological report?’
      
A letter of September from the Czech Ministry of Transport confirming the validity of Mr Funk’s Czech driving licence
         was annexed to his observations and also communicated to the Court by letter of June 2007. In accordance with Article of the Statute of the Court Justice, that document has been sent to all the persons having submitted written observations.
      
 Procedure before the Court of Justice
By order of October the President of the Court of Justice ordered that Cases C‑329/and C‑343/should be joined
         for the purposes of the written and oral procedures and also for judgment.
      
By a series of written questions notified on August 2007, the Court asked the Czech Government about the law of the Czech
         Republic concerning the investigation of the conditions laid down in Article 7(1)(a) and (b) of Directive 91/439, and inquired
         whether it is possible to issue a driving licence including an entry indicating the holder’s residence in another Member State
         and about the criteria applicable in order to ascertain whether a person has his residence in that Member State and whether
         checks are made to establish whether that residence is genuine.
      
By fax received at the Court Registry on August 2007, the Czech Government stated in response to those questions that the
         condition of normal residence, as laid down by Directive 91/439, had not been introduced into the Czech legal order until
         July 2006. In the period before that date, the Czech rules allowed authorisation to drive to be issued to persons having
         neither a permanent nor a temporary residence in the territory of the Czech Republic. 
      
 Concerning the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
These questions referred for a preliminary ruling concern two features of the mutual recognition of driving licences which
         it is appropriate to examine in turn, namely, first, whether a Member State may refuse to recognise the validity of a driving
         licence issued by another Member State and, second, whether it may temporarily suspend the right to drive stemming from such
         a licence until the issuing Member State has taken a decision as to the possible withdrawal of that licence. 
      
 Whether a Member State may refuse to recognise the validity of a driving licence issued by another Member State 
The first point to be noted here is that in the procedure laid down by Article EC providing for cooperation between national
         courts and the Court of Justice, it is for the latter to provide the national court with an answer which will be of use to
         it and enable it to determine the case before it. To that end, the Court may have to reformulate the questions referred to
         it. In addition, it is to be borne in mind that the Court has a duty to interpret all provisions of Community law necessary
         to national courts in order to decide the actions pending before them, even if those provisions are not expressly indicated
         in the questions referred to the Court of Justice by those courts (Case C-280/Viessmann [1993] ECR I-971, paragraph 17; Case C-42/Immobiliare SIF [1997] ECR I-7089, paragraph 28, and Case C‑45/Campina [2007] ECR I-2089, paragraphs and 31). 
      
Here, having regard to the facts giving rise to the cases in the main proceedings and also to the terms of the observations
         submitted to the Court, examination of the questions raised must take into account Article 7(1)(a) and (b) of Directive 91/439.
         In order to furnish a reply both helpful and as complete as possible to the questions referred, it is therefore appropriate
         to widen their scope in so far as the national courts have not done so. 
      
By the first two questions in Case C-329/and the second and third questions in Case C-343/06, the referring courts have
         in essence sought to ascertain whether Articles 1(2), 7(1)(a) and (b) and 8(2) and (4) of Directive 91/are to be interpreted
         as preventing one Member State (the host Member State) from refusing to recognise in its territory a driving licence subsequently
         issued by another Member State (the issuing Member State) to a person who has earlier, in the host Member State, had his previous
         driving licence withdrawn for driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol, when that person has obtained that licence
         after any period in which he is forbidden to apply for a new licence, but in disregard of the condition of residence or of
         the conditions of fitness to drive imposed by the host Member State in that respect for the purposes of road safety. 
      
Those questions may appropriately be examined with the first question in Case C‑343/which seeks, in essence, to ascertain
         whether a host Member State may require the holder of a new driving licence, issued by another Member State, to apply for
         recognition of the right to use that licence in the host Member State, before using the licence, when his previous driving
         licence has been withdrawn or cancelled in that latter State. 
      
The first recital in the preamble to Directive 91/states that the general principle of mutual recognition of driving licences
         issued by the Member States, laid down in Article 1(2) of that directive, was established in order to facilitate the movement
         of persons settling in a Member State other than that in which they have passed a driving test (Case C-476/Kapper [2004] ECR I‑5205, paragraph 71). 
      
The Court has consistently held that Article 1(2) of Directive 91/provides for mutual recognition, without any formality,
         of driving licences issued by Member States. That provision imposes on Member States a clear and precise obligation, which
         leaves no room for discretion as to the measures to be adopted in order to comply with it (judgments in Case C‑230/Awoyemi [1998] ECR I‑6781, paragraphs and 43; Case C-246/Commission v Netherlands [2003] ECR I‑7485, paragraphs and 61; and Kapper, paragraph 45; orders of April in Case C‑227/Halbritter [2006] ECR I‑0049, and of September in Case C‑340/Kremer [2006] ECR I-0098). 
      
It follows that the host Member State may not impose any formality as a precondition for recognition of a driving licence
         issued by another Member State. It is therefore contrary to that principle of mutual recognition to demand of the holder of
         a driving licence issued by one Member State that he should apply for recognition of that licence in another Member State
         (see, to that effect, Commission v Netherlands, paragraph et seq.). 
      
It is for the issuing Member State to investigate whether the minimum conditions imposed by Community law, particularly those
         relating to residence and fitness to drive, have been satisfied and, therefore, whether the issue of a driving licence – as
         the case may be, of a new licence – is justified. 
      
As soon, therefore, as the authorities of one Member State have issued a driving licence in accordance with Article 1(1) of
         Directive 91/439, the other Member States are not entitled to investigate whether the conditions for issue laid down by that
         directive have been observed (see, to that effect, the orders in Halbritter, paragraph 34, and Kremer, paragraph 27). The possession of a driving licence issued by one Member State has to be regarded as constituting proof that,
         on the day that licence was issued, its holder fulfilled those conditions (see, to that effect, Commission v Netherlands, paragraph 75; the order of December in Case C-408/Da Silva Carvalho, not published in the ECR and Kapper, paragraph 46). The fact that, in accordance with point of Annex III to that directive, a Member State may require, for
         any issue of a driving licence, a medical examination stricter than those mentioned in that annex does not, therefore, affect
         that Member State’s duty to recognise driving licences issued by the other Member States in accordance with that directive.
         
      
It follows, first, that a host Member State making the issue of a driving licence subject to stricter domestic conditions,
         especially after an earlier licence has been withdrawn, may not refuse to recognise a driving licence subsequently issued
         by another Member State solely on the ground that the holder of that new licence has obtained it pursuant to national legislation
         that does not impose the same requirements as the host Member State. 
      
Second, it is contrary to the principle of mutual recognition for a host Member State to refuse to recognise a driving licence
         issued by another Member State on the ground that, according to the information supplied by the host Member State, the holder
         of that licence did not, at the date of its issue, satisfy the necessary conditions for obtaining it (see, to that effect,
         the order in Da Silva Carvalho, paragraph 22, and Kapper, paragraph 47). 
      
Inasmuch as Directive 91/confers on the issuing Member State exclusive competence to check that driving licences are issued
         in compliance with the requirements imposed by that directive, it is for that Member State alone to take appropriate measures
         in respect of which it is subsequently established that the holders did not satisfy those conditions (see, to that effect,
         the order in Da Silva Carvalho, paragraph 23, and Kapper, paragraph 48). 
      
If a Member State has good reason to doubt the validity of a licence issued by another Member State, it must so inform the
         latter under the rules relating to mutual assistance and the exchange of information contained in Article 12(3) of Directive
         91/439. Should the issuing Member State fail to take the appropriate measures, the host Member State may bring proceedings
         against it under Article EC for a declaration by the Court that there has been a failure to fulfil the obligations arising
         under Directive 91/(see, to that effect, the order in Da Silva Carvalho, paragraph 23, and Kapper, paragraph 48).
      
It is true that, for reasons of road traffic safety, as is made clear by the last recital in the preamble to Directive 91/439,
         Article 8(2) and (4) permits the Member States, in certain circumstances, to apply their national provisions on the restriction,
         suspension, withdrawal or cancellation of driving licences to any licence-holder having normal residence in their territory.
         
      
It is, however, to be borne in mind, first, that that right, as it arises from Article 8(2) of Directive 91/439, may be exercised
         only by reason of some conduct of the person concerned after he has obtained a driving licence issued by another Member State
         (see, to that effect, the orders in Halbritter, paragraph 38, and Kremer, paragraph 35). 
      
Second, the first subparagraph of Article 8(4), which authorises a Member State to refuse to recognise the validity of a driving
         licence obtained in another Member State by a person who is, in the first Member State’s territory, the subject of a measure
         restricting, suspending, withdrawing or cancelling a licence, constitutes a derogation from the general principle of mutual
         recognition of driving licences and is, therefore, to be interpreted strictly (see, to that effect, Kapper, paragraphs and 72, and the orders in Halbritter, paragraph 35, and Kremer, paragraph 28). 
      
It must at the outset be stressed that, even if that provision enables a Member State, on certain conditions, to refuse recognition
         of a driving licence issued by another Member State, it does not for that reason follow, as the German Government would have
         it, that the first Member State may make the right to use a licence issued by the second State conditional upon prior positive
         authorisation (see, to that effect, the order in Kremer, paragraph 37). 
      
Given that the issuing of a driving licence by a Member State must be effected in compliance with the minimum requirements
         laid down by Directive 91/439, including those set out in Annex III thereto, relating to fitness to drive, an interpretation
         of the first subparagraph of Article 8(4) of that directive to the effect that, in general terms, anyone who has held a driving
         licence that has been withdrawn or cancelled in a Member State may be obliged to appear before the competent authorities of
         that Member State in order to obtain authorisation to make use of the right to drive arising from the driving licence subsequently
         issued in another Member State would run counter to the obligation of mutual recognition without formalities. 
      
Nor may that provision be relied on by a Member State to refuse indefinitely to recognise, in relation to a person who has
         been the object in its territory of a measure withdrawing or cancelling a previous licence issued by that State, the validity
         of any licence that may subsequently be issued to him by another Member State (see, to that effect, Kapper, paragraph 76, and the orders in Halbritter, paragraph 27, and Kremer, paragraph 29). To accept that a Member State is entitled to rely on its national provisions in order to refuse indefinitely
         to recognise a licence issued by another Member State would be fundamentally incompatible with the principle of mutual recognition
         of driving licences which is the linchpin of the system established by Directive 91/(Kapper, paragraph 77, and the orders in Halbritter, paragraph 28, and Kremer, paragraph 30). 
      
More particularly, the Court has held in paragraph of its order in Kremer that when a person has been the object of a measure withdrawing his driving licence in the territory of a Member State but
         not including a period in which it is prohibited to apply for a new licence, it is contrary to Article 1(2) in conjunction
         with Article 8(2) and (4) of Directive 91/for that Member State to refuse to recognise, in its territory, the right to
         drive stemming from a driving licence subsequently issued in another Member State and, therefore, the validity of that licence,
         so long as the licence-holder has not satisfied the necessary conditions in that first Member State for the issue of a new
         licence following that withdrawal, including the examination of fitness to drive certifying that the grounds justifying the
         withdrawal are no longer in existence.
      
In contrast, it is clear from the foregoing that, when the person concerned has been the object of a measure withdrawing his
         driving licence and prohibiting any application for a new licence for a given period, it is not contrary to Articles 1(2)
         and 8(4) of Directive 91/for a Member State to refuse to recognise a new licence issued by another Member State during
         the period of that prohibition.
      
Similarly, although Article 8(2) of Directive 91/does not permit the Member State of normal residence to refuse to recognise
         a driving licence issued by another Member State just because the holder has earlier had a previous licence withdrawn in the
         Member State of normal residence, that provision does nevertheless allow that State, as recalled in paragraphs and above,
         subject to observance of the principle of territoriality of criminal and police laws, to restrict, suspend, withdraw or cancel
         the new licence if that is warranted, according to the law of the host Member State, by the holder’s conduct after the issue
         of the new licence.
      
In order to answer the questions raised by the national courts, particular consideration must next be given to the application
         of the principle of mutual recognition, as set out above, when it has established that the new driving licence was issued
         in disregard of the residence condition imposed by Directive 91/439. 
      
In this regard, the fourth recital in the preamble to that directive shows that the conditions laid down in order to ensure
         road safety include those contained in Article 7(1)(a) and (b) of that directive, which makes the issue of a driving licence
         conditional upon the requirements relating to fitness to drive and residence, respectively. 
      
As remarked by the Commission of the European Communities in its observations, the residence condition helps, inter alia,
         the fight against ‘driving-licence-tourism’, in the absence of complete harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating
         to the issuing of driving licences. Moreover, as the Advocate General has pointed out in paragraph of his Opinion, that
         condition is indispensable if observance of the condition of fitness to drive is to be monitored.
      
Article 7(5) of Directive 91/439, in providing that no person may hold a driving licence from more than one Member State,
         affirms the single nature of a driving licence. So, as a precondition making it possible to establish whether a particular
         candidate has observed the other conditions imposed by the directive, the condition of residence, which determines the Member
         State of issue, assumes special importance in relation to the other conditions laid down by the directive.
      
Road safety might, therefore, be jeopardised if the condition of residence were not observed with regard to someone whose
         right to drive has been restricted, suspended, withdrawn or cancelled for the purposes of Article 8(4) of Directive 91/439.
         
      
It follows that, when it is possible to determine, not in the light of information supplied by the host Member State but on
         the basis of entries appearing in the driving licence itself or of other incontestable information supplied by the Member
         State of issue, that the condition of residence laid down by Article 7(1)(b) of Directive 91/had not been satisfied when
         that licence was issued, the host Member State, in whose territory the holder of that licence has been the object of a measure
         withdrawing an earlier driving licence, may refuse to recognise the right to drive stemming from the driving licence later
         issued by another Member State following any period in which it is prohibited to apply for a new licence.
      
Having regard to all the foregoing considerations, the answer to be given to the questions referred must be that, on a proper
         construction of Articles 1(2), 7(1) and 8(2) and (4) of Directive 91/439, it is contrary to those provisions for a Member
         State, in circumstances such as those of the cases in the main proceedings, to refuse to recognise in its territory the right
         to drive stemming from a driving licence subsequently issued by another Member State following any period in which the person
         concerned is forbidden to apply for a new licence and therefore, the validity of that licence, so long as the licence-holder
         has not satisfied the necessary conditions in that first Member State for the issue of a new licence following the withdrawal
         of a previous licence, including the examination of fitness to drive certifying that the grounds justifying the withdrawal
         are no longer in existence. In the same circumstances, it is not contrary to those provisions for a Member State to refuse
         to recognise in its territory the right to drive stemming from a driving licence subsequently issued by another Member State,
         if it is established, on the basis of entries appearing in the driving licence itself or of other incontestable information
         supplied by the Member State of issue, that when that licence was issued its holder, who had been the object, in the territory
         of the first Member State, of a measure withdrawing an earlier licence, was not normally resident in the territory of the
         Member State of issue.
      
 Whether it is possible to suspend temporarily the right to drive stemming from a driving licence issued by another Member
            State 
By its third question, the national court in Case C‑329/seeks, essentially, to ascertain whether, on a proper construction
         of Articles 1(2) and 8(2) and (4) of Directive 91/439, a Member State may, after a driving licence has been withdrawn by its
         administrative authorities, temporarily suspend in the interests of road safety the right to drive stemming from a licence
         subsequently issued by another Member State, when the latter has indicated that it was to conduct an examination of the procedure
         followed in the issuing of that new licence which might lead to its withdrawal. 
      
 The relevance of the question
In its written observations concerning Case C‑329/06, the German Government maintains that, as a result of the position expressed
         by the Czech Republic in its letter of March 2006, referred to in paragraph above, that it would not withdraw Mr Wiedemann’s
         licence, the question is no longer relevant. 
      
It is to be borne in mind that, in proceedings under Article EC, which is based on a clear separation of functions between
         the national courts and the Court of Justice, it is for the national court alone, before which the dispute has been brought,
         and which must assume responsibility for the judicial decision to be made, to determine in the light of the particular circumstances
         of the case both the need for a preliminary ruling in order to enable it to deliver judgment and the relevance of the questions
         which it refers to the Court. Consequently, where the questions submitted by the national court concern the interpretation
         of Community law, the Court of Justice is, in principle, bound to give a ruling (see, in particular, Case C‑379/PreussenElektra [2001] ECR I‑2099, paragraph 38; Case C‑341/Laval un Partneri [2007] ECR I-0000, paragraph 45; and Case C‑450/Varec [2008] ECR I-0000, paragraph 23).
      
Nevertheless, the Court has also held that, in exceptional circumstances, it can examine the conditions in which the case
         was referred to it by the national court, in order to assess whether it has jurisdiction (Varec, paragraph and the case-law cited). The Court may refuse to rule on a question referred for a preliminary ruling by a
         national court only where it is quite obvious that the interpretation of Community law that is sought bears no relation to
         the actual facts of the main action or its purpose or where the problem is hypothetical (see, in particular, PreussenElektra, paragraph 39, and Laval un Partneri, paragraph 46). 
      
In this case the German Government does not challenge the Court’s jurisdiction at the moment when the preliminary ruling proceedings
         were initiated. It does no more than observe that this question has become irrelevant as a result of the letter of March
         of the Czech Minister for Transport, given that that letter expresses the definitive refusal of the Czech authorities
         to initiate a procedure for the withdrawal of the Czech driving licence at issue in the main proceedings. 
      
It is, however, for the national court and not for the Court of Justice to determine the significance of that letter in order
         to establish whether it contains such a refusal. In any case, it is for the national court alone to decide whether, in the
         light of events of which it was informed after the decision to refer, the reply to that question now serves no purpose in
         the settlement of the case before it.
      
It follows that an answer must be given to this question.
      
 Substance
First of all, it is to be noted that when, on the basis of Directive 91/439, a Member State is bound to recognise a driving
         licence issued by another Member State, the effectiveness of mutual recognition of driving licences would be jeopardised if
         it were possible for that Member State to decide to suspend the right to drive stemming from that licence while the second
         Member State investigates the procedure followed for its issue. 
      
In such a situation, even if that investigation may lead to withdrawal of the licence in question, temporary suspension of
         the right to drive stemming from that licence would be based on a presumption of unlawfulness irreconcilable with the Court’s
         case-law referred to in paragraph above, according to which possession of a driving licence issued by a Member State must
         be considered by every other Member State as constituting proof that the holder of that licence, on the day it was issued
         to him, had fulfilled the conditions for issue laid down by Directive 91/439.
      
A Member State which, after adopting a measure withdrawing a person’s driving licence, is bound by virtue of the provisions
         of that directive to recognise a licence subsequently issued to that person by another Member State, may not, therefore, suspend
         the right to drive stemming from that new licence. 
      
When, however, in accordance with the second part of the reply set out in paragraph above, a Member State is, exceptionally,
         entitled to refuse to recognise the validity of a driving licence issued by another Member State, that first State is a fortiori
         empowered to suspend the right to drive of the holder of that licence while the second Member State undertakes the investigation
         of the procedure followed in the issue of the licence, particularly as regards observance of the condition of residence imposed
         by Article 7(1)(b) of Directive 91/439, which might possibly lead to the withdrawal of the licence. 
      
Furthermore, as has been stated in paragraph above, it is important to bear in mind that a Member State may, by virtue
         of Article 8(2) of Directive 91/439, apply its national provisions on the restriction, suspension, withdrawal or cancellation
         of the right to drive to the holder of a driving licence issued by another Member State on account of that person’s conduct
         after that licence was issued.
      
In light of the foregoing considerations, the reply to be given to the third question referred in Case C‑329/must be that
         it is contrary to Articles 1(2) and 8(2) and (4) of Directive 91/for a Member State bound, in accordance with that directive,
         to recognise the right to drive stemming from a driving licence issued by another Member State, to suspend that right temporarily
         while the latter Member State investigates the procedure followed in the issuing of that licence. In contrast, in that same
         context, it is not contrary to those provisions for a Member State to decide to suspend that right if it is clear from entries
         in that licence or other incontestable information supplied by that other Member State that the condition of residence imposed
         in Article 7(1)(b) of that directive was not satisfied at the moment when that licence was issued. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable. 
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      On a proper construction of Articles 1(2), 7(1) and 8(2) and (4) of Council Directive 91/439/EEC of July on driving
            licences, as amended by Regulation (EC) No 1882/of the European Parliament and of the Council of September 2003, it
            is contrary to those provisions for a Member State, in circumstances such as those of the cases in the main proceedings, to
            refuse to recognise in its territory the right to drive stemming from a driving licence subsequently issued by another Member
            State beyond any period in which the person concerned is forbidden to apply for a new licence and, therefore, to recognise
            the validity of that licence, so long as the licence-holder has not satisfied the necessary conditions in that first Member
            State for the issue of a new licence following the withdrawal of a previous licence, including the examination of fitness
            to drive certifying that the grounds justifying the withdrawal are no longer in existence. 
In the same circumstances, it is not contrary to those provisions for a Member State to refuse to recognise in its territory
            the right to drive stemming from a driving licence subsequently issued by another Member State, if it is established, on the
            basis of entries appearing in the driving licence itself or of other incontestable information supplied by the Member State
            of issue, that when that licence was issued its holder, who had been the object, in the territory of the first Member State,
            of a measure withdrawing an earlier licence, was not normally resident in the territory of the Member State of issue.
2.      It is contrary to Articles 1(2) and 8(2) and (4) of Directive 91/439, as amended by Regulation No 1882/2003, for a Member
            State bound, in accordance with that directive, to recognise the right to drive stemming from a driving licence issued by
            another Member State, to suspend that right temporarily while the latter Member State investigates the procedure followed
            in the issuing of that licence. In contrast, in that same context, it is not contrary to those provisions for a Member State
            to decide to suspend that right if it is clear from entries in that licence or from other incontestable information supplied
            by that other Member State that the condition of residence imposed in Article 7(1)(b) of that directive was not satisfied
            at the moment when that licence was issued. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 