
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
December (*)
      
(National administrative procedure – Administrative acts – Duty to state reasons – Possibility of failure to state reasons being remedied during legal proceedings against an administrative act – Interpretation of the second paragraph of Article TFEU and Article 41(2)(c) of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
         European Union – Lack of jurisdiction of the Court)
      
In Case C‑482/10,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the Corte dei conti, sezione giurisdizionale per la Regione
         Siciliana (Italy), made by decision of September 2010, received at the Court on October 2010, in the proceedings
      
Teresa Cicala
v
Regione Siciliana,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, E. Juhász, G. Arestis, T. von Danwitz (Rapporteur) and D. Šváby, Judges,
Advocate General: Y. Bot,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        the Regione Siciliana, by V. Farina and D. Bologna, avvocati,
–        the Italian Government, by G. Palmieri, acting as Agent, assisted by S. Varone, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Danish Government, by V. Pasternak Jørgensen, acting as Agent,
–        the German Government, by T. Henze, J. Möller and N. Graf Vitzthum, acting as Agents,
–        the Greek Government, by E.-M. Mamouna, K. Paraskevopoulou and I. Bakopoulos, acting as Agents,
–        the European Commission, by C. Cattabriga and H. Kraemer, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of the principle of stating reasons for the acts of public
         authorities, laid down by the second paragraph of Article TFEU and Article 41(2)(c) of the Charter of Fundamental Rights
         of the European Union (the ‘Charter’).
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between Ms Cicala and the Regione Siciliana concerning a decision providing for
         a reduction in the amount of Ms Cicala’s pension and the recovery of amounts paid for earlier periods.
      
 Legal context
Law No of August introducing new rules governing administrative procedure and relating to the right of access to
         administrative documents (GURI No of August 1990, p. 7), as amended by Law No of February (GURI No of
         February 2005, p. 4, ‘Law No 241/1990’) provides at Article 1(1):
      
‘Administrative activity shall pursue objectives established by law and be governed by the criteria of economy, efficiency,
         impartiality, right of access and transparency according to the methods prescribed by this law and other provisions governing
         distinct procedures as well as by principles derived from the Community legal order.’
      
Article 3(1) and (2) of Law No 241/provides, in relation to the duty to state reasons:
      
‘1.      All administrative decisions … must state reasons, except in the cases provided for in paragraph 2. The reasons stated must
         indicate the factual circumstances as well as the legal grounds that led the administration to take that decision, having
         regard to the results of the preliminary examination of the file.
      
2.      Reasons are not required to be stated for legislative acts and acts of general application.’
The first paragraph of Article 21g(2) of Law No 241/is worded as follows:
      
‘A decision adopted in breach of the rules of procedure or the rules relating to the form of measures will not be annulled
         where, having regard to the fact that it falls within the administration’s circumscribed powers, it is clear that its operative
         part could not have been different from that which was actually adopted.’
      
Article of Sicilian Regional Law No of April introducing provisions relating to administrative decisions, right
         of access to administrative documents and the improvement of the functioning of administrative activity (Sicilian Regional
         Law No 10/1991) reproduces verbatim Article of Law No 241/1990.
      
Article of Sicilian Regional Law No 10/provides:
      
‘For all matters that are not provided for by this law, the provisions of Law No 241/shall be applicable, insofar as
         they are compatible, including successive amendments and additions, and also implementation and related measures.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Ms Cicala, who was employed by the Region of Sicily, receives a pension paid to her by the Region of Sicily. By memorandum
         dated 1997, the Region of Sicily informed Ms Cicala that the amount of her pension, as established by an earlier regional
         decree, was more than what was actually due to her and that that amount would be reduced, and that the amounts unduly paid
         to her would correspondingly be recovered. Ms Cicala brought an action for annulment of that memorandum before the Corte dei
         conti, sezione giurisdizionale per la Regione Siciliana (Court of auditors, administrative appeals section for the Region
         of Sicily), alleging a total failure to state reasons for the act which made it, inter alia, impossible to determine the matters
         of fact and law warranting the reduction in her pension and the recovery of the sums unduly paid.
      
The Region of Sicily submitted, in that regard, that the contested memorandum fell within the administration’s circumscribed
         powers and that its provisions could not have been different from those that were adopted. During the judicial proceedings,
         it provided information relating to the reasons explaining that memorandum and concluded that it was not possible, in accordance
         with Article 21g of Law No 241/1990, to annul it.
      
In its decision to refer the matter, the Corte dei conti, sezione giurisdizionale per la Regione Siciliana, sets out considerations
         relating to the Court’s jurisdiction to answer the questions raised. It notes, first of all, that, in the context of the action
         in the main proceedings, it exercises judicial functions. In the area of pensions, it has exclusive jurisdiction on the merits
         and has jurisdiction to annul administrative acts. Thus, contrary to the cases giving rise to the orders of November in Case C‑192/ANAS [1999] ECR I‑8583, and Case C‑440/RAI [1999] ECR I‑8597, in which the Court declared that it had no jurisdiction to rule on the questions referred by the Corte
         dei conti, that body must, in the context of these proceedings, be considered to be not an administrative authority but a
         court within the meaning of Article TFEU.
      
The Corte dei conti, sezione giurisdizionale per la Regione Siciliana, further submits that the questions referred are admissible.
         Article 1(1) of Law No 241/contains a direct, unconditional renvoi to principles derived from the legal order of the Union. The Consiglio di Stato (Council of State) held, in a recent judgment
         (sez. V 4035/2009), that principles of EU law apply directly in the internal legal order and must govern the actions of the
         administration. Thus, it must be considered that the duty to state reasons referred to in the second paragraph of Article
         TFEU and Article 41(2)(c) of the Charter applies to all activities of the Italian administration, whether they are exercised
         in the implementation of EU law or in the context of the administration’s own powers.
      
In those circumstances, even though, in this case, the action in the main proceedings concerns a purely internal situation,
         this reference for a preliminary ruling should, in accordance with the Court’s case-law, be considered as admissible. Considering
         that the resolution of that dispute depends on the interpretation of those provisions of EU law, the Corte dei conti, sezione
         giurisdizionale per la Regione Siciliana, has decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to the
         Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Are the interpretation and application of Article of [Law No 241/1990] and Article of [Sicilian Regional Law No 10/1991]
         – in relation to Article of [Law 241/1990], which requires the Italian administrative authorities to apply the principles
         of [EU] law, pursuant to the duty to state reasons for the acts of public authorities laid down in the second paragraph of
         Article [TFEU] and Article 41(2)(c) of [the Charter] – to the effect that measures of public authorities in private-law
         form, that is to say, measures relating to individual rights and that are in any event mandatory, in matters relating to pensions,
         may be exempted from the duty to state reasons, compatible with EU law, and does such a case amount to infringement of an
         essential procedural requirement governing an administrative measure?
      
(2)      Is the first sentence of Article 21g(2) of [Law No 241/1990], as interpreted by the administrative case-law – in relation
         to the duty to state reasons for an administrative measure laid down by Article of [Law 241/1990] and Article of [Sicilian
         Regional Law No 10/1991], together with the duty to state reasons for the acts of public authorities laid down by the second
         paragraph of Article [TFEU] and Article 41(2)(c) of [the Charter] – compatible with Article of [Law No 241/1990], which
         requires the administration to apply the principles of the legal order of the Union, and, consequently, is it compatible and
         permissible to interpret and apply that provision as allowing the authorities to supplement a statement of reasons for an
         administrative measure during the proceedings?’
      
 Jurisdiction of the Court
Having regard to the reasons for the decision to refer the matter, questions arise as to whether the Court has jurisdiction
         to rule on the questions referred to it, as regards, on the one hand, the classification as a ‘court or tribunal’ within the
         meaning of Article TFEU of the Corte dei conti, sezione giurisdizionale per la Regione Siciliana, and, on the other, the
         subject-matter of those questions.
      
In that latter regard, the Regione Siciliana, the Italian, Danish, German, and Greek Governments, and also the European Commission,
         argue, in essence, that the Court lacks jurisdiction to answer the questions referred, due to the fact that the action in
         the main proceedings relates to a purely internal situation. The Italian and Greek Governments, and the Commission too, submit
         inter alia that the renvoi to EU law, provided for in Article of Law No 241/1990, does not fulfil the conditions laid down by the Court’s case-law
         in order to give rise to its jurisdiction.
      
Under Article TFEU the Court has jurisdiction to give preliminary rulings concerning the interpretation of the Treaties
         and acts of the institutions of the Union. In the context of the cooperation between the Court and the national courts established
         by Article TFEU, it is for the national courts alone to assess, in view of the special features of each case, both the
         necessity of a preliminary ruling in order to enable them to give their judgment and the relevance of the questions they put
         to the Court (see, to that effect, Case C‑310/Agafiţei and Others [2011] ECR I‑5989, paragraphs and and the case-law cited).
      
Consequently, when questions submitted by national courts concern the interpretation of a provision of EU law, the Court is,
         in principle, obliged to give a ruling (Case C‑3/Poseidon Chartering [2006] ECR I‑2505, paragraph 15; Case C‑203/Volvo Car Germany [2010] ECR I‑10721, paragraph 24; and Agafiţei and Others, paragraph 26).
      
In accordance with that case-law, the Court has repeatedly held that it has jurisdiction to give preliminary rulings on questions
         concerning provisions of EU law in situations in which the facts of the case in the main proceedings fell beyond the field
         of application of EU law but in which those provisions of EU law had been rendered applicable by domestic law due to a renvoi made by that law to the content of those provisions. In those cases, the provisions of domestic law incorporating provisions
         of EU law did not limit the application of the latter (Case C‑130/Gilroy [1997] ECR I‑4291, paragraph 23, and Case C‑28/Leur-Bloem [1997] ECR I‑4161, paragraph and case-law cited).
      
The Court has stated in that regard that when, in regulating purely internal situations, domestic legislation seeks to adopt
         the same solutions as those adopted in EU law in order, for example, to avoid discrimination against foreign nationals or
         any distortion of competition or to provide for a single procedure in comparable situations, it is clearly in the interest
         of the Union that, in order to forestall future differences of interpretation, provisions or concepts taken from EU law should
         be interpreted uniformly, irrespective of the circumstances in which they are to apply (Agafiţei and Others, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Thus, an interpretation, by the Court, of provisions of EU law in purely internal situations is warranted on the ground that
         they have been made applicable by national law directly and unconditionally (see, to that effect, Case C‑346/Kleinwort Benson [1995] ECR I‑615, paragraph 16, and Case C‑280/ETI and Others [2007] ECR I‑10893, paragraph 25), in order to ensure that internal situations and situations governed by EU law are treated
         in the same way (see, to that effect, Poseidon Chartering, paragraph 17, and Case C‑217/Confederación Española de Empresarios de Estaciones de Servicio [2006] ECR I‑11987, paragraph 22).
      
In this instance, it is common ground that the action in the main proceedings concerns provisions of national law that apply
         in a purely national context and among them, in particular, those relating to the stating of reasons for administrative acts
         are at issue in that action.
      
Accordingly, it must be examined whether an interpretation by the Court of the provisions referred to by the questions raised
         is warranted, as the national court maintains, on the ground that those provisions have been made applicable by national law
         directly and unconditionally, within the meaning of the case-law cited at paragraph herein, by means of a renvoi made by Article of Law No 241/to principles derived from the legal order of the Union.
      
In that regard, the Italian Government submits, in particular, that the duty to state reasons is wholly governed by internal
         law relating to administrative procedure and may not, thus, be the subject of interpretation by the Court.
      
Law No 241/and Sicilian Regional Law No 10/provide for specific rules in relation to the duty to state reasons for
         administrative acts. Moreover, Law No 241/lays down, in relation to the consequences of an infringement of that duty,
         specific rules that are made applicable to the procedure in the main proceedings through Article of Sicilian Regional Law
         No 10/1991.
      
Thus, as was in particular noted by the national court itself, the Region of Sicily and the Italian Government, Article of Law No 241/and Article of Sicilian Regional Law No 10/establish the principle of a duty to state reasons for
         administrative decisions by laying down, inter alia, what those reasons must cover. Moreover, as regards the consequences
         of infringing that obligation, Article 21g(2) of Law No 241/provides that a decision cannot be annulled when it falls
         within the administration’s circumscribed powers and it is clear that its provisions could not have been different from those
         that were adopted. Finally, according to the national court, that latter provision allows, under certain conditions, the possibility
         of supplementing the statement of reasons for an administrative act during proceedings.
      
On the other hand, Article of Law No 241/makes a renvoi in a general manner to ‘principles derived from the Community legal order’, and not specifically to the second paragraph
         of Article TFEU and Article 41(2)(c) of the Charter, referred to by the questions raised or even to other rules of EU
         law concerning the duty to state reasons for acts.
      
Accordingly, it cannot be considered that the provisions referred to by the questions raised have been, as such, made applicable
         directly by Italian law.
      
Likewise, it cannot be considered, in those circumstances, that the renvoi to EU law as a means of regulating purely internal situations is, in this case, unconditional so that the provisions referred
         to by those questions are applicable without limitation to the situation at issue in the main proceedings.
      
In that regard, it should be noted that the Corte dei conti, sezione giurisdizionale per la Regione Siciliana, does not indicate
         at all whether that renvoi has the consequence of setting aside the national rules relating to the duty to state reasons and of replacing them with the
         second paragraph of Article TFEU and Article 41(2)(c) of the Charter, which are addressed, indeed, according to their
         wording, not to the Member States but solely to the EU institutions and bodies, or indeed with other rules of EU law relating
         to the duty to state reasons, even when it is a purely internal situation at issue, in order to treat purely internal situations
         and those governed by EU law in the same manner.
      
Thus, neither the decision to refer nor Law No 241/contains precise enough indications from which it could be deduced
         that, by referring, in Article of Law No 241/1990, to principles deriving from EU law, the national legislature intended,
         in relation to the duty to state reasons, to make a renvoi to the content of the second paragraph of Article TFEU and Article 41(2)(c) of the Charter, or indeed to other rules of
         EU law concerning the duty to state reasons for acts, in order that internal situations and situations falling within EU law
         should be treated in the same way. It cannot therefore be concluded that there is, in this case, a definite interest of the
         Union in preserving uniformity of interpretation of those provisions.
      
It follows from all the foregoing considerations that the Court does not have jurisdiction to answer the questions referred
         by the Corte dei conti, sezione giurisdizionale per la Regione Siciliana, having regard to the subject-matter of those questions.
      
In those circumstances, it is not necessary to examine whether the Corte dei conti, sezione giurisdizionale per la Regione
         Siciliana, is, in the context of the action in the main proceedings, a court or tribunal within the meaning of Article TFEU.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
The Court of Justice of the European Union has no jurisdiction to answer the questions referred by the Corte dei conti, sezione
            giurisdizionale per la Regione Siciliana (Italy), by decision of September 2010.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 