
Avis juridique important
|
61989JJudgment of the Court of May 1990.  -  Commission of the European Communities v Kingdom of Spain.  -  Failure of a Member State to fulfil its obligations - Council Directive 83/183/EEC - National legislation which fails to comply with obligations under Community law.  -  Case C-31/89.  
European Court reports Page I-Pub.RJ Page Pub somm 
Summary
Parties
Operative part
Keywords
++++Member States - Obligations - Implementation of directives - Failure to implement - Justification - Not permissible  ( EEC Treaty, Art . )  
Summary
According to well-established case-law, a Member State may not plead provisions, practices or circumstances existing in its internal legal system in order to justify a failure to comply with obligations and time-limits laid down in Community directives . 
Parties
In Case C-31/Commission of the European Communities, represented by Daniel Calleja, a member of its Legal Department, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of Georgios Kremlis, also a member of the Commission' s Legal Department, Wagner Centre, Kirchberg,  applicant,  v  Kingdom of Spain, represented by Javier Conde de Saro, Director-General for Coordination in matters involving Community Law and Institutions, and Rafael García-Valdecasas y Fernández, abogado del Estado, head of the State Legal Department for relations with the Court of Justice, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the Spanish Embassy, 4-boulevard Emmanuel-Servais,  defendant,  APPLICATION for a declaration that by not granting exemption from value-added tax for permanent imports from another Member State by individuals of motor vehicles for private use, trailers, motor cycles, pleasure boats and private aircraft, contrary to Council Directive 83/183/EEC of March on tax exemptions applicable to permanent imports from a Member State of the personal property of individuals ( Official Journal 1983, L 105, p . ), the Kingdom of Spain has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EEC Treaty,  THE COURT  composed of : O . Due, President, C . N . Kakouris and M . Zuleeg ( Presidents of Chambers ), R . Joliet, J . C . Moitinho de Almeida, G . C . Rodríguez Iglesias and M . Diez de Velasco, Judges,  ( the grounds of the judgment are not reproduced )  hereby :  
Operative part
( ) Declares that by not granting exemption from value-added tax for permanent imports from another Member State by individuals of motor vehicles for private use, trailers, motor cycles, pleasure boats and private aircraft, contrary to Council Directive 83/183/EEC of March on tax exemptions applicable to permanent imports from a Member State of the personal property of individuals, the Kingdom of Spain has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EEC Treaty;  ( ) Orders the Kingdom of Spain to pay the costs .  
Top  
 