
Avis juridique important
|
61990O0068(01)
Order of the President of the Court of May 1990.  -  Yvan Blot and Front national v European Parliament.  -  Inadmissibility.  -  Case C-68/R.  
European Court reports Page I-Summary
Parties
Grounds
Operative part
Keywords
++++Application for interim measures - Conditions of admissibility - Main application dismissed as inadmissible  ( EEC Treaty, Arts and 186; Rules of Procedure, Art . 83() )  
Summary
The dismissal, on grounds of inadmissibility, of the main application to which an application for interim measures relates renders the latter itself inadmissible . 
Parties
In Case C-68/R  Yvan Blot and Front national, represented by SCP J.-P . Claudon and W . de Saint-Just, of the Paris Bar, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the premises of M . Preta, plateau du Kirchberg,  applicants,  v  European Parliament, represented by J . Campinos, Jurisconsult, assisted by R . Bieber, Legal Adviser, and P . Kyst, a member of its Legal Department, acting as Agents,  defendant,  APPLICATION for an order suspending the operation of three measures adopted by the European Parliament concerning, respectively, the calling of a meeting on January of the European Parliament' s Interparliamentary Delegation for relations with Switzerland, the procedure for the appointment of the chairman of that delegation, and the appointment on January of G . Topmann as chairman of the delegation,  The President of the Court of Justice  of the European Communities  makes the following  Order  
Grounds
By an application lodged at the Court Registry on March 1990, Mr Y . Blot, a Member of the European Parliament belonging to the Group of the European Right, and the Front national, a non-profit-making association governed by the French Law of July 1901, represented by its chairman Mr Le Pen, sought the annulment, under Article of the EEC Treaty, of three measures adopted by the European Parliament concerning, respectively, the calling of a meeting on January of the European Parliament' s Interparliamentary Delegation for relations with Switzerland, the procedure for the appointment of the chairman of that delegation, and the appointment on January of G . Topmann as chairman of the delegation .  By a separate document lodged at the Court Registry on the same date, the applicants also applied, pursuant to Article of the EEC Treaty and Article of the Rules of Procedure, for interim measures suspending the operation of the three contested measures until such time as the Court had given its ruling on the main application .  The defendant submitted its written observations on April . The parties presented oral argument on May .  However, by an order of May made pursuant to Article 92() of the Rules of Procedure, the Court dismissed the main application as inadmissible .  The application for interim measures is therefore inadmissible and must be dismissed .  
Operative part
On those grounds,  THE PRESIDENT  hereby orders as follows :  ( ) The application for interim measures is dismissed .  ( ) The applicants are ordered to pay the costs .  Luxembourg, May .  
Top  
 