
Case C-296/Telecom Italia SpA
v
Ministero dell’Economia e delle Finanze
and
Ministero delle Comunicazioni
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Tribunale amministrativo regionale del Lazio)
(Telecommunications services – Directive 97/13/EC – Articles 6, 11, and – Fees and charges for general authorisations and individual licences – Obligation on former holders of exclusive rights – Temporary continuation)
Summary of the Judgment
Approximation of laws – Telecommunications sector – Common framework for general authorisations and individual licences –
            Directive 97/– Fees and charges for general authorisations and individual licences
(European Parliament and Council Directive 97/13, Arts 6, 11, and 25)
Articles 6, 11, and of Directive 97/on a common framework for general authorisations and individual licences in the
         field of telecommunications services preclude a Member State from requiring an operator, formerly the holder of an exclusive
         right to provide public telecommunications services and then the holder of a general authorisation, to pay a pecuniary charge
         corresponding to the amount previously demanded for that exclusive right, for one year from the final date laid down for transposition
         of that directive into national law, namely December 1998. 
      
(see para. 45, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
February (*)
      
(Telecommunications services – Directive 97/13/EC – Articles 6, 11, and – Fees and charges for general authorisations and individual licences – Obligation on former holders of exclusive rights – Temporary continuation)
In Case C‑296/06,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the  Tribunale amministrativo regionale del Lazio (Italy), made
         by decision of May 2006, received at the Court on July 2006, in the proceedings
      
Telecom Italia SpA
v
Ministero dell’Economia e delle Finanze,
Ministero delle Comunicazioni,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of A. Rosas, President of the Chamber, U. Lõhmus, J. Klučka, A. Ó Caoimh and P. Lindh (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer,
Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on October 2007,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Telecom Italia SpA, by F. Satta, F. Lattanzi, C. Tesauro and C. Santacroce, avvocati,
–        the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, assisted by P. Gentili, Avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by E. Traversa and M. Shotter, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on October 2007,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles 11, and of Directive 97/13/EC of the
         European Parliament and of the Council of April on a common framework for general authorisations and individual licences
         in the field of telecommunications services (OJ L 117, p. 15).
      
The reference was made in proceedings between Telecom Italia SpA (‘Telecom Italia’) on the one hand and the Ministero dell’Economia
         e delle Finanze (Ministry of the Economy and Finance) and the Ministero delle Comunicazioni (Ministry of Communications) on
         the other concerning the obligation imposed on Telecom Italia to pay a fee based on a year’s turnover from the final date
         laid down for transposition into national law of Directive 97/13.
      
 Relevant provisions
 Community legislation 
Articles and 11(1) of Directive 97/concerning the fees and charges for general authorisations procedures and individual
         licences respectively provide that the Member States are to ensure that any fees imposed on undertakings as part of authorisation
         procedures seek only to cover the administrative costs incurred in the issue, management, control and, as appropriate, enforcement
         of the system of general authorisations or the applicable individual licences.
      
The general time-limit provided for the entry into force of Directive 97/is set out in the first paragraph of Article thereof, which reads as follows:
      
‘Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directive
         and publish the conditions and procedures attached to authorisations as soon as possible and, in any event, not later than
         December 1997. They shall immediately inform the Commission thereof.’
      
Article of Directive 97/contains a specific provision regarding authorisations existing at the date of its entry into
         force:
      
‘1. Member States shall make all necessary efforts to bring authorisations in force at the date of entry of this Directive
         into line with its provisions before January 1999.
      
2. Where application of the provisions of this Directive results in amendments to the terms of authorisations already in existence,
         Member States may extend the validity of terms, other than those giving special or exclusive rights which have been or are
         to be terminated under Community law, provided that this can be done without affecting the rights of other undertakings under
         Community law, including this Directive. In such cases, Member States shall notify the Commission of the action taken to that
         end and shall state the reasons therefor.
      
3. Without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph 2, obligations in authorisations existing at the date of entry into force
         of this Directive which have not been brought into line by January with the provisions of this Directive shall be inoperative.
      
Where justified, Member States may, upon request, be granted a deferment of that date by the Commission.’
 National legislation
 The Postal and Telecommunications Code
Until the implementation of Directive 97/13, the provision of public telecommunications services in Italy was reserved to
         the State under the first paragraph of Article of the Postal and Telecommunciations Code (Codice postale e delle telecomunicazioni;
         the ‘Codice Postale’),  annexed to Presidential Decree No approving the consolidated act  containing postal, post bank
         and telecommunications legislation   (approvazione del testo unico delle disposizioni legislative in materia postale, di bancoposta
         e di telecomunicazioni) of March (Ordinary Supplement to GURI No of  May 1973). 
      
Article of the Codice Postale provides that ‘concession holders are required to pay the State an annual charge in the
         amount prescribed in the present Decree or in the instrument granting the concession’. That charge was calculated in proportion
         to the gross receipts or profits obtained from the service licensed, less the amounts paid to the operator of the public network.
      
 Presidential Decree No of September Directive 97/was implemented, inter alia, by Presidential Decree No concerning regulations for the implementation of
         Community Directives in the field of telecommunications (regolamento per l’attuazione di direttive comunitarie nel settore
         delle telecomunicazioni) of September (Ordinary Supplement to GURI No of September 1997; ‘Decree No 318/1997’).
         
      
Article 2(3) to (6) of that decree provide as follows:
      
‘3.      Until January 1998, the special and exclusive rights for the provision of voice telephony services and the related installation
         and supply of public telecommunications networks shall be maintained. …
      
4.      The licences for public use and the authorisations referred to in Article 184(1) of the Codice Postale existing at the time
         of the entry into force of these regulations shall be amended, on the initiative of the [national regulatory authority], before
         January 1999, with a view to bringing them into line with the provisions contained herein. 
      
5.      Where application of the provisions of these regulations makes amendments to the terms of existing licences and authorisations,
         terms other than those giving special or exclusive rights which have been abolished or are to be abolished under these regulations,
         shall remain valid, subject to the rights which other undertakings derive, in particular, from Community law.
      
6.      Except for subparagraphs (4) and (5), obligations arising from licences and authorisations existing on the date on which these
         regulations came into force which have not been brought into line with the provisions of the latter shall be void from January
         1999.’
      
Article 6(20) of Decree No 318/provides:
      
‘… the contribution payable by undertakings in respect of the procedures for the grant of individual licences shall cover
         solely the  administrative costs incurred in the preliminary investigation, control of the management of the service and maintenance
         of the conditions imposed for the licences themselves…’
      
Article 21(2) of Decree No 318/reads as follows:
      
‘Unless otherwise provided in these regulations, the provisions in force in the field of telecommunications shall continue
         to apply. In particular,  the provisions referred to in Article of the Codice Postale shall continue to apply, for the
         purposes referred to in Article 6(20) and (21) and pending a decision to the contrary by the [national regulatory authority].’
      
 Law No Article 20(3) of Law No introducing public finance provisions for stabilisation and development (misure di finanza pubblica
         per la stabilizzazione e lo sviluppo) of December (Ordinary Supplement to GURI No of December 1998; ‘Law No
         448/1998’) provides:
      
‘3.      From January 1999, Article of the [Codice Postale] ceases to be applicable to the providers of public telecommunications
         services.’
      
Pursuant to Article 20(4) of that law, Article 21(2) of Decree No 318/has been repealed.
      
 The main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
Telecom Italia, a company incorporated under Italian law, is the former holder of exclusive rights, in the form of an exclusive
         licence, to provide public telecommmunciations services in Italy. It challenges before the Tribunale amministrativo regionale
         del Lazio (Regional Administrative Court of Latium) the continuation, in respect of 1998, of the annual charge provided by
         the Codice Postale, which amounts to approximately EUR million, for which it claims reimbursement. That company claims
         that the opening of the telecommunications market to competition on January gave rise to the abolition of exclusive
         rights in that sector. From that date, the only pecuniary charges applicable to telecommunications undertakings in respect
         of their individual licences were those provided for in Article of Directive 97/13, as confirmed by the Court in Joined
         Cases C-292/and C-293/Albacom and Infostrada [2003] ECR I‑9449.
      
The national court also expresses doubts as to the validity of the annual charge imposed on Telecom Italia for 1998, while
         asking whether Article of Directive 97/13, which contains a transitional provision for authorisations existing on the date
         of the entry into force of that directive, such as that granted to Telecom Italia, might not, however, be interpreted as authorising
         such a charge for that year only. That court is none the less inclined to think, like Telecom Italia, that Article does
         not contain a transitional provision concerning Article of that directive on charges for individual licences and that it
         does not therefore allow the imposition of a pecuniary charge such as the charge in the main proceedings.
      
It is in those circumstances that the Tribunale amministrativo regionale del Lazio decided to stay the proceedings and refer
         the following question to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Is Article 20(3) of Law No 448/consistent with Articles 11, and of Directive 97/13…?’
 The question referred
First of all, it should be noted that, in proceedings brought under Article EC, it is not for the Court to rule on the
         compatibility of national rules with provisions of Community law. On the other hand, the Court is competent to supply the
         national court with all the guidance as to the interpretation of Community law necessary to enable that court to rule on the
         compatibility of the national rules with the provisions of Community law (see, in particular, Case C-130/Lamaire [1994] ECR I-3215, paragraph 10, and Case C-506/Wilson [2006] ECR I‑8613, paragraphs and 35). 
      
In that regard, even if, formally, the national court has limited its question to the interpretation of Articles 11, and
         of Directive 97/13, that fact does not prevent the Court from providing the national court with all the elements of interpretation
         of Community law which may enable it to rule on the case before it, whether or not reference is made thereto in the question
         referred (see, in particular, Case C-329/Alevizos [2007] ECR I-3505, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Accordingly, in so far as it is apparent from the case-file submitted to the Court that Telecom Italia has a general authorisation,
         account should be taken also of Article of Directive 97/relating to general authorisations.
      
Consequently, the question referred must be understood as seeking to ascertain whether Articles and of Directive 97/13,
         read in conjunction with Articles and thereof, preclude a Member State from requiring an operator, formerly the holder
         of an exclusive right to provide public telecommunications services and then the holder of a general authorisation, to pay
         a pecuniary charge such as the charge in the main proceedings, corresponding to the amount previously demanded for the exclusive
         right, for one year from the final date laid down for transposition of that directive into national law, namely December
         1998.
      
 Observations submitted to the Court
Telecom Italia and the Commission of the European Communities submit that such a charge is incompatible with Article of
         Directive 97/as interpreted by the Court and that its continuation for one year from the final date laid down for transposition
         of that directive into national law is not permitted by Article of that directive. In their view, Article permits the
         terms of authorisations existing on the date of the entry into force of Directive 97/to be continued, in so far as those
         conditions do not give special or exclusive rights. However, the obligation to pay the charge in question in the main proceedings
         is the consideration for the grant of an exclusive right. It must therefore be considered to be contrary to Article 22.
      
The Italian Government, for its part, makes a distinction between Article 22(2) of Directive 97/13, which provides that the
         terms giving special or exclusive rights may not be continued after the date of entry into force of that directive, and Article
         22(3) thereof, under which the obligations concerning the authorisations existing on that date may be continued until December
         1998. That government states that the special and exclusive rights were withdrawn on December 1997, in accordance with
         Directive 97/13. It adds that the Italian Republic also exercised the right, conferred by Article 22(3), to maintain certain
         obligations for one year. The payment of the charge imposed by the former holder of exclusive rights falls within those obligations
         and is therefore compatible with the directive.
      
 The Court’s answer 
The Court has previously had the opportunity to examine the compatibility of Directive 97/with an annual charge imposed
         on a telecommunications undertaking and calculated on the basis of a percentage of its turnover in Albacom and Infostrada, cited above. In paragraph of that judgment, the Court held that such a charge is contrary to the objectives sought by
         the Community legislature and goes beyond the common framework established by Directive 97/13. Moreover, it follows from paragraphs
         and of that judgment that such a charge is prohibited by Article of that directive, which provides that the fees
         imposed on undertakings as part of authorisation procedures seek only to cover the administrative costs incurred in the delivery,
         management, review and application of individual licences. Since the fees imposed under Article of that directive are limited
         in the same way, the same prohibition applies on the basis of that article.
      
Pursuant to Article of Directive 97/13, Articles and had to be implemented, like all provisions of that directive,
         not later than December 1997.
      
Article of Directive 97/contains, however, the derogating provisions applicable to the authorisations existing on the
         date of entry into force of that directive, under which those authorisations had to be brought into line with the latter before
         January 1999, in other words not later than one year after the date laid down in Article 25.
      
The question therefore arises whether Article of Directive 97/allows, by way of derogation and for one year only, the
         continuation of a charge such as the charge in the main proceedings as regards the operator to which an exclusive right had
         been granted before the entry into force of that directive.
      
Article allows not only, in subparagraph 1, an additional period of one year, expiring on December 1998, to bring authorisations
         existing on the date of entry into force of Directive 97/into line with its provisions, but in addition provides in subparagraph
         thereof, that the validity of terms linked to existing authorisations may be extended, without prejudice, however, to those
         giving special or exclusive rights and provided that that extension of validity does not affect the rights of other undertakings
         under Community law. Article 22(3) concerns obligations in the authorisations existing on the date of entry into force of
         that directive. That provision, which applies without prejudice to the provisions in Article 22(2), provides that the obligations
         referred to must be brought into line with that directive by January 1999, unless the Member State concerned has, upon request,
         been granted a deferment of that date by the Commission.
      
Article of Directive 97/does not therefore deal explicitly with the charges applicable to telecommunications undertakings
         which are holders of authorisations, be they general authorisations or individual licences. Only Articles and of that
         directive expressly address that issue.
      
Before determining whether Article may none the less be applied to charges such as the charge at issue in the main proceedings,
         it is necessary to interpret that article by reference not only to its wording but also to its objective and scheme in the
         context of Directive 97/taken as a whole.
      
In that regard, recital in the preamble to that directive serves to clarify the objective of Article 22. The Community
         legislature stated in that recital that certain telecommunications licences have been granted by the Member States for periods
         which go beyond January 1999. In order to avoid claims for compensation, it was considered necessary to allow the Member
         States to extend the validity of certain conditions of those licences, in so far as they do not confer special or exclusive
         rights. As regards those rights, without prejudice to authorisations granted by the Commission, they must be withdrawn in
         particular pursuant to Commission Directive 90/388/EEC of June on competition in the markets for telecommunications
         services (OJ L 192, p. 10).
      
The objective of Article of Directive 97/is therefore to avoid litigation, by making it possible for contractual relationships
         entered into between those States and telecommunications undertakings before the entry into force of that directive to continue
         beyond January 1999, while granting the Member States a period only until that date in order to adapt the content of the
         contracts in question to the provisions of that directive.
      
The purpose of Article of Directive 97/13, thus clarified in the light of recital 26, therefore appears to have nothing
         to do with the continuation of a charge connected with a former exclusive right.
      
Analysis of the precise wording of that article supports that finding.
      
First, so far as concerns a Member State which has not obtained an authorisation from the Commission to maintain special or
         exclusive telecommunications rights, Article 22(2) of Directive 97/precludes the continuation of conditions giving such
         rights beyond December 1997. As the Advocate General has pointed out in paragraph of his Opinion, if an exclusive right
         is withdrawn, that withdrawal must generally affect the application of the pecuniary charge which is the consideration for
         it.
      
Secondly, the actual wording of Article 22(3) of Directive 97/makes it clear that that paragraph applies without prejudice
         to the provisions of Article 22(2). Since that subparagraph excludes the terms giving special or exclusive rights, Article
         22(3) cannot refer to obligations laid down in such terms, so that it cannot be understood as allowing them to continue until
         December 1998.
      
Consequently, it must be considered that an obligation taking the form of a charge linked to a former exclusive right does
         not come within the scope of the obligations referred to in Article 22(3) of Directive 97/and such a charge cannot be continued
         beyond December pursuant to Article of that directive.
      
The Italian Government stated at the hearing, however, that the payment of the charge in the case in the main proceedings
         is not linked to the grant of an exclusive right, which has, moreover, been withdrawn. That charge was designed, in fact,
         to facilitate on the part of the Italian Republic the transition towards a competitive system. Since that Member State had
         to abandon the system of exclusive rights which it had set up as well as the resources which that system guaranteed it, the
         continuation of that charge for one year constituted a financial contribution enabling it to adapt gradually to the new system.
         The word ‘obligations’ in Article 22(3) of Directive 97/is distinct from the word ‘terms’ used in Article 22(2) and should
         be read independently of the latter. It thus provides a means for a Member State to impose, for financial reasons, a charge
         such as the charge at issue in the main proceedings until December 1998.
      
In that respect, it should be pointed out that it is for the national court to determine whether the charge at issue in the
         main proceedings, which it is not denied is based on Article of the Codice Postale, is linked to the exclusive right relating
         to the public telecommunications service granted to Telecom Italia before the entry into force of Directive 97/13.
      
Assuming that a charge such as the charge at issue in the main proceedings is not linked to an exclusive right granted before
         the entry into force of Directive 97/13, it must be examined whether such a charge constitutes an obligation within the meaning
         of Article 22(3) of that directive, eligible for the derogation laid down in that provision.
      
In that regard, the Italian Government’s interpretation is based on the premise that the ‘obligations’ referred to in Article
         22(3) are distinct from the ‘terms’ in Article 22(2). The latter notion refers only to the advantages granted to the undertaking
         in its interest, whereas the word ‘obligations’ includes the charges imposed on undertakings, including those imposed, as
         in the case in the main proceedings, solely in the financial interest of the Member State concerned, irrespective of the ‘terms’
         of the authorisation.
      
That analysis cannot, however, be accepted. First, according to the scheme of Article 22(2) and (3), and the use of the word
         ‘terms’, in particular in Articles 3, and of Directive 97/read in conjunction with the annex thereto, in order to describe
         the conditions which may be attached to authorisations, that word covers the notion of ‘obligations’ within the meaning of
         Article 22(3) of that directive. The conditions which may be attached to authorisations as set out in the annex to that directive
         cover many obligations, including the condition in point 4.of that annex, relating to environmental and town and country
         planning requirements.
      
Secondly, only Articles and of Directive 97/deal with the charges applicable to undertakings which hold authorisations
         in the telecommunications services sector (see, to that effect, Albacom and Infostrada, cited above, paragraph 26). As to individual licences, Article 11(1) of that directive provides that the fees imposed by
         the Member States on undertakings which hold those licences seek only to cover the administration costs generated by the work
         involved in implementing those licences (Albacom and Infostrada, paragraph 25, and Joined Cases C-392/and C-422/i-Germany [2006] ECR I-8559, paragraph 28). The same consideration applies to the fees imposed by the Member States for general authorisations
         pursuant to Article of Directive 97/13, which provides in addition for only one other form of financial contribution, namely
         contributions to the provision of universal service.
      
Accordingly, the notion of ‘conditions attached to authorisations’ within the meaning of Directive 97/covers different
         rights and obligations without, however, covering charges imposed on telecommunications undertakings which hold authorisations.
         
      
It follows that the word ‘obligations’ within the meaning of Article 22(3) of Directive 97/does not cover a pecuniary charge,
         such as the charge at issue in the main proceedings, which is imposed on a telecommunications undertaking without any link
         to the conditions of exercise of the authorisation granted to it, for the sole purpose of assisting financially the Member
         State concerned.
      
Having regard to the foregoing considerations, the answer to the question referred must be that Articles 6, 11, and of Directive 97/preclude a Member State from requiring an operator, formerly the holder of an exclusive right to provide
         public telecommunications services and then the holder of a general authorisation, to pay a pecuniary charge such as the charge
         in the main proceedings, corresponding to the amount previously demanded for that exclusive right, for one year from the final
         date laid down for transposition of that directive into national law, namely December 1998.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
Articles 6, 11, and of Directive 97/13/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of April on a common
            framework for general authorisations and individual licences in the field of telecommunications services preclude a Member
            State from requiring an operator, formerly the holder of an exclusive right to provide public telecommunications services
            and then the holder of a general authorisation, to pay a pecuniary  charge such as the charge in the main proceedings, corresponding
            to the amount previously demanded for that exclusive right, for one year from the final date laid down for transposition of
            that directive into national law, namely December 1998.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 