
Order of the Court (Seventh Chamber) of September — Total and Elf Aquitaine v Commission(Case C-495/P)
Appeal — Regulation (EC) No 1/— Competition — Agreements, decisions and concerted practices — Infringement of the principles of conferred powers and of proportionality — Manifestly incorrect interpretation — Infringement of the rights of the defence and of the principles of equity and of the equality of arms — Duty to state reasons
1.                     Appeals — Grounds — Requirement that criticism of the reasoning of the General Court be specific (Art. TFEU; Statute of
            the Court of Justice, Art. 58; Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, Art. 112(1)(c)) (see paras 14, 29, 72, 84)
2.                     Competition — European Union rules — Infringements — Attribution — Parent company and subsidiaries — Economic unit — Criteria
            for assessment — Presumption of a decisive influence exerted by the parent company over its wholly-owned subsidiaries — Evidential
            obligations of the company seeking to rebut that presumption (Art. TFEU) (see paras 26, 28, 31, 36, 42, 57)
3.                     Acts of the institutions — Grounds — Obligation — Scope — Decision imposing fines for the infringement of the competition
            rules and concerning a number or addressees — Attribution of the practices of a subsidiary to its parent company — Requirements
            of explicit grounds (Arts TFEU and 296, second para. TFEU) (see paras 48-49, 51)
4.                     Appeals — Grounds — Review by the Court of the assessment of the facts submitted to the General Court — Possible only where
            the clear sense of the evidence has been distorted (Art. TFEU; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 58, first para.)
            (see para. 52)
5.                     Competition — Fines — Amount — Determination — Deterrent effect — Taking account of the size and overall resources of the
            undertaking on which the fine was imposed (Art. TFEU; Council Regulation No 1/2003, Art. 23) (see para. 80)
Re: 
Appeal brought against the judgment of the General Court (Sixth Chamber, Extended Composition) of July in Case T-190/Total and Elf Aquitaine
 v 
Commission
 by which that Court dismissed the action for partial annulment of Commission Decision C(2006) final of May relating
                  to a proceeding under Article [EC] and Article of the EEA Agreement (Case COMP/F/38.— Hydrogen peroxide and perborate) —
                  Competition — Agreements, decisions and concerted practices — Infringement of the principles of conferred powers and of proportionality —
                  Manifestly incorrect interpretation — Infringement of the rights of the defence and of the principles of equity and of the
                  equality of arms — Duty to state reasons.
               
Operative part 
1.
	The appeal is dismissed.
2.
	Total SA and Elf Aquitaine SA are ordered to pay the costs.
Top  
 