
Case C-283/A.H. Kuipers
v
Productschap Zuivel
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the College van Beroep voor het bedrijfsleven)
(Common organisation of the markets – Milk and milk products – Regulation (EEC) No 804/– National scheme under which dairies withhold deductions from the price payable to dairy farmers or pay price supplements
         to them according to the quality of the milk supplied – Incompatibility)
      
Opinion of Advocate General Kokott delivered on December Judgment of the Court (First Chamber), May Summary of the Judgment
Agriculture — Common organisation of the markets — Functioning — Producer prices — Fixing — Community legislation — Member
            State intervention — Limits — Milk and milk products — National provisions instituting a mechanism reducing the price of milk
            on the basis of quality criteria, favouring only dairy farmers who meet those quality criteria — Not permissible
(Council Regulation No 804/68, as modified by Regulation No 1538/95)
In a sector covered by a common organisation, a fortiori where that organisation is based on a common pricing system, Member
         States can no longer take action, through national provisions taken unilaterally, affecting the machinery of price formation
         at the production and marketing stages established under the common organisation.  They may, however, adopt measures intended
         to remove a distortion of competition, since measures of that kind do not as such affect the fixing of prices but rather seek
         to safeguard the proper working of the machinery for setting prices in order to achieve price levels which serve the interests
         of both producers and consumers. 
      
The machinery of price formation governed by Regulation No 804/on the common organisation of the market in milk and milk
         products, as modified by Regulation No 1538/95, is, however, affected by the system which, whatever its alleged or stated
         objective may be, institutes a mechanism under which:
      
–      on the one hand, dairies are required to withhold deductions from the price of milk delivered to them when that milk does
         not meet certain quality criteria and,
      
–      on the other hand, the amount thus withheld over a given period by all the dairies is aggregated before being redistributed,
         after possible financial adjustments between the dairies, in the form of supplements identical in amount paid by each dairy,
         per kilograms of milk delivered to it during that period, to those dairy farmers alone who have delivered milk meeting
         those quality criteria. 
      
(see paras 42-43, 53, operative part)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
May (*)
      
(Common organisation of the markets – Milk and milk products – Regulation (EEC) No 804/– National scheme under which dairies withhold deductions from the price payable to dairy farmers or pay price supplements
         to them according to the quality of the milk supplied – Incompatibility)
      
In Case C-283/03,
REFERENCE under Article EC for a preliminary ruling made by the College van Beroep voor het bedrijfsleven (Netherlands)
         by decision of June 2003, lodged at the Court on June 2003, in the proceedings
      
A.H. Kuipers
v
Productschap Zuivel,
      
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of P. Jann, President of the Chamber, K. Lenaerts, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, K. Schiemann (Rapporteur) and M. Ilešič,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on October 2004,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Mr Kuipers, by A. Noordhuis, advocaat,
–       Productschap Zuivel and the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster and J. van Bakel, acting as Agents,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by T. van Rijn,  A. Stobiecka-Kuik and H. van Vliet, acting as Agents, assisted
         by   M. van der Woude, advocaat,
      
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on December 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
The reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Regulation (EEC) No 804/of the Council of June
         on the common organisation of the market in milk and milk products  (OJ, English Special Edition (I), p. 176), as
         amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 1538/of June (OJ L 148, p. 17; hereinafter ‘Regulation No 804/68’),
         Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) and Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC).
      
The reference has been made in the course of proceedings between Mr Kuipers and Productschap Zuivel (Dairy Board) regarding
         deductions made by the latter in July and August from the price payable to Mr Kuipers for deliveries of raw milk.
      
 Law
 Community legislation
Article of Regulation No 804/provides:
‘1.      Before August of each year a target price for milk shall be fixed for the Community in respect of the milk year beginning
         in the following calendar year. 
      
…
2.      The target price shall be that price which it is aimed to obtain for the aggregate of producers’ milk sales, on the Community
         market and on external markets, during the milk year. 
      
3.      The target price shall be fixed for milk containing 3.7% fat, delivered to dairy. 
4.      The target price shall be fixed in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 43(2) of the Treaty.’ 
Article of Regulation No 804/provides:
‘Each year at the same time as the target price for milk, and in accordance with the same procedure, the following shall be
         fixed:
      
a) an intervention price for butter; 
b) an intervention price for skimmed milk powder …’. 
Article of Regulation No 804/provides:
‘Save as otherwise provided in this Regulation, Articles to of the Treaty shall apply to the production of and trade
         in the products listed in Article 1.’ 
      
Article of that regulation states as follows:
‘1.      Subject to the provisions of Article 92(2) of the Treaty, aids the amount of which is fixed on the basis of the price or quantity
         of products listed in Article shall be prohibited. 
      
2.      National measures permitting equalisation between the prices of products listed in Article shall also be prohibited.’ 
Article of Regulation (EEC) No 1411/of the Council of June laying down additional rules on the common organisation
         of the market in milk and milk products for products falling within tariff heading No 04.(OJ, English Special Edition (II), p. 412) provides as follows:
      
‘1.  Without prejudice to requirements for the protection of public health as regards milk suitable for human consumption,
         drinking milk, other than raw milk, may be produced in the Community only by milk processors. 
      
Milk used for making such drinking milk shall have been subject to a system of payment varying according to quality.  This
         system must guarantee that milk used as raw material for making drinking milk reaches certain standards of quality, including
         composition. 
      
…
3.      The Council, acting in accordance with the voting procedure laid down in Article 43(2) of the Treaty on a proposal from the
         Commission, shall adopt general rules for the application of paragraph 1. 
      
4.      Detailed rules for the application of paragraph shall be adopted in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article of Regulation (EEC) No 804/68.’ 
      
 Netherlands legislation relating to payment for raw milk adjusted according to its quality
Article of the Law on the Quality of Agricultural Products (Landbouwkwaliteitswet, Staatsblad 1971, p. 371), as amended by the Law of December (Staatsblad 1993, p. 690), permits the adoption of rules on the quality of agricultural products, including milk and milk products, which
         are intended to promote the sales thereof.  Those rules may, inter alia, relate to ‘payment according to the quality of products’.
      
Article 3(1) of the Decree on the Quality of Agricultural Products: raw milk and dairy production (Landbouwkwaliteitsbesluit:
         rauwe melk en zuivelbereiding, Staatsblad 1994, p. 63), as amended by the Regulation of June (Nederlandse Staatscourant 1995, p. 122, hereinafter ‘the Decree on the Quality of Agricultural Products’), provides:
      
‘The Minister may lay down rules for raw milk, heat-treated drinking milk and products made from milk, with regard to:
(a)      … in so far as raw milk is concerned, payment according to the quality;
...
(c)      the obligation for certain affiliated establishments to pay to the COKZ [(Centraal Orgaan voor Kwaliteitsaangelegeheden in
         de Zuivel) (Central Council for Dairy Product Quality Assurance)] deductions imposed and other sums of money in connection
         with the quality of raw milk and the obligation for the COKZ to pay to certain establishments affiliated to it price supplements
         in connection with the quality of raw milk.’
      
According to Article of the Decree on the Quality of Agricultural Products, the Minister may, however, order that the rules
         referred to in Article 3(1) of that decree are to be adopted by byelaw by the management of the Productschap (Product Board),
         a body governed by the Law on the Organisation of Undertakings (Wet op de Bedrijfsorganisatie), which groups undertakings
         by product.
      
The Regulation on the Quality of Agricultural Products: payment for farm milk according to quality (Landbouwkwaliteitsregeling
         uitbetaling van boerderijmelk naar kwaliteit) (Nederlandse Staatscourant 1994, p. 25) was adopted by the Staatssecretaris van Landbouw, Natuurbeheer en Visserij (Minister for Agriculture, Nature
         Conservation and Fisheries).  Article of that regulation confers on the Productschap Zuivel (Dairy Board, hereinafter the
         ‘Productschap’) authority to lay down, by way of byelaws, the rules relating to payment according to quality for farm milk
         concerning, inter alia, ‘the withholding of a deduction and the payment of a quality supplement’.
      
The management of the Productschap adopted the Byelaw on the Quality of Agricultural Products 1994: Payment for farm milk
         according to quality (Landbouwkwaliteitsverordening 1994, Uitbetaling van boerderijmelk naar kwaliteit, PBO blad 1994, afl. No 9; hereinafter the ‘byelaw’).  Article 2(1) of that byelaw states as follows:
      
‘‘The recipient of farm milk shall pay the dairy farmers concerned for that milk according to the quality, having due regard
         to the provisions set out in or pursuant to this byelaw.’
      
Article 10(1) of the byelaw provides: 
‘An assessment shall be attributed by the milk monitoring station to the results of the quality testing, in accordance with
         a system comprising standards, deduction points and other deductions to be imposed, adopted by the chairman after hearing
         the views of the COKZ.’
      
According to Article of the byelaw:
‘1.      The recipients of farm milk shall, in respect of a fixed period of weeks, pay a quality supplement to dairy farmers who
         in the period in question are assigned in total not more than one deduction point and whose milk is found not to contain any
         antibiotic ...
      
2.      The amount of the quality supplement shall be fixed per kilogrammes of milk for each region determined by the chairman,
         after hearing the views of the COKZ, in such a way that the total amount of quality supplements per period is the same or
         approximately the same as the total amount of deductions withheld.’
      
By decision of February 1995, the president of the Productschap designated the entire territory of the Netherlands as a
         region within the meaning of Article 11(2) of the byelaw.
      
Article of that byelaw provides:
‘For each sampling period, the recipient of farm milk shall withhold, on the basis of the total number of deduction points
         assigned, a deduction to be determined by the chairman after hearing the views of the COKZ, in respect of the total quantity
         of farm milk delivered in that period by the dairy farmer concerned, as well as any deduction(s) in respect of individual
         deliveries on account of the presence of antibiotics.’
      
The Decree on the determination of frequency and assessment of results of quality testing (Besluit vaststelling frequentie
         en beoordeling resultaten kwaliteitsonderzoek), as amended by the Decrees of July and February 1995, adopted by
         the president of the Productschap, lays down, inter alia, the deductions to be imposed.
      
In their written observations, the Netherlands Government and the Productschap submit in that regard that the deduction points
         are applied according to the extent to which the milk delivered differs from the standard, the deduction itself being set
         at NLG 0.per kilogramme of milk and per point.  By way of derogation from this scale, a deduction of NLG 0.is applied
         per kilogramme of milk delivered which has been shown to contain antibiotics.
      
That Government and the Productschap pointed out, in the same way, that in order to allow the COKZ to calculate the amount
         of the quality supplement per kilogrammes of milk delivered, at the end of a sampling period the dairies supply it, per
         milk producer, with the information relating to the quantities of milk delivered, the deduction points and amounts of deductions
         made during that period.  After having made that calculation, the COKZ informs each dairy of the total amount of quality supplements
         which it is required to pay.  Where the amount of deductions retained by a dairy is greater than the amount of supplements
         which it must pay, it transfers the difference to the COKZ, whilst the latter undertakes to repay the amounts thus collected
         to the dairies which are required to pay an amount of supplements above the amount of the deductions which they have retained.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Mr Kuipers is a dairy farmer in the Netherlands.  After various deliveries to the De Kievit dairy, the latter informed him,
         by letters of and July and and August 1995, that, given the presence of an antibiotic in the milk delivered,
         it would be making a deduction from the price to be paid for those deliveries at a rate of NLG 0.per kilogramme, in accordance
         with Article of the byelaw.
      
As the administrative appeal brought by Mr Kuipers against that decision was dismissed by the COKZ, he contested the position
         adopted by it before the Arrondissementsrechtbank te Groningen (District Court, Groningen).  By decision of April 1999,
         that court declared that it did not have jurisdiction to hear the action.
      
The latter decision was overturned on appeal by the Raad van State (Council of State) which, by judgment of May 2000, also
         annulled the decisions adopted by the COKZ and ordered that Mr Kuiper’s initial claim be transferred to the Productschap,
         which alone was competent to deal with it.
      
In that judgment, the Raad van State stated, inter alia, that ‘under the [byelaw] …, a dairy is entrusted, in Article
         12, with the task of withholding a deduction in respect of the total quantity of farm milk delivered by a dairy farmer in
         a particular period … and, in Article 11, it is likewise required to pay a quality supplement.  However, according to the
         broad logic of that byelaw, the decisions concerning such payments and deductions must be attributed to the [Productschap].
         The byelaw was adopted by the management of the [Productschap] and the obligations laid down in it are imposed on a dairy
         by that management. It follows from Article that the chairman of the Productschap determines the deduction to be withheld.
         The system comprising standards and deductions to be imposed was also adopted by the chairman.  A dairy, as a contracting
         party on the market in dairy products, merely provides financial and administrative assistance.  It does not have the public-law
         authority to determine the legal status (rights and/or obligations) of other persons subject to the law’.
      
By decision of December 2000, the Productschap held that Mr Kuiper’s claim was not well founded.  Mr Kuipers then appealed
         against that decision to the College van Beroep voor het bedrijfsleven (Administrative Court for Trade and Industry).  
      
That court takes the view, firstly, that the withholding of deductions by the De Kievit dairy on the amounts due to Mr Kuipers
         must be attributed to the Productschap.
      
It considers, secondly, that the Netherlands legislation on the payment for raw milk adjusted according to its quality does
         not infringe Council Regulation (EEC) No 2377/of June laying down a Community procedure for the establishment of
         maximum residue limits of veterinary medicinal products in foodstuffs of animal origin (OJ L 224, p. 1), or Council Directive
         92/46/EEC of June laying down the health rules for the production and placing on the market of raw milk, heat-treated
         milk and milk-based products (OJ L 268, p. 1), or Council Directive 92/47/EEC of June on the conditions for granting
         temporary and limited derogations from specific Community health rules on the production and placing on the market of milk
         and milk-based products (OJ L 268, p. 33).  In its opinion, that Community legislation does not preclude raw milk which
         complies with the standards thus set from being differentiated for the purpose of determining the price payable to the producer.
      
Nor, finally, in the view of the national court, does that national legislation infringe Regulation No 1411/71.  It considers
         that Article thereof requires Member States to put into effect a system of payment varying according to quality with regard
         to milk used to make drinking milk and neither the letter nor the spirit of that provision permits the conclusion that its
         aim, namely to make available high-quality products for consumption, could not also be achieved by national systems of payment
         varying according to quality applicable to milk intended for the manufacture of other milk-based products.
      
However, the College van Beroep voor het bedrijfsleven is doubtful as to the compatibility of that national legislation with
         Regulation No 804/given, on the one hand, the effect which that could have on the system of common prices laid down by
         that regulation and, on the other hand, the fact that that national legislation could bring about an equalisation between
         the prices of milk products prohibited by Article 24(2) of that regulation, or, as is prohibited under Article 24(1), institute
         aid determined by reference to the price or quantity of milk delivered.
      
In the same way, the national court is uncertain whether the supplements instituted by that national legislation constitute
         aid within the meaning of Article of the Treaty and whether that legislation should, on that basis, have been notified
         to the Commission as provided for by Article 93(3) of the Treaty.
      
It was in those circumstances that the College van Beroep voor het bedrijfsleven decided to stay proceedings and to refer
         the following questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Is a national system of deductions and supplements based on the quality of raw milk delivered to the dairy, such as that at
         issue, consistent with Regulation (EEC) No 804/on the common organisation of the market in milk and milk products and in
         particular with the prohibition of “equalisation between the prices” in Article 24(2) … ?
      
2.      Is a national system of supplements based on the quality of raw milk delivered to the dairy, such as that at issue, consistent
         with the prohibition of aid in Article 24(1) of Regulation (EEC) No 804/68?
      
3.      If Question is answered in the affirmative, is such a national system to be regarded as aid the grant of which must be notified
         beforehand to the Commission under Article 93(3) of the EC Treaty … ?’ 
      
 The order in which the questions must be examined
As emerges from the questions referred by the national court, the latter is requesting an examination of the national system
         at issue in the main proceedings in the light of various provisions of Community law.
      
In that regard, it is important to note that, in the event of proceedings relating to an agricultural sector governed by a
         common organisation of the market, the problem raised must first be examined from that point of view having regard to the
         precedence necessitated by Article 38(2) of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article 32(2) EC) for the specific provisions
         adopted in the context of the common agricultural policy over the general provisions of the Treaty relating to the establishment
         of the common market (Case 177/McCarren [1979] ECR 2161, paragraph 9). 
      
The application of that principle to this case means that consideration should first be given to the first and second questions,
         which relate to the system of common prices instituted by Regulation No 804/and to Article 24(1) and (2) thereof, provisions
         which both form an integral part of the common organisation of the market instituted by that regulation (see, by analogy,
         McCarren, cited above, paragraph 10). 
      
This method of dealing with the questions is necessary also in a separate respect.  By virtue of Article of the EC Treaty
         (now, after amendment, Article EC), the provisions of Title VI, Chapter thereof, relating to rules on competition, are
         applicable to production of and trade in agricultural products only to the extent determined by the Council within the framework
         of measures adopted for the organisation of agricultural markets.  In that regard, Article of Regulation No 804/provides
         that, save as otherwise provided in that regulation, Articles to of the EC Treaty (now Article EC) are to apply to
         the production of and trade in the products covered by that regulation.  It follows from Article that, although Articles
         to of the Treaty are fully applicable to the milk and milk products sector, their application nevertheless remains subordinate
         to the provisions governing the common organisation of the market established by the regulation.  In other words, recourse
         by a Member State to the provisions of Articles to on aid cannot receive priority over the provisions of the regulation
         on the organisation of that sector of the market (see, by analogy, McCarren, paragraph 11).  
      
It follows that the potential need to examine the third question, which seeks to assess the national system at issue in the
         main proceedings in the light of Articles to of the Treaty, is subordinate to the answer which will be given to the
         first two questions of the national court.
      
 The first question
As can be seen, inter alia, from the grounds for the order for reference, the first question seeks to determine, firstly,
         whether the system of common prices instituted by Regulation No 804/precludes a national system such as that described
         in paragraphs to of the present judgment (hereinafter ‘the national system at issue in the main proceedings’) which provides
         that dairies retain deductions from the price of milk payable to dairy farmers or pay supplements to them according to the
         quality of the raw milk that they deliver and, secondly, whether Article 24(2) of that regulation must be interpreted as meaning
         that such a national system constitutes a measure permitting ‘equalisation between the prices of products listed in Article
         1’ of that regulation which is prohibited by Article 24(2).
      
 The first part of the first question
With regard to the first part of the first question, relating to the scope of the system of common prices instituted by Regulation
         No 804/68, it should be observed at the outset, as the Advocate General noted in point of her Opinion, that it is settled
         case-law that, where there is a regulation on the common organisation of the markets in a given sector, the Member States
         are under an obligation to refrain from taking any measures which might undermine or create exceptions to it.  Rules which
         interfere with the proper functioning of a common organisation of the markets are also incompatible with such common organisation,
         even if the matter in question has not been exhaustively regulated by it (see, inter alia, Case C-1/Compassion in World Farming [1998] ECR I-1251, paragraph 41, and the case-law there cited).
      
Submitting that the rules under the national system at issue in the main proceedings have the sole aim of encouraging dairy
         farmers to deliver only high‑quality milk so as to help its sale, however, the Netherlands Government and the Productschap
         rely on settled case‑law of the Court according to which the establishment of a common organisation of the agricultural markets
         pursuant to Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) does not have the effect of exempting agricultural
         producers from any national provisions intended to attain objectives other than those covered by the common organisation,
         even though such provisions may, by affecting the conditions of production, have an impact on the volume or the cost of national
         production and therefore on the operation of the common market in the sector concerned (see Joined Cases 141/to 143/Holdijk and Others [1982] ECR 1299, paragraph 12; Case 118/Nertsvoederfabriek Nederland [1987] ECR 3883, paragraph 12; and Case C-309/Annibaldi [1997] ECR I-7493, paragraph 20).
      
The Netherlands Government and the Productschap point out, more particularly, that the Court has, when faced with national
         measures on the quality of products containing a prohibition on the production of cheese of a quality other than that laid
         down by the national legislation, accepted that, in the absence of any rule of Community law on the quality of cheese products,
         the Member States retain the power to apply rules of that kind to cheese producers established within their territory (Case
         237/Jongeneel Kaas and Others [1984] ECR 483, paragraphs to 14).
      
Furthermore, the Netherlands Government and the Productschap reiterate that the target price referred to in Article of Regulation
         No 804/is a political objective at Community level and is not a guarantee to all producers in every Member State that they
         will earn an income corresponding to the target price (Case C-137/Milk Marque and National Farmers’ Union [2003] ECR I-7975, paragraph 88). 
      
It must, however, be stated that the legal principles thus referred to by the Netherlands Government and the Productschap
         in no way bring into question the fact that one of the main objectives of the common organisation of the market in the milk
         and milk products sector instituted by Regulation No 804/is to ensure that milk producers can obtain a price for that product
         in the region of the target price and that the mechanisms instituted by the regulation and designed to achieve that end –
         among which, in particular, is a system of intervention prices, in accordance with Article of that regulation, for certain
         derived products, as well as import levies and export refunds – are subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the Community
         (see, to that effect, Case 10/Toffoli and Others [1979] ECR 3301, paragraph 11).
      
Nor are the legal principles referred to by the Netherlands Government and the Productschap such as to bring into question
         the assessment that, in a sector covered by a common organisation, a fortiori where that organisation is based on a common pricing system, Member States can no longer take action, through national provisions
         taken unilaterally, affecting the machinery of price formation at the production and marketing stages established under the
         common organisation (see Toffoli and Others, cited above, paragraph 12; Case 166/Commission v Italy [1984] ECR 459, paragraph 5; Case 127/Commission v Greece [1988] ECR 3333, paragraph 8; and Milk Marque and National Farmers’ Union, cited above, paragraph 63).
      
As the Netherlands Government and the Productschap point out, the Court has held that national measures intended to remove
         a distortion of competition resulting from the abuse of the dominant position occupied by an agricultural cooperative on the
         national market by reducing the market power of that cooperative and its ability to increase the price of milk charged by
         member producers beyond levels judged to be competitive cannot be considered measures affecting the machinery of price formation
         under the common organisation within the meaning of the case-law cited at paragraph of this judgment.  Measures of that
         kind do not as such affect the fixing of prices but rather seek to safeguard the proper working of the machinery for setting
         prices in order to achieve price levels which serve the interests of both producers and consumers (Milk Marque and National Farmers’ Union, paragraphs 64, and 86). 
      
However, in the present case the view must be taken that, unlike the measures at issue in the case leading to the Milk Marque and National Farmers’ Union judgment, or prohibitions on the production of cheese not complying with certain quality standards in relation to which the
         Court gave judgment in Jongeneel Kaas and Others, cited above, the national system at issue in the main proceedings does indeed affect the machinery of price formation under
         the common organisation, whatever may be its alleged or stated objective.  That system requires each dairy sometimes to withhold
         deductions from the price normally payable to the dairy farmer when it appears that the milk delivered does not meet certain
         quality criteria, and sometimes to pay to the farmer, when the milk does satisfy those criteria, a supplement per kilogrammes
         of milk delivered in addition to the price normally payable to that farmer and financed from all the deductions withheld by
         the Netherlands dairies because of deliveries of lower-quality milk.
      
In so doing, that system therefore has the effect of determining in advance certain factors which affect the definitive setting
         of the price to be paid by the dairy to each dairy farmer who delivers milk to it.
      
Furthermore, as the Court has already held, the essential aim of the machinery of the common organisation of the market in
         milk and milk products is to achieve price levels at the production and wholesale stages which take into account both the
         interests of Community production as a whole in the relevant sector and those of consumers and which guarantee market supplies
         without encouraging overproduction (see Joined Cases 36/and 71/Irish Creamery Milk Suppliers Association and Others [1981] ECR 735, paragraph 20, and Milk Marque and National Farmers’ Union, paragraph 85). 
      
The payment of supplements such as those laid down by the national system at issue in the main proceedings to all dairy farmers
         who have delivered standard-quality milk in the Netherlands is, inter alia, likely to harm those objectives by conferring
         an advantage on those farmers.  Moreover, it should be noted in that regard that the target price referred to in Article of Regulation No 804/is fixed by reference to a standard type of milk accepted as typical of Community production (Case
         179/Bozzetti [1985] ECR 2301, paragraph 33).
      
Furthermore, as the Commission has rightly pointed out, the national system at issue in the main proceedings disturbs the
         price mechanism to the extent that, with regard to milk which does not meet certain criteria and which, therefore, may be
         less suitable for further treatment and be of less use to the dairies, it provides for a deduction from the price which does
         not, however, benefit the dairies but the dairy farmers who have delivered milk of normal quality, thus requiring the dairies
         to bear the extra costs caused by the lower quality of the milk which they have received.
      
It should also be noted that the functioning of a common organisation of the markets and in particular the formation of producer
         prices must in principle be governed by the general Community provisions as laid down in general rules amended annually, with
         the result that any specific interference with this functioning is strictly limited to the cases for which express provision
         has been made (Case 77/Cucchi [1977] ECR 987, paragraph 31).
      
With regard, in that connection, to the fact that Article 5(1) of Regulation No 1411/provides that milk used by milk processors
         for making drinking milk is to have been subject to a system of payment varying according to quality, it should be noted that
         the implementation of that provision was, as is clear from paragraph of that article, subject to the later adoption by the
         Council of general rules for the application of paragraph thereof.  Such rules have, as the Commission has rightly pointed
         out, never been adopted by the Council.
      
It is indeed possible to discern in Article of Regulation No 1411/the intention of the Community legislature to institute
         such a pricing system with regard to milk used for making drinking milk, which, as is clear from the third recital in the
         preamble to that regulation, has great importance as a basic foodstuff for the whole population and is subject to special
         quality requirements. 
      
However, it appears that, failing adoption of Community implementing measures under Article 5(3) of that regulation, such
         a system, which unlike the national system at issue in the main proceedings, would in addition have concerned only milk intended
         to be used to make drinking milk and not other milk products, could not have been implemented.
      
It follows from the foregoing that, as the Commission and Mr Kuipers have rightly submitted, the answer to the first part
         of the first question should be that the common pricing system which forms the basis of the common organisation of the market
         in milk and milk products instituted by Regulation No 804/prohibits Member States from unilaterally adopting provisions
         affecting the machinery of price formation at the production and marketing stages established under the common organisation.
         That is the case with regard to a system such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which, whatever its alleged or stated
         objective may be, institutes a mechanism under which:
      
–       on the one hand, dairies are required to withhold deductions from the price of milk delivered to them when that milk does
         not meet certain quality criteria and,
      
–       on the other hand, the amount thus withheld over a given period by all the dairies is aggregated before being redistributed,
         after possible financial adjustments between the dairies, in the form of supplements identical in amount paid by each dairy,
         per kilogrammes of milk delivered to it during that period, to those dairy farmers alone who have delivered milk meeting
         those quality criteria.
      
 The second part of the first question
Since the answer to the first part of the first question indicates that the pricing system instituted by Regulation No 804/precludes the establishment of a national system such as that at issue in the main proceedings, it is not necessary to consider
         further whether Article 24(2) of that regulation also precludes such a system or, therefore, to answer the second part of
         that question.
      
 The second question
By its second question, the national court essentially asks whether Article 24(1) of Regulation No 804/68, which prohibits
         aid the amount of which is fixed on the basis of the price or quantity of products listed in Article of that regulation,
         precludes the institution of a national system, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which provides for payment
         of supplements to certain dairy farmers.
      
It follows from the answer to the first part of the first question that the pricing system instituted by that regulation precludes
         the establishment of such a national system.  In those circumstances, it is also unnecessary to answer the second question.
      
 The third question
By its third question, the national court essentially asks whether Articles and 93(3) of the Treaty are to be interpreted
         as meaning that supplements paid to dairy farmers on the terms laid down by the national system at issue in the main proceedings
         constitute State aid within the meaning of the first of those provisions, which must therefore be notified to the Commission
         in accordance with the second of those provisions.
      
Having regard to the considerations set out in paragraphs to of this judgment and the answer given to the first part
         of the first question, it is sufficient to note that having recourse to Articles to of the Treaty cannot affect the
         need for Member States to observe the rules on the common organisation of the market in the milk and milk products sector,
         with the result that it is not necessary to answer the third question.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court.  Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the
         costs of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
The common pricing system which forms the basis of the common organisation of the market in milk and milk products instituted
            by Regulation (EEC) No 804/of the Council of June on the common organisation of the market in milk and milk products,
            as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 1538/of June 1995,  prohibits Member States from unilaterally adopting provisions
            affecting the machinery of price formation at the production and marketing stages established under the common organisation.
            That is the case with regard to a system such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which, whatever its alleged or stated
            objective may be, institutes a mechanism under which:
–       on the one hand, dairies are required to withhold deductions from the price of milk delivered to them when that milk does
            not meet certain quality criteria and,
–       on the other hand, the amount thus withheld over a given period by all the dairies is aggregated before being redistributed,
            after possible financial adjustments between the dairies, in the form of supplements identical in amount paid by each dairy,
            per kilogrammes of milk delivered to it during that period, to those dairy farmers alone who have delivered milk meeting
            those quality criteria. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Dutch.
      
Top  
 