
Joined Cases C-266/to C-270/04, C-276/and C-321/to C-325/Distribution Casino France SAS, formerly Nazairdis SAS, and Others
v
Caisse nationale de l’organisation autonome d’assurance vieillesse des travailleurs non salariés des professions industrielles
            et commerciales (Organic)
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Tribunal des affaires de sécurité sociale de Saint-Étienne)
(Concept of aid – Tax assessed on the basis of sales area – Hypothecation of the tax revenue)
Opinion of Advocate General Stix-Hackl delivered on July Judgment of the Court (First Chamber), October Summary of the Judgment
1.     State aid – Proposed aid – Prohibition of implementation before the Commission’s final decision – Scope – Obligations of national
            courts
(Arts 87(1) EC and 88(2) and (3) EC)
2.     State aid – Provisions of the Treaty – Scope – Taxes – Exclusion except in respect of taxes financing aid – Tax coupled with
            exemptions allegedly constituting aid – Lack of hypothecation of the tax to the exemption from that tax – Excluded
(Arts 87(1) EC and 88(3) EC)
3.     State aid – Definition – Measures financed by an allegedly unlawful tax – Lack of hypothecation of that tax to the measures
            concerned – Excluded – Specific case
(Arts 87(1) EC and 88(3) EC)
1.     According to Article 88(3) EC, the Commission is to be informed of any plans to grant or alter aid. If it considers that any
         such plan is not compatible with the common market, it is without delay to initiate the procedure provided for in Article
         88(2) EC, and the Member State concerned may not put its proposed measures into effect until that procedure has resulted in
         a final decision. An aid measure within the meaning of Article 87(1) EC which is put into effect in infringement of the obligations
         arising from Article 88(3) EC is unlawful. It is for the national courts to uphold the rights of the persons concerned in
         the event of a possible breach by the national authorities of the prohibition on putting aid into effect, taking all the consequential
         measures under national law as regards both the validity of decisions giving effect to aid measures and the recovery of the
         financial support granted.
      
(see paras 29-30)
2.     Taxes do not fall within the scope of the Treaty provisions concerning State aid unless they constitute the method of financing
         an aid measure, so that they form an integral part of that measure. If a tax effectively constitutes an integral part of an
         aid measure within the meaning of Article 87(1) EC, disregard on the part of the national authorities of the obligations arising
         from Article 88(3) EC affects not only the lawfulness of the aid measure but also that of the tax which constitutes the method
         of financing it.
      
For a tax to be regarded as forming an integral part of an aid measure, it must be hypothecated to the aid measure under the
         relevant national rules, in the sense that the revenue from the tax is necessarily allocated for the financing of the aid.
         In the event of such hypothecation, the revenue from the tax has a direct impact on the amount of the aid and, consequently,
         on the assessment of the compatibility of that aid with the common market. There is no hypothecation of a tax to aid which
         is constituted by an exemption from payment of that tax in favour of certain categories of undertakings, because a tax cannot
         be hypothecated to such an exemption from payment. Application of a tax exemption and its extent do not depend on the tax
         revenue. Thus businesses liable to pay a tax cannot rely on the argument that the exemption enjoyed by other businesses constitutes
         State aid in order to avoid payment of that tax. Accordingly, even if the tax exemption for some undertakings constitutes
         an aid measure within the meaning of Article 87(1) EC, the possible illegality of that aid is not such as to affect the legality
         of the tax itself, so that businesses which are liable to pay the tax cannot plead the possible illegality of the exemption
         before the national courts in order to avoid payment of that tax or to obtain reimbursement.
      
(see paras 34-35, 40-44)
3.     There is no hypothecation of the tax to the measures financed by that tax, which is necessary for that tax to be regarded
         as an item of State aid, in the case of a cessation payment to some economic operators, since the amount actually paid in
         this respect is not dependent on the revenue from the tax, but is laid down, under a decree, within the limits determined
         by ministerial order on the basis of factors which characterise the situation of each applicant, in particular the state of
         his resources and his charges. Likewise, there is no hypothecation of the tax to the financing of basic old-age insurance
         schemes for certain professional groups, since, by virtue of the detailed rules according to which the contribution of the
         tax to that financing is determined, the tax revenue does not directly affect the amount of the advantage granted to the recipient
         schemes, which, however, do not carry out an economic activity. There is likewise no hypothecation as regards the allocation
         of a part of the tax revenue to an intervention fund and a trade committee, since those bodies and the competent Ministers
         have a discretion as regards that allocation.
      
(see paras 46, 48-49, 54-56)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Concept of aid – Tax assessed on the basis of sales area – Hypothecation of the tax revenue)
In Joined Cases C-266/to C-270/04, C-276/and C-321/to C‑325/04,
REFERENCES for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Tribunal des affaires de sécurité sociale de Saint-Étienne
         (Cases C‑266/to C-270/and C‑276/04) and from the Cour d’appel de Lyon (Cases C-321/to C-325/04) (France), made by
         decisions of April and February 2004, received at the Court on 24, and June and July 2004, in the proceedings
      
Distribution Casino France SAS, formerly Nazairdis SAS (Case C‑266/04),
      
Jaceli SA (Case C-267/04),
      
Komogo SA (Case C-268/and Case C-324/04),
Tout pour la maison SARL (Case C-269/and Case C-325/04),
      
Distribution Casino France SAS (Case C-270/04),
      
Bricorama France SAS (Case C-276/04),
      
Distribution Casino France SAS (Case C-321/04),
      
Société Casino France, successor to IMQEF SA, successor to JUDIS SA (Case C-322/04),
Dechrist Holding SA (Case C-323/04),
      
v
Caisse nationale de l’organisation autonome d’assurance vieillesse des travailleurs non salariés des professions industrielles
            et commerciales (Organic),
      
 
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of K. Schiemann, President of the Fourth Chamber, acting for the President of the First Chamber, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues,
         K. Lenaerts (Rapporteur), E. Juhász and M. Ilešič, Judges,
      
Advocate General: C. Stix-Hackl,
Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on June 2005,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Nazairdis SAS, Jaceli SA, Komogo SA, Tout pour la maison SARL, Distribution Casino France SAS, Distribution Casino France
         SAS, Société Casino France, successor to IMQEF SA, successor to JUDIS SA, and Dechrist Holding SA, by E. Meier and C. Cassan,
         avocats,
      
–       Bricorama France SAS, by B. Geneste, O. Davidson and C. Medina, avocats,
–       Caisse nationale de l’organisation autonome d’assurance vieillesse des travailleurs non salariés des professions industrielles
         et commerciales (Organic), by R. Waquet, avocat,
      
–       the French Government, by G. de Bergues and S. Ramet, acting as Agents,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by C. Giolito, acting as Agent,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on July 2005,
gives the following
Judgment
These references for a preliminary ruling concern the interpretation of Articles EC and EC.
The references have been made in the course of proceedings in which the lawfulness of the French tax to support the trade
         and craft sectors was challenged.
      
 National law
 The tax to support the trade and craft sectors
Article 3(2) of Law No 72-of July establishing measures for certain categories of elderly traders and craftsmen
         (Journal officiel de la Republique française (Official Gazette of the French Republic) ‘JORF’), July 1972, p. 7419) establishes a tax to support the trade and craft
         sectors (Taxe d’aide au commerce et à l’artisanat, hereinafter ‘the TACA’).
      
The TACA is a progressive tax borne directly by retail stores in France which have a sales area exceeding mand an annual turnover in excess of EUR 000. The tax rates progress in step with annual turnover per m2.
      
At the time of the events concerning the cases at issue in the main proceedings, the TACA was collected by the Caisse nationale
         de l’organisation autonome d’assurance vieillesse des travailleurs non salariés des professions industrielles et commerciales
         (National Independent Old-Age Insurance Fund for Self-Employed Persons in Manufacturing and Trading Occupations (hereinafter
         ‘Organic’).
      
 The use to which the revenue from the TACA is put
 The cessation payment
Under Articles to of Law No 72-657, the revenue from the TACA was first earmarked for financing special compensatory
         cessation aid for certain traders and craftsmen.
      
Article of Law No 81-of December (JORF, December 1981, p. 3539), the Finance Law for 1982, as amended
         by Law No 95-of February (JORF, February 1995, p. 1742) and by Law No 2002-of December (JORF, December 2002, p. 22025), replaced that special compensatory aid with a cessation payment. That article provides:
      
‘Traders and craftsmen who have been insured for years or more under the old-age insurance schemes for persons in the craft
         sector and in manufacturing and trading occupations shall be eligible, upon request and provided that their financial means
         do not exceed a ceiling determined by decree, to receive aid from the funds of those schemes if they are:
      
(a)      over the age of and permanently cease all activity;
…’.
Article of Decree No 82-of April (JORF, April 1982, p. 1035), as amended by Decree No 91-of November
         (JORF, November 1991), lays down the conditions governing the award of the cessation payment. According to that provision,
         the local committee is to lay down the amount of the payment within the limits determined by ministerial order on the basis
         of the ‘factors which characterise the situation of each applicant, in particular the state of his resources and obligations’.
         
      
Article of the Ministerial Order of August (JORF, August 1996, p. 12940), as amended by the Order of September
         converting into euro certain amounts given in francs (JORF, September 2001, p. 14495), states that ‘the amount of
         the payment must be between EUR and EUR for a household, and between EUR and EUR for one person’.
      
 Other uses to which the TACA is put
Since the TACA was established, the revenue from it has increased considerably on account of the expansion of the market share
         held by the retail and distribution industry and the growth in the surface area of commercial establishments in France.
      
The revenue surplus from the TACA was allocated to basic old-age insurance schemes for self-employed persons in the craft
         sector and for self-employed persons in manufacturing and trading occupations, to the Fonds d’intervention pour la sauvegarde
         de l’artisanat et du commerce (Intervention Fund for the Support of Crafts and Trade) (hereinafter ‘Fisac’) and to the Comité
         professionnel de la distribution des carburants (Fuel Distributors’ Trade Committee) (hereinafter ‘the CPDC’).
      
–       Allocation to old-age insurance schemes
Article 40-II of Law No 96-of December on social security funding for (JORF, December 1996, p. 19369)
         added a paragraph (6) to Article L. 633-of the Social Security Code, which provides that a proportion of the revenue from
         the TACA is to be allocated for financing the basic old-age insurance schemes for self-employed persons in the craft sector
         and for self-employed persons in manufacturing and trading occupations. The amount in question is distributed, in proportion
         to their respective accounting deficit, between Organic and the Caisse nationale d’assurances vieillesse des artisans (National
         Old-Age Insurance Fund for Craftsmen) (hereinafter ‘Cancava’).
      
The amount of the TACA allocated for financing the insurance schemes in question is determined each year by an Interministerial
         Order.
      
That mechanism for financing the basic old-age insurance schemes was abolished by Article 35-IV of Law No 2002-1575.
–       Allocation to Fisac
Article of Decree No 95-of October (JORF, October 1995, p. 15808) on the use to which the revenue from the
         TACA is to be put, provides that a proportion of the revenue surplus from the TACA is to be paid into a special Fisac account.
      
Under Article of that decree, Fisac finances, on the one hand, collective projects with the aim of maintaining and adapting
         the trade and craft sectors for the purposes of retaining business activity in particular geographical or occupational areas
         and socially beneficial local services and, on the other hand, the transfer and restructuring of undertakings in the trade
         and craft sectors with an annual turnover not exceeding amounts determined by order of the minister responsible for the trade
         and craft sectors.
      
Under Article of that decree, ‘decisions [to grant aid measures] shall be made by the minister responsible for the trade
         and craft sectors in the light of an opinion delivered by [a] committee’ set up by that same decree.
      
–       Allocation to the CPDC
The CPDC was created by Decree No 91-of March (JORF, March 1991, p. 3874), which was amended by Decree No 98-of March (JORF, March 1998, p. 3515) and by Decree No 2001-of November (JORF, November 2001, p. 18016)
         (hereinafter ‘Decree 91-284). In accordance with Article of Decree No 91-284, the CPDC is entrusted with:
      
‘1.      drawing up and implementing the action programmes for reforming the fuel distribution network, improving its productivity,
         modernising its marketing and management conditions and maintaining a balanced provision of service across the national territory;
      
2.      providing assistance to the undertakings concerned so that they can implement the programmes adopted and carry out any necessary
         studies to that end;
      
3.      gathering information such as to contribute to the purposes described above and disseminating it within the trade.’
Article of the same decree states that CPDC decisions are made by the CPDC’s board, are notified to the Commissaire du gouvernement
         and the Contrôleur d’État and become operative provided that they have not been vetoed by any of those persons within days.
      
Decree 98-increased CPDC resources by supplementing its receipts with a proportion of the revenue surplus from the TACA.
         To that end it amended Article of Decree 91-284, adding a subparagraph (g) which states that: ‘a joint order by the Minister
         for Industry, the Minister for the Trade and Craft Sectors and the Minister for the Budget shall set the ceiling each year
         for the funds allocated to the Fuel Distributors’ Trade Committee’.
      
 The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
On April the claimant companies in the main proceedings in Cases C‑321/to C-325/each brought an action against
         Organic before the Tribunal des affaires de sécurité sociale de Saint-Étienne (Saint-Étienne Social Security Tribunal). Those
         actions sought to obtain reimbursement of the sums which the companies had paid as TACA in and/or 2000. They considered
         that the TACA had been introduced in breach of Articles 87(1) EC and 88(3) EC.
      
By judgments of January the Tribunal des affaires de sécurité sociale de Saint-Étienne dismissed those actions. The
         claimants in the main proceedings then appealed to the Cour d’appel de Lyon (Court of Appeal, Lyon).
      
On April 2003, the claimant in the main proceedings in Case C-276/brought an action before the Tribunal des affaires
         de sécurité sociale de Saint-Étienne against Organic to obtain reimbursement of the sums that it had paid as TACA in respect
         of the period from to 2002.
      
On April 2003, the claimants in the main proceedings in Cases C-266/to C‑270/brought five different actions before
         the same court against Organic for reimbursement of the sums that they had paid as TACA in respect of 2001.
      
The national courts in those cases seek to ascertain whether the TACA was introduced in breach of Articles 87(1) EC and 88(3)
         EC.
      
By judgments of February (Cases C-321/to C-325/04) the Cour d’appel de Lyon therefore decided to stay the proceedings
         and ask the Court of Justice ‘to decide whether [the TACA] collected from [the appellants] constitutes State aid within the
         meaning of Article EC’.
      
By decisions of April (Cases C-266/to C-270/and Case C-276/04), the Tribunal des affaires de sécurité sociale
         de Saint-Étienne decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following question to the Court of Justice for a preliminary
         ruling:
      
‘Must Article EC be interpreted as meaning that State funding by France through the … CPDC and … Fisac by way of assistance
         when self-employed craftsmen and traders retire and grants made to the old-age insurance scheme for self-employed persons
         in manufacturing and trading occupations, and to the scheme for self-employed persons in the craft sector constitute State
         aid?’
      
By order of the President of the Court of September 2004, the cases were joined. 
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 Initial observations
According to Article 88(3) EC, the Commission is to be informed of any plans to grant or alter aid. If it considers that any
         such plan is not compatible with the common market, it is without delay to initiate the procedure provided for in Article
         88(2) EC, and the Member State concerned may not put its proposed measures into effect until that procedure has resulted in
         a final decision.
      
An aid measure within the meaning of Article 87(1) EC which is put into effect in infringement of the obligations arising
         from Article 88(3) EC is unlawful (see Case C-354/Fédération nationale du commerce extérieur des produits alimentaires and Syndicat national des négociants et transformateurs de saumon [1991] ECR I-5505, paragraph 17). It is for the national courts to uphold the rights of the persons concerned in the event
         of a possible breach by the national authorities of the prohibition on putting aid into effect, taking all the consequential
         measures under national law as regards both the validity of decisions giving effect to aid measures and the recovery of the
         financial support granted (see Joined Cases C-34/to C-38/Enirisorse [2003] ECR I-14243, paragraph 42).
      
Even though, as the Advocate General rightly states in points to of her Opinion, the decisions to refer provide only
         some basic information about the legal and factual background to the main proceedings, it is clear from those decisions that
         the proceedings before the national courts all concern requests for reimbursement of the sums paid as TACA.
      
It is, moreover, apparent from the documents sent to the Court that the claimants in the main proceedings submitted in the
         proceedings before the national courts that the TACA is unlawful since it is linked to aid granted in breach of Articles 87(1)
         EC and 88(3) EC.
      
In those circumstances, the questions referred for a preliminary ruling essentially concern the question whether Articles
         87(1) EC and 88(3) EC preclude the levy of a tax such as the TACA.
      
According to consistent case-law, taxes do not fall within the scope of the EC Treaty’s provisions concerning State aid unless
         they constitute the method of financing an aid measure, so that they form an integral part of that measure (Case C-174/Streekgewest [2005] ECR I-85, paragraph 25).
      
If a tax effectively constitutes an integral part of an aid measure within the meaning of Article 87(1) EC, disregard on the
         part of the national authorities of the obligations arising from Article 88(3) EC affects not only the lawfulness of the aid
         measure but also that of the tax which constitutes the method of financing it (see Enirisorse, paragraphs to 45).
      
It must therefore be considered whether a tax such as the TACA may be regarded as forming an integral part of one or more
         aid measures within the meaning of the case-law cited above.
      
The alleged aid measures which are disputed in the proceedings pending before the national courts and which, according to
         those courts, may affect the legality of the TACA by virtue of the Treaty provisions in respect of State aid are, first, an
         exemption from the TACA for retail outlets with a sales area of less than mor having an annual turnover of less than EUR (hereinafter ‘small retail outlets’) and, secondly, the various measures
         financed through the revenue from the TACA.
      
Those different measures must be considered separately.
 Exemption from the TACA for small retail outlets
The claimants in the main proceedings submit that exemption from the TACA for small retail outlets constitutes an aid measure
         within the meaning of Article 87(1) EC. It is a selective advantage granted through State resources and is likely to adversely
         affect competition and trade between Member States. As the tax is inseparable from the exemption from it, it is an integral
         part of the aid.
      
In that regard, it must be borne in mind that, for a tax to be regarded as forming an integral part of an aid measure, it
         must be hypothecated to the aid measure under the relevant national rules, in the sense that the revenue from the tax is necessarily
         allocated for the financing of the aid. In the event of such hypothecation, the revenue from the tax has a direct impact on
         the amount of the aid and, consequently, on the assessment of the compatibility of that aid with the common market (Streekgewest, paragraph 26).
      
However, a tax cannot be hypothecated to an exemption from payment of that same tax for a category of businesses. Application
         of a tax exemption and its extent do not depend on the tax revenue (Streekgewest, paragraph 28).
      
Thus the Court has held that businesses liable to pay a tax cannot rely on the argument that the exemption enjoyed by other
         businesses constitutes State aid in order to avoid payment of that tax (see Case C-390/Banks [2001] ECR I-6117, paragraph 80). 
      
Accordingly, even if the tax exemption for small retail outlets constitutes an aid measure within the meaning of Article 87(1)
         EC, the possible illegality of that aid is not such as to affect the legality of the TACA.
      
It therefore follows from the above that the possible illegality of exemption from the TACA for small retail outlets is not
         such as to affect the legality of the tax itself, so that businesses which are liable to pay the TACA cannot plead the possible
         illegality of the exemption before the national courts in order to avoid payment of that tax or to obtain reimbursement.
      
 The various uses to which the revenue from the TACA is put
According to the claimants in the main proceedings, the various uses to which the revenue from the TACA is put all constitute
         State aid for the purposes of Article 87(1), which have been granted in breach of Article 88(3) EC.
      
However, it must be borne in mind that, in the context of the cases in the main proceedings, which all concern demands for
         reimbursement of taxes that are allegedly unlawful under Articles 87(1) EC and 88(3) EC, the question whether the various
         measures financed by means of the TACA constitute State aid is relevant only in so far as it is established that the tax is
         hypothecated to the measures concerned (Streekgewest, paragraph 26).
      
According to the claimants in the main proceedings, there is such hypothecation of the TACA to the measures financed by that
         tax. The revenue from the TACA is not allocated to the Treasury. On the contrary, the legislation establishing the TACA specifically
         aims to finance aid measures in favour of certain categories of traders who are in competition with those subject to the tax.
      
First, as regards the cessation payment (see paragraphs to of this judgment), it must be noted that, under the national
         legislation at issue, that measure is funded by the TACA. However, contrary to the submissions of the claimants in the main
         proceedings, the national legislation does not provide for hypothecation of the TACA to the cessation payment.
      
To that effect it must be pointed out that the amount of the cessation payment granted to traders and craftsmen who permanently
         cease all activity is, as was stated in paragraph of this judgment, ‘between EUR and EUR for a household, and
         between EUR and EUR for one person’. The amount of the payment actually made is not dependent on the revenue
         from the tax, but is laid down, under Article of Decree No 82-307, ‘by the local committee’ within the limits determined
         by ministerial order on the basis of ‘factors which characterise the situation of each applicant, in particular the state
         of his resources and his charges’.
      
The national legislation at issue in the main proceedings can thus be distinguished from that considered in the case which
         gave rise to the judgment in Case 47/France v Commission [1970] ECR 487, paragraph 20, where it was provided that the aid which it established increased ‘in proportion to the increase
         in the revenue from the charge’.
      
Similarly, under the national legislation at issue in the case which gave rise to the judgment in Enirisorse, cited above, the revenue from the tax directly influenced the amount of the economic advantage granted. In that case the
         legislation expressly provided that two thirds of the revenue from the tax was to be paid to a specific port authority.
      
By contrast, in the cases in the main proceedings, there is no connection between the revenue from the TACA and the amount
         of the cessation payment granted to traders and craftsmen who permanently cease working. The national legislation at issue
         establishes the amount of the cessation payment between a minimum and maximum value regardless of the revenue from the tax.
         It is then for the local committee to decide upon the amount of the cessation payment solely on the basis of the personal
         circumstances of the traders and craftsmen concerned. Since the revenue from the TACA does not influence the amount of the
         advantage granted to traders and craftsmen by virtue of the cessation payment, the TACA is not hypothecated to the cessation
         payment within the meaning of the case-law cited in paragraph of this judgment.
      
In those circumstances, the possible illegality of the cessation payment in the light of the Treaty provisions on State aid
         is not such as to affect the lawfulness of the TACA.
      
Secondly, as regards the allocation of part of the revenue from the TACA to the financing of basic old-age insurance schemes
         for self-employed persons in the craft sector and for self-employed persons in manufacturing and trading occupations (see
         paragraphs to of this judgment), it must be pointed out that the recipient funds (Organic and Cancava) each administer
         a basic social security scheme founded on a solidarity mechanism. As the activity carried out by the funds concerned does
         not constitute an economic activity (Joined Cases C-264/01, C-306/01, C-354/and C-355/AOK Bundesverband and Others [2004] ECR I-2493, paragraph 47), the financing of that activity falls outside the scope of Article 87(1) EC.
      
Furthermore, in any event the national legislation at issue in no way establishes hypothecation of the TACA to the old-age
         insurance schemes for craftsmen and traders. Under Article 40-II of Law No 96-1160, the amount of the TACA allocated for financing
         the insurance schemes in question is determined each year by joint order of the competent Ministers. In view of the discretion
         enjoyed by those Ministers, it cannot be accepted that the revenue from the TACA directly affects the amount of the advantage
         granted to the recipient funds at issue (see Case C-175/Pape [2005] ECR I-127, paragraph 16). Indeed it is apparent from the documents submitted to the Court that the amount allocated
         to Organic and Cancava is invariably set at EUR each year, regardless of the revenue from the TACA.
      
Finally, on the basis of the evidence in the documents submitted to the Court, the TACA does not appear to be hypothecated
         to the measures financed by Fisac (see paragraphs to of this judgment) or the CPDC (see paragraphs to of this
         judgment) either. The discretion enjoyed by Fisac and the CPDC and the competent Ministers in respect of the allocation of
         funds deriving from the revenue from the TACA under Articles of Decree No 95-and of Decree No 91-respectively
         precludes the existence of such hypothecation (see Pape, paragraph 16).
      
Consequently, even if Fisac and the CPDC finance measures could be classified as State aid, the possible illegality of such
         aid would not be such as to affect the lawfulness of the TACA in the light of the Treaty provisions in respect of State aid.
      
It follows from all the above that Articles 87(1) EC and 88(3) EC are to be interpreted as not precluding the levy of a tax
         such as the TACA.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the actions pending before the national courts,
         the decision on costs is a matter for those courts. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the
         costs of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
Articles 87(1) EC and 88(3) EC are to be interpreted as not precluding the levy of a tax such as the French tax to support
            the trade and craft sectors.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 