
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Tenth Chamber)
March (*)
Table of contents
I.  Legal context
II.  Pre-litigation procedure and proceedings before the Court
III.  Request seeking the production of evidence after the close of the written part of the procedure
IV.  The action
A.  Preliminary observations
1.  The concepts of ‘unusually heavy rainfall’ and ‘best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs’
2.  The burden of proof
B.  The first complaint
1.  The first part of the first complaint
(a)  The agglomeration of Athlone
(b)  The agglomeration of Cavan
(1)  Arguments of the parties
(2)  Findings of the Court
(c)  The agglomeration of Cork City
(d)  The agglomeration of Enniscorthy
(e)  The agglomeration of Fermoy
(f)  The agglomeration of Mallow
(g)  The agglomeration of Midleton
(1)  Arguments of the parties
(2)  Findings of the Court
(h)  The agglomeration of Osberstown
(i)  The agglomeration of Roscommon Town
(j)  The agglomeration of Roscrea
(k)  The agglomeration of Thurles
2.  The second part of the first complaint
(a)  Arguments of the parties
(b)  Findings of the Court
3.  Application of exceptional circumstances and of the concept of ‘best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs’
(a)  Arguments of the parties
(b)  Findings of the Court
C.  The second complaint
1.  The first part of the second complaint
(a)  Arguments of the parties
(b)  Findings of the Court
2.  The second part of the second complaint
(a)  Arguments of the parties
(b)  Findings of the Court
3.  The third part of the second complaint
(a)  Arguments of the parties
(b)  Findings of the Court
4.  Application of exceptional circumstances and of the concept of ‘best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs’
D.  The third complaint
1.  The agglomerations whose collecting systems for urban waste water do not comply with Article of Directive 91/2.  The agglomerations of Dundalk, Killybegs, Portarlington, Ringsend and Tralee
3.  The agglomerations of Ballincollig New, Cavan, Killarney, Longford, Navan, Nenagh and Roscrea
(a)  Arguments of the parties
(b)  Findings of the Court
(1)  The relevant data for examining the third complaint so far as concerns the agglomerations of Ballincollig New, Cavan, Killarney, Longford, Navan, Nenagh and Roscrea
(2)  The agglomerations concerned
4.  Application of exceptional circumstances and of the concept of ‘best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs’
E.  The fourth complaint
F.  Conclusion
V.  Costs
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations — Directive 91/271/EEC — Collection and treatment of urban waste water — Exceptional circumstances — Best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs — Principle that the costs should be proportionate — Burden of proof — Means of proof)
In Case C‑427/17,
ACTION under Article TFEU for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on July 2017,
European Commission, represented by K. Mifsud-Bonnici and E. Manhaeve, acting as Agents,
applicant,
v
Ireland, represented by J. Quaney,  M. Browne and A. Joyce, acting as Agents, and by S. Kingston, Barrister-at-Law, C. Toland, Senior Counsel, and B. Murray, Senior Counsel,
defendant,
THE COURT (Tenth Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Court, acting as President of the Tenth Chamber, F. Biltgen and E. Levits (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: N. Wahl,
Registrar:  L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on September 2018,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the European Commission requests the Court to declare that:
–        by not ensuring that the waters collected in a combined urban waste water and rainwater system in the agglomerations of Athlone, Ballincollig New, Cavan, Cork City, Enniscorthy, Fermoy, Midleton, Osberstown, Mallow, Ringaskiddy (including within it the agglomeration  of Carrigaline), Roscommon Town, Roscrea, Thurles and Gaoth Dobhair are retained and conducted for treatment in compliance with the requirements of Council Directive 91/271/EEC of May concerning urban waste water treatment (OJ L 135, p. 40), as amended by Regulation (EC) No 1137/of the European Parliament and of the Council of October (OJ L 311, p. 1) (‘Directive 91/271’), Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 3(1) and (2) of that directive and section A and footnote of Annex I  thereto;
–        by either not putting in place secondary or equivalent treatment or not providing sufficient evidence to demonstrate compliance in this respect with Directive 91/with regard to the agglomerations of Arklow, Athlone, Ballincollig New, Ballybofey/Stranorlar, Cavan, Cobh, Cork City, Enfield, Enniscorthy, Fermoy, Killybegs, Mallow, Midleton, Passage/Monkstown, Osberstown, Rathcormac, Ringaskiddy (including the flows from Carrigaline and Crosshaven), Ringsend, Roscommon Town, Roscrea, Shannon Town, Thurles, Tubbercurry, Youghal and  Gaoth Dobhair, Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under  Article 4(1) and (3) of that directive, read in conjunction with the requirements of Article thereof and  section B of Annex  I thereto;
–        by not ensuring that urban waste water entering collecting systems from the agglomerations of Athlone, Ballincollig New, Cavan, Cork City, Dundalk, Enniscorthy, Fermoy, Killarney, Killybegs, Longford, Mallow, Midleton, Navan, Nenagh, Osberstown, Portarlington, Ringsend, Roscrea, Thurles, Tralee and Waterford City be, before discharge into sensitive areas, made subject to treatment more stringent than that described in  Article of  Directive 91/and in accordance with the requirements of section B of Annex  I thereto, Ireland  has failed to fulfil its obligations under  Article 5(2) and (3)  of that directive, read in conjunction with the requirements of Article thereof and  section B of Annex I thereto; and
–        by not ensuring that the disposal of waste water from urban waste water treatment plants of the agglomerations of Arklow and Castlebridge is subject to prior regulations and/or specific authorisation, Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of Directive 91/271.
I.      Legal context
The third recital of Directive 91/states:
‘...  to prevent the environment from being adversely affected by the disposal of insufficiently-treated urban waste water, there is a general need for secondary treatment of urban waste water’.
The eighth recital of Directive 91/states:  
‘... it is necessary to monitor treatment plants, receiving waters and the disposal of sludge to ensure that the environment is protected from the adverse effects of the discharge of waste waters’.
Article of Directive 91/states:
‘For the purposes of this Directive:
...
5.      “collecting system” means a system of conduits which collects and conducts urban waste water;
6.      “p.e. (population equivalent)” means the organic biodegradable load having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5) of g of oxygen per day;
...
11.      “eutrophication”  means the enrichment of water by nutrients, especially compounds of nitrogen and/or phosphorus, causing an accelerated growth of algae and higher forms of plant life to produce an undesirable disturbance to the balance of organisms present in the water and to the quality of the water concerned;
...’
Article of Directive 91/provides:
‘1.      Member States shall ensure that all agglomerations are provided with collecting systems for urban waste water:
–        at the latest by December for those with a population equivalent (p.e.) of more than 000, and
–        at the latest by December for those with a p.e. of between and 000.
For urban waste water discharging into receiving waters which are considered “sensitive areas” as defined under Article 5, Member States shall ensure that collection systems are provided at the latest by December for agglomerations of more than p.e.
Where the establishment of a collecting system is not justified either because it would produce no environmental benefit or because it would involve excessive cost, individual systems or other appropriate systems which achieve the same level of environmental protection shall be used.
2.      Collecting systems described in paragraph shall satisfy the requirements of section A of Annex I. …’
Article of Directive 91/provides:
‘1.      Member States shall ensure that urban waste water entering collecting systems shall before discharge be subject to secondary treatment or an equivalent treatment as follows:
–        at the latest by December for all discharges from agglomerations of more than p.e.,
–        at the latest by December for all discharges from agglomerations of between and p.e.,
–        at the latest by December for discharges to fresh-water and estuaries from agglomerations of between and p.e.
...
3.      Discharges from urban waste water treatment plants described in paragraphs and shall satisfy the relevant requirements of section B of Annex I. ...
4.      The load expressed in p.e. shall be calculated on the basis of the maximum average weekly load entering the treatment plant during the year, excluding unusual situations such as those due to heavy rain.’
Article of Directive 91/provides:
‘1.      For the purposes of paragraph 2, Member States shall by December identify sensitive areas according to the criteria laid down in Annex II.
2.      Member States shall ensure that urban waste water entering collecting systems shall before discharge into sensitive areas be subject to more stringent treatment than that described in Article 4, by December at the latest for all discharges from agglomerations of more than p.e.
3.      Discharges from urban waste water treatment plants described in paragraph shall satisfy the relevant requirements of section B of Annex  I. ...
...
5.      Discharges from urban waste water treatment plants which are situated in the relevant catchment areas of sensitive areas and which contribute to the pollution of these areas shall be subject to paragraphs 2, and 4.
...
6.      Member States shall ensure that the identification of sensitive areas is reviewed at intervals of no more than four years.
7.      Member States shall ensure that areas identified as sensitive following review under paragraph shall within seven years meet the above requirements.
...’
Article of Directive 91/states:
‘Member States shall ensure that the urban waste water treatment plants built to comply with the requirements of Articles 4, 5, and are designed, constructed, operated and maintained to ensure sufficient performance under all normal local climatic conditions. When designing the plants, seasonal variations of the load shall be taken into account.’
Article of Directive 91/states:
‘1.      Treated waste water shall be reused whenever appropriate. Disposal routes shall minimise the adverse effects on the environment.
2.      Competent authorities or appropriate bodies shall ensure that the disposal of waste water from urban waste water treatment plants is subject to prior regulations and/or specific authorisation.
3.      Prior regulations and/or specific authorisation of discharges from urban waste water treatment plants made pursuant to paragraph within agglomerations of to p.e. in the case of discharges to fresh waters and estuaries, and within agglomerations of p.e. or more in respect of all discharges, shall contain conditions to satisfy the relevant requirements of section B of Annex I. The Commission may amend those requirements. Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 18(3).
4.      Regulations and/or authorisation shall be reviewed and if necessary adapted at regular intervals.’
Annex  I to Directive 91/271, entitled ‘Requirements for urban waste water’, provides in section A, headed ‘Collecting systems’:
‘Collecting systems shall take into account waste  water treatment requirements.
The design, construction and maintenance of collecting systems shall be undertaken in accordance with the best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs, notably regarding:
–        volume and characteristics of urban waste water,
–        prevention of leaks,
–        limitation of pollution of receiving waters due to storm water overflows.’
Section B — headed ‘Discharge from urban waste water treatment plants to receiving waters’  —  of Annex I to Directive 91/states:
‘1.      Waste water treatment plants shall be designed or modified so that representative samples of the incoming waste water and of treated effluent can be obtained before discharge to receiving waters.
2.      Discharges from urban waste water treatment plants subject to treatment in accordance with Articles and shall meet the requirements shown in Table 1.
3.      Discharges from urban waste water treatment plants to those sensitive areas which are subject to eutrophication as identified in Annex II.A(a) shall in addition meet the requirements shown in Table of this Annex.
...’
Footnote of Annex I, which relates to sections A and B of the annex, is worded as follows:
‘Given that it is not possible in practice to construct collecting systems and treatment plants in a way such that all waste water can be treated during situations such as unusually heavy rainfall, Member States shall decide on measures to limit pollution from storm water overflows. Such measures could be based on dilution rates or capacity in relation to dry weather flow, or could specify a certain acceptable number of overflows per year.’
Table of Annex I to Directive 91/contains the requirements for discharges from urban waste water treatment plants subject to Articles and of the directive. It is as follows:
Parameters
Concentration
Minimum percentage of reduction [in relation to the load of the influent]
Reference method of measurement
Biochemical  oxygen demand (BODat °C) without nitrification ...
mg/l  O70-under Article 4(2)
...
Chemical oxygen demand (COD)
mg/l  O...
Total suspended solids 
mg/l ...
under Article 4(2) (more than p.e.)
under Article 4(2) (to p.e.)
...
under Article 4(2) (more than p.e.)
under Article 4(2) (to p.e.)
...
Table of Annex I to Directive 91/contains the requirements for discharges from urban waste water treatment plants to sensitive areas which are subject to eutrophication. It is as follows:
Parameters
Concentration
Minimum percentage of reduction …
Reference method of measurement
Total phosphorus
mg/l  (- p.e.)
mg/l  (more than p.e.)
...
Total nitrogen ...
mg/l (- p.e.) …
mg/l  (more than p.e.)  ...
70-...
Section A of Annex II to  Directive 91/specifies the criteria for identification of sensitive areas.
II.    Pre-litigation procedure and proceedings before the Court
By a letter of formal notice of September 2013, the Commission raised with Ireland its concerns relating to compliance with Directive 91/271, taking the view that Ireland:
–        had failed to ensure that waters collected in agglomerations were retained and conducted for treatment in compliance with  the requirements of Article of Directive 91/and section A of Annex I thereto;
–        had not put in place secondary or equivalent treatment for urban waste water discharges from agglomerations, as provided for in Article of Directive 91/and sections B and D of Annex I thereto;
–        had failed to apply Article of Directive 91/correctly in respect of agglomerations; and
–        had failed to apply Article of Directive 91/in respect of agglomerations.
By letters of December 2013, February and April 2014, Ireland  acknowledged the shortcomings regarding the system for collecting and treating urban waste water  and stated that the numerous upgrading  works would, in the coming years, enable that system to comply fully with Directive 91/271.
In the light of that information and following a meeting between the Irish authorities and Commission staff on April 2014, the Commission sent Ireland an additional letter of formal notice dated September 2015, replacing the previous one in full.
In the additional letter of formal notice, the Commission limited the first and fourth complaints to and agglomerations respectively, while extending the second and third complaints to and agglomerations respectively.
In its replies of January and July 2016,  Ireland set out the advances in the programme for  upgrading its system for collecting and treating  urban waste water, whilst acknowledging that works were necessary in order to comply fully with Directive 91/271.
On the basis of the data submitted by Ireland in its replies, the Commission sent it a reasoned opinion dated  September 2016, calling upon it to take the measures necessary to comply with the reasoned opinion within two months of receipt thereof.
In the reasoned opinion, the Commission extended the first complaint to a total of agglomerations, while the second, third and fourth complaints were limited to 28, and agglomerations respectively.
In its reply dated November 2016, Ireland submitted new data disclosed by the  Environmental Protection Agency (Ireland) on November 2016. Referring to those data, Ireland stated, first, that some of the Commission’s criticisms accordingly no longer had a basis.  Second, Ireland specified the dates from which the works that were in progress would enable full compliance of the  system for collecting and treating  urban waste water with  Directive 91/to be achieved.
Since the Commission was not fully satisfied with Ireland’s responses to the reasoned opinion, it brought the present action.
III. Request seeking the production of evidence after the close of the written part of the procedure
After the close of the written procedure on February 2018, Ireland requested leave, by a letter dated September 2018, to produce new documents pursuant to Article 128(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice.
By decision of September 2018, the President of the Chamber  admitted those new documents as evidence in the examination of the present action for failure to fulfil obligations, while permitting the Commission to comment on them at the hearing.
IV.    The action
A.      Preliminary observations
The Commission’s action is founded on four complaints, alleging, respectively: incorrect application of Article 3(1) and (2) of Directive 91/and section A and footnote of Annex I thereto, in respect of agglomerations;  incorrect application of Article 4(1) and (3) of that directive, read in conjunction with Article thereof and  paragraph of section B of Annex I thereto, in respect of agglomerations;  incorrect application of Article of that directive, read in conjunction with Article thereof and  paragraph of section B of Annex I thereto, in respect of agglomerations;  and  incorrect application of Article of that directive in respect of two  agglomerations.
Ireland denies the alleged failure to fulfil obligations in two respects. First, it puts forward for the majority of the complaints, taken individually, arguments designed to call into question the fact that the Commission has placed before the Court all the information  required to enable the Court to establish that there has been a failure to fulfil obligations as alleged. Second, relying on section A and  footnote of Annex I to Directive 91/271, Ireland submits, in respect of the whole of the present action, that the complaints put forward by the Commission must be analysed in the light of the exceptional circumstances with which Ireland has been faced over the last two decades and having regard to the concept of ‘best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs’.
That being so, it is appropriate to note at the outset the requirements that must be met in order to rely upon the concept of ‘best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs’,  as well as the specific framework in which Directive 91/lays down the obligations owed by the Member States, before drawing the ensuing conclusions as to the burden of proof.
1.      The concepts of ‘unusually heavy rainfall’ and ‘best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs’
Directive 91/refers, in section A of Annex  I, to the concept of  ‘best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs’,  which specifies, in essence, that the design, construction and maintenance of collecting systems for urban waste water are to be undertaken in accordance with such knowledge not entailing excessive costs. In addition, by footnote of that annex, the EU legislature acknowledged that situations exist in which the urban waste water will not be capable of being collected or treated in its entirety. In particular, it stated that ‘it is not possible in practice to construct collecting systems and treatment plants in a way such that all waste water can be treated’ and it provided that failure to collect and treat waste water may be tolerated during ‘situations such as unusually heavy rainfall’. However, in that case, Member States are to decide on ‘measures to limit pollution from storm water overflows’ (judgment of  October 2012, Commission v United Kingdom, C‑301/10, EU:C:2012:633, paragraph 56).
First, as regards the term ‘unusually heavy rainfall’, that term is mentioned in footnote of Annex I to Directive 91/by way of illustration only, since it is preceded by the words ‘during situations such as’. Thus, failure to collect or treat waste water may also be allowed in other circumstances (judgment of  October 2012, Commission v United Kingdom, C‑301/10, EU:C:2012:633, paragraph 57).
However, the objective pursued by Directive 91/does not permit the inference that it is normal and common for those other circumstances to arise, in particular as the word ‘unusually’ clearly indicates that failure to collect or treat waste water cannot occur in normal circumstances (judgment of  October 2012, Commission v United Kingdom, C‑301/10, EU:C:2012:633, paragraph 58).
Furthermore, it should be pointed out that, where a Member State is faced with an exceptional situation not allowing it to collect or treat waste water, it remains obliged to adopt appropriate measures to limit pollution under footnote of Annex I to Directive 91/(judgment of  October 2012, Commission v United Kingdom, C‑301/10, EU:C:2012:633, paragraph 60).
Also, since the concept of ‘unusually heavy rainfall’ is not defined by Directive 91/271, it is legitimate for the Commission, in carrying out its supervision of compliance with EU law, to adopt guidelines and, as the Court does not have jurisdiction to define numerically obligations laid down by that directive, the concept of ‘unusually heavy rainfall’ must therefore be assessed in the light of all the criteria and conditions prescribed by the directive, in particular the concept of ‘best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs’  (judgment of  October 2012, Commission v United Kingdom, C‑301/10, EU:C:2012:633, paragraph 61).
Second, the concept of ‘best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs’ must be examined in each specific case in the light of the objective of protecting the environment pursued by Directive 91/271, as it constitutes a concept inherent in all the provisions of that directive designed to secure such an objective whilst avoiding the imposition upon the Member States of unachievable obligations which they might not be able to fulfil, or only at disproportionate cost  (see, to that effect, judgment of  October 2012, Commission v United Kingdom, C‑301/10, EU:C:2012:633, paragraphs to 64).
Thus, examination of that concept requires weighing the best technology and the costs envisaged against the benefits that a more effective water collection or treatment system may provide, so that the costs incurred are not disproportionate to the benefits obtained (judgment of  October 2012, Commission v United Kingdom, C‑301/10, EU:C:2012:633, paragraph 67).
Specifically, the Court has held that facilities  cannot be regarded as complying with the concept of ‘best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs’, within the meaning of section A of Annex I to  Directive 91/271, where, first, a Member State has embarked upon a large programme of works proving that there are technological solutions in order to overcome the problem of excessive spills of waste water, but that they have not been applied, and second, such a Member State has decided to finance such works, so that the related costs cannot be regarded as excessive  (see, to that effect, judgment of  May 2017, Commission  v  United Kingdom, C‑502/15, not published, EU:C:2017:334, paragraph 44).
2.      The burden of proof
It is settled case-law that,  although, in proceedings brought under Article TFEU for failure to fulfil obligations, it is for the Commission to prove the allegation that an obligation has not been fulfilled, by placing before the Court all the information required to enable the Court to establish that the obligation has not been fulfilled, without the Commission being entitled to rely on any presumption, account should be taken of the fact that, where it is a question of checking that the national provisions intended to ensure effective implementation of a directive are applied correctly in practice, the Commission, which does not have investigative powers of its own in this area, is largely reliant on the information provided by any complainants and by the Member State concerned (judgment of  January 2016, Commission v Portugal, C‑398/14, EU:C:2016:61, paragraph 47).
It follows, inter alia, that, where the Commission has adduced sufficient evidence to establish that the national provisions transposing a directive are not applied correctly in practice in the territory of the defendant Member State, it is incumbent on the latter to challenge in substance and in detail the information produced and the inferences drawn (judgment of  January 2016, Commission v Portugal, C‑398/14, EU:C:2016:61, paragraph 48).
In the more specific context of Directive 91/271, it is consequently incumbent on the Member State which seeks to rely on the concept of ‘best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs’, with a view to justifying any divergence from the provisions of that directive, to submit to the Court the information enabling it to assess  to what extent, in a specific case, the costs that a more effective water collection or treatment system involve would be disproportionate to the benefits obtained.
It should be noted that the EU legislature, conscious of the scope of the infrastructure works required for the application of Directive 91/and the costs of its full implementation, granted the Member States a period of several years to carry out their obligations (judgment of  May 2017, Commission v United Kingdom, C‑502/15, not published, EU:C:2017:334, paragraph 48).
Furthermore, the question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil obligations must be determined by reference to the situation prevailing in the Member State at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion and the Court cannot take account of any subsequent changes (judgment of  November 2018, Commission v  Slovenia, C‑506/17, not published, EU:C:2018:959, paragraph and the case-law cited).
Since Ireland  puts forward arguments in respect of each complaint in order to prove the compliance of the systems for collecting and treating urban waste water, and also relies, for the whole of the present action for failure to fulfil obligations, on exceptional circumstances and the concept of ‘best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs’ to justify any divergence from  the provisions of Directive 91/271, it is appropriate to examine the merits of each complaint put forward by the Commission, before assessing the matters advanced by Ireland to justify the cases in which the Court concludes that there are divergences from the directive’s provisions, whilst, under the Court’s case-law, even if the Member State concerned does not deny a failure to fulfil obligations, it is incumbent upon the Court, in any event, to determine whether or not that alleged breach of obligations exists (see, to that effect, judgment of  September 2017, Commission  v  Greece, C‑320/15, EU:C:2017:678, paragraph 21).
B.      The first complaint
By its first  complaint,  the Commission contends that Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 3(1) and (2) of Directive 91/271, read in conjunction with section A and  footnote of Annex I thereto, on the ground, first, that the combined systems for collecting urban waste water of  agglomerations  do not satisfy the requirements of those provisions inasmuch as there are repeated and excessive spills from them and, second, such a system is entirely lacking in two  agglomerations.
Ireland  challenges in individual instances the data put forward by the Commission in support of its complaint  and contests globally the infringement of Article of Directive 91/by relying on exceptional circumstances and the concept of ‘best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs’.
Since exceptional circumstances and that concept are relied on in order to justify the situations in which a collecting system for urban waste water does not fulfil the requirements of Article of Directive 91/271, it is appropriate first of all to determine whether the evidence submitted by the Commission is capable of proving the complaint as regards each of the agglomerations that the complaint covers.
1.      The first part of the first complaint 
The Commission submits that the collecting systems for urban waste water and rainwater  of the agglomerations of Athlone,  Ballincollig New, Cavan, Cork City, Enniscorthy, Fermoy, Mallow, Midleton, Osberstown, Roscommon Town, Roscrea and Thurles give rise to spills of untreated waters the frequency and quantity of which do not comply with Article 3(1) of  Directive 91/and footnote of Annex I thereto.
Prompted by information  provided by Ireland in its defence, the Commission withdrew the first part of the first complaint so far as concerns the agglomeration of  Ballincollig New  and  the townland of Killagoley  in the agglomeration of Enniscorthy.
Following a question from the Court at the hearing, Ireland  conceded, however, that, in the case of the  agglomerations of Athlone, Cork City, Fermoy and  Mallow, the data put forward by the Commission showed that the collecting systems for urban waste water did not comply with the requirements of Article of Directive 91/271, while maintaining that the situations of non-compliance thereby admitted had to be assessed in the light of the concept of ‘best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs’.
In any event, as has been recalled in paragraph above, it is incumbent upon the Court to determine whether or not the alleged failure to fulfil obligations exists,  even in so far as Ireland does not deny the failure.
(a)    The agglomeration of Athlone
In respect of the agglomeration  of Athlone, it is apparent from the data forwarded to the Commission by Ireland in its reply of December to the initial letter of formal notice of September that more than spills were recorded for 2011, equivalent  to a volume of mof urban waste water discharged without prior treatment.
In the light of those data, it must be concluded that the  collecting system for urban waste water of the agglomeration  of Athlone does not comply with Article of Directive 91/271.
(b)    The agglomeration of Cavan
(1)    Arguments of the parties
First, the  Commission refers to the document of February entitled  ‘Cavan Sewerage Scheme and Treatment Works’, annexed to Ireland’s reply of December to the  initial letter of formal notice  of  September 2013,  which mentions  one storm water overflow that did not comply with the national requirements for discharges from storm water overflows.  
Second, the Commission refers to the report of the Environmental Protection Agency for entitled ‘Urban Waste Water Treatment in 2016’  (‘the EPA Report’)  which itself refers to the information contained in the annual environmental report for the agglomeration of Cavan indicating  the presence of storm water overflows for the period that it covers, of which the status of is unknown, the status of five is compliant with the national requirements transposing Directive 91/and the status of one is not compliant with those requirements.
Ireland submits, first, that the Commission cannot discharge the burden of proving the failure to fulfil obligations by relying on the fact that the EPA Report  categorises the  collecting system for urban waste water of the agglomeration  of Cavan as not compliant with the national requirements transposing Directive 91/271, since the fact that that agglomeration is mentioned in the report results solely from the fact that it was included by the Commission in the procedure leading to the present action for failure to fulfil obligations. In any event, it is incumbent upon the Commission to rely on its own evidence and not on data from the Member State in question.
Second, Ireland puts forward the improvements in the aforesaid collecting system which have been reflected in a reduction in the number of storm water overflows present in that  agglomeration.
(2)    Findings of the Court
First of all, it is to be recalled that, although, in proceedings brought under Article TFEU for failure to fulfil obligations, it is for the Commission to prove the allegation that an obligation has not been fulfilled, by placing before the Court all the information required to enable the Court to establish that the obligation has not been fulfilled, without the Commission being entitled to rely on any presumption, account should be taken of the fact that, where it is a question of checking that the national provisions intended to ensure effective implementation of a directive are applied correctly in practice, the Commission, which does not have investigative powers of its own in this area, is largely reliant on the information provided by any complainants and by the Member State concerned (judgment of January 2016, Commission v Portugal, C‑398/14, EU:C:2016:61, paragraph 47).
Therefore, the Commission cannot be criticised, as a matter of principle, for making use of the information that is made available to it in order to carry out its task, including information from the Member State concerned itself, where it enables the alleged failure to fulfil obligations to be proved.
However, as is apparent from the EPA Report, upon which, inter alia, the Commission bases the first part of the first  complaint, the inclusion of the data relating to the agglomeration of Cavan  was due to the fact that that agglomeration was covered by the present procedure for failure to fulfil obligations, irrespective of any assessment of whether its collecting system for urban waste water complies with Article of Directive 91/271.
Accordingly, the Commission cannot conclude from the mere mention of the agglomeration of Cavan  in the EPA Report that the collecting system for urban waste water of that agglomeration does not comply with that provision.
In the present instance, the Commission states that it is apparent from the document entitled  ‘Cavan Sewerage Scheme and Treatment Works’ of February that one storm water overflow does not comply with the relevant national requirements.  In its reply, the Commission identifies that overflow as being on Thomas Ashe Street and submits that the EPA Report,  which refers to the information contained in the annual environmental report for that agglomeration,  supports the conclusion that there is an overflow in the agglomeration that does not comply with those requirements.
However, Ireland observes in its rejoinder that that overflow was removed in and that the mm sewer at that location has been replaced by a new mm gravity sewer following works that were completed in July 2016.
In the absence of additional data, it must be held that the Commission has not provided information allowing a determination that the complaint has been made  out so far as concerns the agglomeration  of Cavan.
(c)    The agglomeration of Cork City
In respect of the agglomeration  of Cork City, it is apparent from the data forwarded to the Commission by Ireland  in its reply of November to the reasoned opinion that spills were counted for 2015, equivalent to a volume of mof urban waste water discharged without prior treatment.
In the light of those data, it must be concluded that the collecting system for urban waste water of the agglomeration of Cork City  does not comply with Article of Directive 91/271.
(d)    The agglomeration of Enniscorthy
After taking note that, in the townland of Killagoley in the agglomeration  of Enniscorthy, urban waste water is collected in compliance with Directive 91/271, the Commission indicates in its reply that the EPA Report refers to information contained in the annual environmental report for that agglomeration,  which states that 1% of the total volume of waste water generated was discharged via storm water overflows.
In that regard, it is apparent from that report that, out of the six active storm water overflows for the  agglomeration, one is considered not to comply with the national requirements transposing Directive 91/271. It was, moreover, activated times in 2016.
Therefore, it must be held that the Commission has proved that the collecting system for urban waste water of the agglomeration  of Enniscorthy, apart from  the townland of Killagoley, does not meet, in part, the requirements of Article of Directive 91/271.
(e)    The agglomeration of Fermoy
In respect of the agglomeration of Fermoy, it is apparent from the data forwarded to the Commission by Ireland in its reply of January to the additional letter of formal notice that  spills were counted for 2014, equivalent to a volume of mof urban waste water discharged without prior treatment, while  spills were recorded  for 2015,  equivalent to a volume of mof untreated urban waste water.
In the light of those data, it must be concluded that the collecting system for urban waste water of the agglomeration  of Fermoy does not comply with Article of Directive 91/271.
(f)    The agglomeration of Mallow
In respect of the agglomeration  of Mallow, it is apparent from the data forwarded to the Commission by Ireland in its reply of January to the additional letter of formal notice that,  for 2014, out of the eight active storm water overflows, the estimated number of spills for a single one of those overflows was 121, corresponding to a volume of mof untreated urban waste water.
In the light of those data, it must be concluded that the collecting system for urban waste water of the agglomeration  of Mallow does not comply with Article of  Directive 91/271.
(g)    The agglomeration of Midleton
(1)    Arguments of the parties
As regards the agglomeration  of Midleton, the Commission bases the first part of its first  complaint  on various reports and on a complaint sent  to it in order to demonstrate that the collecting system for urban waste water of that agglomeration  does not comply with Article of Directive 91/271.
First, it relies on the data resulting from the study by  White Young Green on  spillages in the agglomeration  of  Midleton in and 2012.
Second, the Commission refers to the report by  WYG Engineering of November and the report by Mott MacDonald of August 2011, entitled  ‘Midleton Sewerage Scheme — Assessment of Pump Overflow’, in order to prove that the treatment plant of the agglomeration  of  Midleton suffers from under-capacity in relation to the load to be treated and that the pumped flows and storage capacity must be increased considerably. Such a finding is, moreover, said to be confirmed by data communicated to the Commission following a complaint that was sent to it.
Third, the Commission sets out the data of the EPA Report  for that agglomeration.
Ireland contends, as its principal submission, that that evidence is inadmissible, on the ground that it was not sent to it before the Commission brought the present action.
Ireland pleads that, in any event, the data upon which the Commission relies no longer reflect the current situation.  Thus, only eight spills were recorded for 2015. Furthermore, the ‘biochemical oxygen demand’ (‘BOD’) and ‘chemical oxygen demand’ (‘COD’) standards prescribed  in Article of Directive 91/271, read in conjunction with Table of Annex I thereto, were met for to 2016.
(2)    Findings of the Court
As regards the admissibility of the evidence adduced by the Commission,  it must be stated, first of all, that in its reply of December to the  initial letter of formal notice  of  September 2013, Ireland itself referred to the study by  White Young Green on spillages in and 2012.
Next, it is apparent from the case file that the  WYG Engineering report of November was commissioned by Cork County Council.
As regards, finally, the  Mott MacDonald report of August and the complaint sent to the Commission, those documents, like those cited in the preceding paragraphs, were mentioned in the additional letter of formal notice  of September 2015, before being annexed to the Commission’s application.
Therefore, Ireland was able to obtain those documents directly or, at the very least, acting diligently, to ask the Commission to produce them  at the appropriate time.
In any event, in order to guarantee the rights of defence of the Member State concerned, the subject  matter of an action under Article TFEU for failure to fulfil obligations is determined by the Commission’s reasoned opinion, so that the action must be based on the same grounds and pleas as that opinion (judgment of  July 2010, Commission v Portugal, C‑171/08, EU:C:2010:412, paragraph 25).
Here, Ireland  does not dispute that  the grounds and pleas of the Commission’s reasoned opinion and application in the present proceedings are identical.
Consequently, the evidence upon which the Commission bases the first part of its first complaint  as regards the agglomeration  of Midleton must be declared admissible.
The Commission moreover relied on the EPA Report,  which refers to the information contained in the annual environmental report for the agglomeration, from which it is apparent that four storm water overflows were active in and that there were spills from them, equivalent to a volume of m³ of untreated urban waste water.
In that regard, first, Ireland cannot plead that these data from are old since it raises against them data from in order to challenge the matters put forward by the Commission.
Second, as Article of Directive 91/lays down an obligation to collect all urban waste water, the fact that the prescribed water treatment standards in Article of  Directive 91/271, read in conjunction with Table of Annex I thereto, were met for to has no bearing on whether the collecting system for urban waste water  complies with Article of the directive.
In the light of those factors, it must be concluded that  the collecting system for urban waste water of the agglomeration  of Midleton does not comply with Article of  Directive 91/271.
(h)    The agglomeration of Osberstown
As regards the agglomeration  of Osberstown, the Commission notes the presence of storm water  overflows and points out that upgrade works are in progress.
Whilst the existence of storm water  overflows and of ongoing upgrade works is an indication that the collecting system for urban waste water is liable, in certain circumstances, to give rise to  spillages and discharges of untreated urban waste water, the fact remains that, in the absence of specific and precise data concerning the compliance of those overflows and their activity, the existence of the overflows and works amounts, at most, to only a presumption of non-compliance.
Furthermore, and as has been noted in  paragraph above, the mere fact that the agglomeration  of Osberstown has been mentioned in the EPA Report  cannot in itself suffice to conclude that the collecting system for urban waste water  of that agglomeration does not comply with Article of Directive 91/271.  Moreover, as the Commission has observed in its reply, there does not seem to be a reference to the data relating to  that agglomeration in  the EPA Report.
In the absence of additional data, it must be held that the Commission has not provided information allowing a determination that the complaint has been made out so far as concerns the agglomeration of Osberstown.
(i)    The agglomeration of Roscommon Town
It is apparent from Ireland’s reply to the additional letter of formal notice  that there are storm water overflows in the agglomeration  of Roscommon Town.  Also, the EPA Report refers to the information contained in the annual environmental report for that agglomeration  recording six storm water overflows, none of which complies with the national requirements transposing Directive 91/271.
In the light of those data, it must be concluded that the collecting system for urban waste water of the agglomeration  of Roscommon Town does not comply with Article of Directive 91/271.
(j)    The agglomeration of Roscrea
As regards the agglomeration  of Roscrea, the Commission notes the presence of four  storm water  overflows and points out that upgrade works are in progress.  In that regard, the Commission refers to the EPA Report,  which itself refers to the information contained in the annual environmental report for that agglomeration,  but does not contain any particulars as to the compliance and activity of those overflows.
Whilst the existence of storm water  overflows and of ongoing upgrade works is an indication that the collecting system is liable, in certain circumstances, to give rise to spillages and discharges of untreated urban waste water, the fact remains that, in the absence of specific and precise data concerning the compliance of those overflows and their activity, the existence of the overflows and works amounts, at most, to only a presumption of non-compliance.
Furthermore, and as has been noted in paragraph above, the mere fact that the agglomeration of Roscrea  has been mentioned in the EPA Report,  which refers to the information contained in the annual environmental report for that agglomeration,  cannot in itself suffice to conclude that the collecting system for urban waste water of that agglomeration does not comply with Article of Directive 91/271.
In the absence of additional data, it must be held that the Commission has not provided information allowing a determination that the complaint has been made  out so far as concerns the agglomeration of Roscrea.
(k)    The agglomeration of Thurles
The Commission notes the presence of four storm water  overflows in the agglomeration  of Thurles  and points out that upgrade works are in progress. In that regard, the Commission refers to the EPA Report,  which itself refers to the information contained in the annual environmental report for that agglomeration, but does not contain any particulars as to the compliance and activity of those overflows.
Whilst the existence of storm water  overflows and of ongoing upgrade works is an indication that the collecting system is liable, in certain circumstances, to give rise to spillages and discharges of untreated urban waste water, the fact remains that, in the absence of specific and precise data concerning the compliance of those overflows and their activity, the existence of the overflows and works amounts, at most, to only a presumption of non-compliance.
Furthermore, and as has been noted in paragraph above, the mere fact that the agglomeration of Thurles  has been mentioned in the EPA Report,  which refers to the information contained in the annual environmental report for that agglomeration,  cannot in itself suffice to conclude that the collecting system for urban waste water of that agglomeration does not comply with Article of Directive 91/271.
In the absence of additional data, it must be held that the Commission has not provided information allowing a determination that the complaint has been made out so far as concerns the agglomeration of Thurles.
2.      The second part of the first complaint 
(a)    Arguments of the parties
The Commission submits that  Ireland has not put in place appropriate collecting systems for urban waste water in the agglomerations of Ringaskiddy and Gaoth Dobhair.
However, prompted by information provided by Ireland  in its defence, the Commission withdrew the second part of the first complaint so far as concerns the agglomeration  of Gaoth Dobhair.
As regards the agglomeration  of  Ringaskiddy, the Commission states that the urban waste water, corresponding to a load of p.e., is not collected.
Ireland  states that 85% of the total load generated by that agglomeration  comes from industrial activities that have their own treatment plants. Accordingly, only the loads of the towns of Carrigaline and Crosshaven should be taken into consideration for the purpose of assessing compliance with Article of Directive 91/271.
After taking note in the reply that a load of p.e.  had to be adopted for the  agglomeration  of Ringaskiddy, the Commission,  relying on the data submitted by Ireland in its reply of January to the additional letter of formal notice,  reiterates that no collecting system exists for that agglomeration.
(b)    Findings of the Court
Since it is not disputed that no collecting system for urban waste water exists in respect of the load of p.e. in the agglomeration  of Ringaskiddy, it must be concluded that the collecting system for urban waste water of that  agglomeration  does not comply with Article of  Directive 91/271.
It follows from all those considerations that  the  collecting systems for urban waste water of the agglomerations of Athlone,  Cork City, Enniscorthy apart from  the townland of Killagoley, Fermoy, Mallow, Midleton, Ringaskiddy and  Roscommon Town  do not comply with Article of Directive 91/271.
Since Ireland  submits, however, that the compliance of the collecting systems for urban waste water in those agglomerations must be assessed in the light of section A and footnote of Annex I to Directive  91/and application of the concept of  ‘best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs’ would therefore justify any partial divergence from Article of that directive, the matters put forward by Ireland in that regard should be examined in the light of the principles noted in  paragraphs to above.
3.      Application of exceptional circumstances and of the concept of ‘best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs’
(a)    Arguments of the parties
In general terms, Ireland  notes the exceptional circumstances that it has faced in the past few decades in the sector of urban waste water management and treatment, stressing the initial effort necessary to render the network for collecting and treating Irish urban waste water compliant,  the major reform undertaken in that sector and the effects of an economic crisis on the carrying out of that reform.
In particular, Ireland  submits that the complaints put forward by the Commission must be analysed having regard to the investment made and works carried out by  Ireland  from to  2013, in the context of the fundamental reform of the system for treating urban waste water, a reform which was, however, profoundly affected by the economic crisis that Ireland suffered in 2008. Over that period, it was nevertheless possible to invest EUR 3.billion in order to upgrade the infrastructure for collecting and treating urban waste water.
In that context, Ireland  states that there will be substantial investment in the short term in order to complete that upgrading.  The investment amounts to EUR 2.billion for the period from to  and will enable the system for collecting and treating urban waste water to be rendered fully compliant with Directive 91/271.
On a more individual level, Ireland  notes, regarding certain agglomerations,  the technical, legal or administrative difficulties which have been able to delay the carrying out of the necessary works.
Furthermore, Ireland maintains that, in view of the infrequency and limited size of the spills recorded in certain  agglomerations, the individual instances of malfunction of the relevant collecting systems for urban waste water must be regarded as resulting from  unusually heavy rainfall within the meaning of footnote of Annex I to Directive 91/271.
The Commission notes that application of the concept of ‘best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs’  is merely the expression of the principle of proportionality in connection with  investment relating to infrastructure for collecting and treating waste water.  In that context, Ireland  fails to adduce any evidence proving that the costs necessary in order to render the  systems for collecting and treating waste water compliant with Directive 91/are disproportionate to the environmental protection benefits.
(b)    Findings of the Court
As has been recalled in paragraph above,  the concept of ‘unusually heavy rainfall’ must be assessed in the light of all the criteria and conditions prescribed by Directive 91/271, in particular the concept of ‘best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs’.
Application of the latter concept must be examined in each specific case and  requires weighing the best technology and the costs envisaged against the benefits that a more effective system for collecting or treating urban waste water may provide, so that the costs incurred are not disproportionate to the benefits obtained.
In that regard, the Court has held that facilities cannot be regarded as complying with the concept of ‘best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs’, within the meaning of section A of Annex I to Directive 91/271, where, first, a Member State has embarked upon a large programme of works proving that there are technological solutions in order to overcome the problem of excessive spills of waste water, but that they have not been applied, and second, such a Member State has decided to finance such works, so that the related costs cannot be regarded as excessive  (see, to that effect, judgment of  May 2017, Commission  v  United Kingdom, C‑502/15, not published, EU:C:2017:334, paragraph 44).
Since Ireland  states that it has embarked upon a programme of major reform of the  system for collecting and treating urban waste water, it is proven, first, that there are technological solutions in order to overcome the problem of excessive spills before urban waste water is treated. Second, the costs of the works necessary for that purpose cannot be regarded as excessive, inasmuch as Ireland  has decided to carry them out.
In this connection, it should be borne in mind that, in accordance with settled case-law, a Member State may not plead practical or administrative difficulties in order to justify non-compliance with the obligations and time  limits laid down by a directive. The same holds true for financial difficulties, which it is for the Member States to overcome by adopting appropriate measures (see, to that effect, judgment of  October 2012, Commission  v  United Kingdom, C‑301/10, EU:C:2012:633, paragraph and the case-law cited).
Thus, mere general mention of the financial difficulties connected with the economic crisis cannot justify the fact that the  collecting systems for urban waste water of the various agglomerations covered by the first complaint  do not comply with Article of Directive 91/271.
That having been said, as the Commission itself acknowledged at the hearing the existence of such an economic crisis could, for each specific case, be taken into account in the context of the balancing exercise referred to in paragraphs and above.
However, it must be stated that Ireland adduces nothing capable of proving that the costs to be incurred, in order to ensure that the  collecting systems for urban waste water of the various agglomerations covered by the first  complaint are compliant, are disproportionate to the resulting advantages.
Furthermore, mention of the works that remain to be carried out so far as concerns the collecting systems of each of the  agglomerations covered by the first complaint attests the feasibility of putting in place the facilities  necessary to render the systems compliant with Directive 91/271.
In that regard, it is to be borne in mind that  the EU legislature, conscious of the scope of the infrastructure works that resulted from the transposition of Directive 91/and the costs of its full implementation, granted the Member States a period of several years to carry out their obligations (judgment of  May 2017, Commission  v  United Kingdom, C‑502/15, not published, EU:C:2017:334, paragraph 48).
As regards,  in particular, the agglomeration  of Midleton, Ireland  states that the frequency of spills is very low, so that they cannot be classified as usual events.
However, as the Commission submitted in its reply,  the EPA Report refers to the information contained in the annual environmental report for that agglomeration,  from which it is apparent that four storm water overflows were active in and that there were spills from them, equivalent to a volume of m³ of untreated urban waste water.
In the absence of further details as to the spills recorded in respect of the agglomeration of Midleton,  Ireland cannot assert that those spills result from unusual meteorological events the taking account of which would entail costs disproportionate to the benefits obtained.
It follows from all those considerations that the collecting of urban waste water in the agglomerations of Athlone, Cork City, Enniscorthy  apart from  the townland of Killagoley, Fermoy, Mallow, Midleton, Ringaskiddy and  Roscommon Town does not comply with Article 3(1) and (2) of  Directive 91/and  section A of Annex I thereto.
C.      The second complaint
By its second  complaint, the Commission contends that Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 4(1) and (3) of Directive 91/271, read in conjunction with Article thereof and section B of Annex I thereto,  because, first,  there is no treatment plant in six  agglomerations, second, the treatment plants existing in seven agglomerations  are unable to ensure compliance with the BOD  and COD  standards as prescribed in section B and Table of Annex  I to Directive 91/and, third,  Article of that directive is not complied with so far as concerns agglomerations.
Ireland contests globally the infringement of Article of Directive 91/by relying on application of the concept of ‘best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs’ and challenges individually the data put forward by the Commission in support of this complaint  as regards certain agglomerations.
Since exceptional circumstances and the concept of ‘best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs’ are relied on in order to justify the situations in which a system for treating urban waste water does not fulfil the requirements of Article of Directive 91/271, it is appropriate at the outset to determine whether the evidence submitted by the Commission is capable of justifying in law the second complaint as regards each of the agglomerations covered by it.
1.      The first part of the second complaint 
(a)    Arguments of the parties
The Commission submits that the requirements of Article 4(1) and (3) of  Directive 91/are not complied with on account of the absence of waste water treatment facilities for the  agglomerations of Arklow, Cobh, Killybegs, Passage/Monkstown, Ringaskiddy and  Youghal.
Ireland  pleads, first, difficulties in planning and achieving the required facilities. It states, second, that the works  enabling waste water to be treated in compliance with the requirements of Article 4(1) and (3) of  Directive  91/are in the course of being completed or, at least, are planned.
(b)    Findings of the Court
Article 4(1) of  Directive 91/provides that all urban waste water entering collecting systems must before discharge be subject to secondary treatment or an equivalent treatment.
Under Article 4(3) of Directive 91/271, that secondary or equivalent treatment must be carried out by treatment plants the discharges of which satisfy the requirements of section B of Annex I  to the directive.
As is apparent from Ireland’s reply of January to  the additional letter of formal notice  and its reply of November to the reasoned opinion, urban waste water of the agglomerations of Arklow, Cobh, Killybegs, Passage/Monkstown, Ringaskiddy and Youghal is not treated before discharge, on account of the absence of facilities  necessary for that purpose.
As the question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil obligations must be determined by reference to the situation prevailing in the Member State at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion, the Court cannot take account, in that regard, of any subsequent changes  (judgment of  January 2016, Commission v Portugal, C‑398/14, EU:C:2016:61, paragraph 49).
Here, the reasoned opinion, dated September 2016, set Ireland a period of two months from receipt thereof for complying with its obligations under Article of Directive 91/271. The period granted for compliance thus expired on November 2016.
As regards the  agglomerations referred to in the first part of the second complaint, Ireland  indicates  in its defence that, on the date on which that pleading was lodged, works concerning the treatment plants were in progress or scheduled in order to meet the obligations under Article of Directive 91/271. Accordingly, it is established that, at the end of the period laid down by the reasoned opinion, those agglomerations did not comply with the obligations stemming from Article 4, since they did not have operational waste water treatment facilities.
Therefore, the second  complaint  must be considered well founded so far as concerns the agglomerations of Arklow, Cobh, Killybegs, Passage/Monkstown, Ringaskiddy and  Youghal.
2.      The second part of the second complaint
(a)    Arguments of the parties
Relying on Ireland’s reply of  January to the additional letter of formal notice, the Commission states that the capacity of the facilities of the agglomerations of Ballybofey/Stranorlar, Enfield, Enniscorthy, Ringsend, Shannon Town and  Tubbercurry does not enable secondary or equivalent treatment of the loads of waste water to be ensured before discharge.
In addition, as regards the agglomeration  of Rathcormac, the Commission states that the BOD/COD  standards are not complied with.
As regards the agglomerations of Ballybofey/Stranorlar, Enniscorthy, Ringsend, Shannon Town and  Tubbercurry, Ireland  acknowledges the need to increase the capacity of the waste water treatment facilities.  It states that works are in the course of being finalised in order to remedy those deficiencies.
As regards the agglomeration  of Enfield, Ireland  states that an assessment of the treatment plant’s capacity is underway but that a capacity upgrade is not thought to be required as the BOD/COD standards  are complied with.
As regards the agglomeration  of Rathcormac, Ireland  states that the non-compliance of the waste water treatment facility resulted from operational issues that were to be resolved at the end of 2017.
(b)    Findings of the Court
In support of the second part of the second complaint, the Commission relies on the data dated December which were disclosed to it by Ireland in Ireland’s reply of January to the additional letter of formal notice  and in its reply of November to  the reasoned opinion.
First of all, it is apparent from those documents  that:
–        the load generated by the agglomeration  of  Ballybofey/Stranorlar  is  p.e.,  the treatment capacity of the facilities  is  p.e., and the BOD/COD  standards were complied with so far as concerns  to 2015;
–        the load generated by the agglomeration  of Enniscorthy as regards the secondary discharge was p.e.,  the treatment capacity of the facilities  was  p.e., and the BOD/COD  standards were not complied with so far as concerns those years;
–        the load generated by the agglomeration  of Ringsend is  p.e., the treatment capacity of the facilities  is  p.e., and the BOD/COD standards  were not complied with so far as concerns those years;
–        the load generated by the agglomeration  of Shannon Town is p.e., the treatment capacity of the facilities is  p.e., and the BOD/COD  standards  were not complied with so far as concerns those years; and
–        the load generated by the agglomeration  of Tubbercurry is  p.e., the treatment capacity of the facilities  is  p.e., and  the BOD/COD  standards  were not complied with so far as concerns those years.
Next, so far as concerns the agglomeration  of Enfield, Ireland’s reply to  the reasoned opinion  refers to a generated load of p.e. for 2015, whereas the treatment capacity of the facilities is  p.e. It is, however, also apparent from that reply that the BOD/COD  standards had been complied with since  2013.
As Article 4(1) of  Directive 91/contains an unconditional obligation requiring secondary or equivalent treatment of all urban waste water before discharge, it must be found that, in the light of the under-capacity of the facilities of the  agglomerations  of Ballybofey/Stranorlar and Enfield, the requirements of that provision are not complied with so far as concerns those  agglomerations.
Even though the  BOD/COD  standards were complied with so far as concerns waters treated in the facilities of those  agglomerations in respect of to 2015, the fact remains that a proportion of the urban waste water was not treated at all.
The Court has already held that, since discharges of waters that have not been treated at all do not satisfy the requirements of section B of Annex I to Directive 91/271, the treatment of urban waste water by facilities suffering from under-capacity cannot be regarded as complying with Article 4(3) of that directive  (see, to that effect, judgment of  September 2008, Commission v  Ireland, C‑316/06, not published, EU:C:2008:487, paragraphs and 22).
Regarding, finally, the agglomeration  of  Rathcormac, as is apparent from the data contained in Ireland’s reply of January to  the additional letter of formal notice  and in its reply of  November to  the reasoned opinion, the load generated is  p.e, while the capacity of that agglomeration’s facilities is p.e.  However, the BOD/COD  standards prescribed  in  section B and Table of Annex I to  Directive 91/were not complied with in respect of to 2016.
Ireland states in its defence that the exceeding of those standards is the result of operational issues but does not provide further explanation.
That being so, it must be held that the waste water of the agglomeration  of Rathcormac is not subject to appropriate treatment before discharge. The complaint alleging non-compliance with Article 4(3) of  Directive 91/271, read in conjunction with section B and Table of Annex I thereto,  is accordingly well founded so far as concerns that agglomeration.
Therefore, treatment of the waters of the  agglomerations of Ballybofey/Stranorlar, Enfield, Enniscorthy, Ringsend, Shannon Town  and  Tubbercurry  does not comply with Article 4(1) and (3) of Directive 91/271, read in conjunction with Article thereof and section B and Table of Annex I thereto.  Treatment of the waters of the agglomeration of Rathcormac does not comply with Article 4(3) of Directive 91/271, read in conjunction with Article thereof and section B and Table of Annex I thereto.
3.      The third part of the second complaint 
(a)    Arguments of the parties
The Commission submits that Ireland has infringed  Article 4(1) and (3) of  Directive 91/271, read in conjunction with Article thereof and section B of Annex I thereto,  so far as concerns  the  agglomerations of Athlone, Ballincollig New,  Cavan, Cork City, Fermoy, Mallow, Midleton, Osberstown, Roscommon Town, Roscrea, Thurles and  Gaoth Dobhair.
Prompted by information provided by Ireland in its defence, the Commission withdrew the third part of the second complaint so far as concerns the  agglomeration  of Gaoth Dobhair.
The Commission justifies  the infringement of Article 4(1) and (3) of  Directive 91/on the basis of the infringement of Article of that directive.
In addition to exceptional circumstances and application of the concept of ‘best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs’, Ireland  submits that appropriate treatment of waste water is ensured so far as concerns the agglomerations of Athlone, Ballincollig New, Cavan, Fermoy, Mallow, Midleton,  Osberstown, Roscommon Town and  Thurles and relies, in that regard, on the data contained in its reply of January to  the additional letter of formal notice  and in its reply of November to  the reasoned opinion.
(b)    Findings of the Court
As the Commission bases the third part of the second complaint  exclusively on the fact that the collecting systems for urban waste water in certain agglomerations do not comply with Article of Directive 91/271, it should be noted, first, that, as is apparent from paragraphs 63,  93, and above, the Commission has not established that Ireland  has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of Directive 91/so far as concerns the collecting systems  for urban waste water of the  agglomerations of Cavan, Osberstown, Roscrea  and  Thurles.  In addition, the Commission withdrew  the first part of the first complaint so far as concerns the agglomeration of Ballincollig New.
Therefore, on the basis of the Commission’s line of argument, the third part of the second complaint can only concern the agglomerations of Athlone, Cork City, Fermoy, Mallow, Midleton and Roscommon Town.
First, under Article 4(1) of  Directive 91/271,  all urban waste water entering collecting systems must before discharge be subject to secondary treatment or an equivalent treatment.
Consequently, in so far as agglomerations are not equipped with a system enabling all their urban waste water to be collected in accordance with Article of Directive 91/271, the obligation laid down in Article of the directive to subject all discharges to secondary or equivalent treatment is a fortiori not fulfilled (judgment of  July 2012, Commission  v  Italy, C‑565/10, not published, EU:C:2012:476, paragraph 34).
Second, pursuant to Article 4(3) of  Directive 91/271, discharges from urban waste water treatment plants are to satisfy the requirements of section B of Annex I to the directive.
The third recital of Directive 91/explains that there is a general need for secondary treatment of urban waste water in order to prevent the environment from being adversely affected by its disposal.
Ireland  states that, despite the lack of treatment plants and, consequently, of treatment of urban waste water in certain agglomerations, the BOD/COD  standards are complied with.
It must be stated that, where the establishment of a  collecting system for urban waste water has been considered to be justified in a given agglomeration, Article 4(1) of  Directive 91/lays down an obligation of result  so far as concerns treatment of the urban waste water by a treatment plant.
In addition, paragraph of section B of Annex I to Directive 91/specifies that waste water treatment plants are to be designed or modified so that representative samples of the incoming waste water and of treated effluent can be obtained before discharge to receiving waters.
Therefore, the provisions of Directive 91/lay down treatment obligations designed to achieve systematic and lasting compliance with the standards  that they  establish so far as concerns waste water discharges. To that end, only the collection of all the waste water enables such compliance to be ensured. If there is no system enabling all urban waste water to be collected, any compliance with the BOD/COD  standards  that is recorded cannot be systematic in nature, since it may vary depending on factors connected with various circumstances, such as dilution of the waste water or the conduct of those emitting it.
In any event, paragraph of section B of Annex I to  Directive 91/lays down the obligation to take representative samples of waste water before it is discharged from treatment plants. In the absence of a reliable collecting system, the directive does not offer any other solution enabling compliance with the BOD/COD standards to be proved.
Consequently, it must be found that the treatment of urban waste water in the agglomerations of Athlone,  Cork City, Fermoy, Mallow, Midleton  and Roscommon Town does not comply with Article 4(1) and (3) of  Directive 91/271, read in conjunction with Article thereof and section B of Annex  I thereto.
4.      Application of exceptional circumstances and of the concept of ‘best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs’
In addition to the general context, as noted in paragraphs to above, in which the programme for upgrading urban waste water management was initiated, Ireland  pleads, in individual instances, legal problems that have led to the treatment of urban waste water not complying with Article of Directive 91/271.
Ireland states, furthermore, that the completion in the near future of the works concerning the urban waste water management systems of certain agglomerations covered by the second  complaint  should within the short term enable the  facilities  concerned to be rendered compliant with  Directive 91/271.
In the light of the considerations noted in paragraphs to above and the fact that Ireland has produced nothing capable of demonstrating that the costs of rendering compliant the facilities for treating urban waste water in the agglomerations covered by the second complaint are disproportionate, it must be concluded that the treatment of urban waste water in the agglomerations of Arklow, Athlone, Ballybofey/Stranorlar, Cobh, Cork City, Enfield, Enniscorthy, Fermoy, Killybegs, Mallow, Midleton, Passage/Monkstown, Rathcormac, Ringaskiddy, Ringsend, Roscommon Town, Shannon Town, Tubbercurry and  Youghal does not comply with Article 4(1) and/or (3) of Directive 91/271, read in conjunction with Article thereof and section B of Annex I thereto.
D.      The third complaint
By its third  complaint, the  Commission submits that the more stringent treatment of urban waste water entering sensitive areas and the corresponding catchment areas, under Article 5(2) and (3) of Directive 91/271, is not carried out in the agglomerations  of Athlone, Ballincollig New, Cavan, Cork City, Dundalk, Enniscorthy, Fermoy, Killarney, Killybegs, Longford, Mallow, Midleton, Navan, Nenagh, Osberstown, Portarlington, Ringsend, Roscrea, Thurles, Tralee and Waterford City. Prompted by information provided by Ireland in its defence, the Commission withdrew this complaint as regards the agglomeration  of  Waterford City.
First, the Commission pleads the non-compliance of the collecting systems for waste water of the agglomerations covered by the first complaint  in the present action for failure to fulfil obligations in order to substantiate non-compliance of the treatment systems with Article of  Directive 91/271.
Second, the Commission relies in respect of the other agglomerations covered by the third complaint on the data that were submitted to it by Ireland in its replies to the additional letter of formal notice  and  the reasoned opinion.
1.      The agglomerations whose collecting systems for urban waste water do not comply with Article of Directive 91/Under Article 5(1) of  Directive 91/271, Member States must identify sensitive areas on the basis of the criteria laid down in Annex II to the directive.
Article 5(2) and (3) of Directive 91/lays down an obligation to treat urban waste water before discharge into sensitive areas, in such a way that the standards prescribed in section B of Annex I to the directive are complied with.  That urban waste water must be subjected to more stringent treatment than the treatment provided for in Article of the directive.
Such an obligation also applies as regards discharges from treatment plants  situated in the relevant catchment areas of sensitive areas, pursuant to Article 5(5) of Directive 91/271.
By analogy with what has been stated in paragraph above, if  the collecting system for urban waste water of an  agglomeration  does not comply with Article of Directive 91/271, the view must a fortiori be taken that the treatment of the urban waste water of that agglomeration that is discharged into a sensitive area cannot be ensured.
It is common ground that urban waste water of the agglomerations of Athlone, Cork City, Enniscorthy apart from  the townland of Killagoley, Fermoy, Mallow and  Midleton is discharged into areas that have been identified as sensitive in accordance with the criteria defined in Annex II to Directive 91/and that those agglomerations have a p.e. of more than 000.
Also, it is clear from paragraph above that the collecting systems for urban waste water  of those agglomerations do not comply with Article of Directive 91/271.
Therefore, the treatment of urban waste water in those agglomerations cannot comply with Article of Directive 91/271, read in conjunction with section B of Annex I thereto.
On the other hand, as is apparent from  paragraphs 63, 93, and above,  the Commission has not proved to the required legal standard that that the collecting systems for urban waste water of the  agglomerations of Cavan, Osberstown, Roscrea and Thurles do not comply with Article of Directive 91/271. It is also apparent from  paragraph above  that the Commission withdrew the first part of the first complaint so far as concerns the agglomeration  of Ballincollig New.
In the case of the agglomerations of Osberstown and Thurles, the Commission has not provided other material in support of the third complaint, which must be rejected in their regard. However, in the case of the treatment of urban waste water of the agglomerations of Ballincollig New, Cavan and Roscrea, the material provided by the Commission in support of this complaint will be examined in  paragraphs to below.
2.      The agglomerations of Dundalk, Killybegs, Portarlington, Ringsend and Tralee
The Commission relies on Ireland’s replies to the additional letter of formal notice and reasoned opinion indicating that treatment of the waste water of the agglomerations  of Dundalk, Killybegs, Portarlington, Ringsend and Tralee, which do not have any treatment plant or whose treatment is insufficient, would be compliant upon completion of the works in progress.
Ireland  does not dispute that information, but states that the works in progress should enable compliance with the requirements of Article of Directive 91/to be ensured:
–        in respect of the agglomeration  of  Dundalk, in the third quarter of 2017;
–        in respect of the agglomeration  of  Killybegs, on January 2018;
–        in respect of the agglomeration  of  Portarlington, in the second quarter of 2017;
–        in respect of the agglomeration  of Ringsend, in the second quarter of  2022;  and
–        in respect of the agglomeration of  Tralee, in the fourth quarter of 2017.
Since it is undisputed that the question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil obligations must be determined by reference to the situation prevailing in the Member State at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion  and that, according to the information disclosed by Ireland,  the works in progress will come to an end after November 2016, the third complaint is well founded so far as concerns the agglomerations of Dundalk, Killybegs, Portarlington, Ringsend and  Tralee.
3.      The agglomerations of Ballincollig New, Cavan, Killarney, Longford, Navan, Nenagh and Roscrea
(a)    Arguments of the parties
The Commission, relying on the data as resulting from Ireland’s replies to  the additional letter of formal notice and reasoned opinion, submits that urban waste water discharged into sensitive areas is not treated in accordance with the requirements of Article of Directive 91/271, read in conjunction with Article thereof and section B and Table of Annex I thereto,  so far as concerns the agglomerations of  Ballincollig New, Cavan, Killarney, Longford, Navan, Nenagh and Roscrea.  More specifically, the Commission submits that, even assuming that the treatment complies with those provisions in the case of phosphorus  as regards the agglomerations of Cavan, Killarney, Longford, Navan, Nenagh and Roscrea, nitrogen reduction is not carried out although nitrogen is declared as a limiting nutrient for the sensitive areas into which the treatment plants of those agglomerations discharge waste water.  In addition, the Commission observes in respect of the agglomeration  of Ballincollig New that, following further assessments carried out by the Environmental Protection Agency, Ireland  stated that nutrient removal is not required.
Ireland  submits that the data put forward by the Commission have been updated, as is shown by the letter  of November from the Environmental Protection Agency to the Irish Minister for Housing, Planning, Community and Local Government, which it annexed to the reply to the reasoned opinion. Ireland states that it is clear from that document that it was concluded in respect of the agglomerations of  Cavan, Killarney, Longford, Navan, Nenagh and  Roscrea that a reduction of nitrogen as a limiting nutrient was no longer necessary so far as concerns discharges from those  agglomerations’ treatment plants into the  sensitive areas concerned. As regards the agglomeration  of Ballincollig New, Ireland states that that document concludes that the area into which the waters  treated by that agglomeration’s system is discharged is not sensitive.
The Commission observes that the documents  submitted at the time of the Environmental Protection Agency’s letter of  November amount to preliminary matters that call for additional decisions in order to alter the designation of the sensitive area concerned and the discharge licences and permits that relate thereto.  It refers in that regard to the judgment of  May 2017, Commission v United Kingdom (C‑502/15, not published, EU:C:2017:334).
Ireland  submits that the conclusions which the findings of the Environmental Protection Agency reach are definitive and directly applicable, as the amendments to the register of sensitive areas and to the discharge licences amount only to technical implementing arrangements.  It refers for this purpose to the  judgment of  October 2009, Commission v Sweden (C‑438/07, EU:C:2009:613).
In case it should be of use,  Ireland annexed to its defence  the decisions amending the licences for the treatment plants of certain agglomerations,  including that of Killarney, which were adopted between June and July 2017.
(b)    Findings of the Court
(1)    The relevant data for examining the third complaint so far as concerns the agglomerations of Ballincollig New, Cavan, Killarney, Longford, Navan, Nenagh and Roscrea
It is not disputed that the agglomerations of  Ballincollig New, Cavan, Killarney, Longford, Navan, Nenagh and Roscrea have a p.e. of more than  000.
Also, it is common ground that the urban waste water of those agglomerations is discharged into areas that have been identified as sensitive pursuant to the criteria defined in Annex II to Directive 91/271.
Whilst initially the sensitive waters into which discharges are made from the treatment plants of the agglomerations of  Cavan, Killarney, Longford,  Navan, Nenagh  and Roscrea were identified as such on account of their sensitivity both to nitrogen and to phosphorus, Ireland  informed the Commission in its reply to the reasoned opinion that, in the light of new data, treatment for nitrogen reduction was no longer necessary.
As regards the area of discharge of waters treated by the system of the  agglomeration  of Ballincollig New, Ireland states that, under the conclusions of the letter  of  November 2016, no evidence of eutrophication had been found and  that all biological and nutrient conditions were below threshold levels between and 2015. That said, Ireland  does not dispute the fact that that area is still designated as sensitive.
At the outset, it should be recalled  that the question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil obligations must be determined by reference to the situation prevailing in the Member State at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion and the Court cannot take account of any subsequent changes (judgment of  November 2018, Commission v  Slovenia, C‑506/17, not published, EU:C:2018:959, paragraph and the case-law cited).
The data to which the parties refer come, first, from Ireland’s reply to the additional letter of formal notice and, second, from its reply to the reasoned opinion.  The letter  of November from the  Environmental Protection Agency  to the Irish Minister for Housing, Planning,  Community and Local Government was annexed to Ireland’s reply to the reasoned opinion.  That  letter  in return refers to the review of sensitive areas which was carried out by the Environmental Protection Agency in on the basis of data collected between and (‘the EPA Review’). That review forms Appendix to the  letter.
It is apparent from those data that in the case of the agglomerations of Killarney, Longford, Navan, Nenagh and Roscrea, Ireland did not carry out nitrogen reduction complying with Directive 91/271, although nitrogen is declared as a limiting nutrient for the sensitive areas into which the treatment plants of those agglomerations discharge the  treated waters.
On the other hand, it is not apparent from those data that that is so in the case of the agglomeration  of Cavan. Therefore, in the absence of additional data, it must be held that the Commission has not provided information allowing a determination that the complaint has been made out so far as concerns that agglomeration.
As regards the agglomeration  of Ballincollig New, it is apparent from the EPA Review  that no evidence of eutrophication had been found and that all biological and nutrient conditions were below threshold levels between and 2015. In Ireland’s submission, it follows that there is no obligation to remove the nutrients and, therefore, no infringement of Article of Directive 91/271.
However, irrespective of whether or not there is such an obligation, it is to be noted that, according to  Ireland’s reply to the additional letter of formal notice,  in respect of to nutrients were removed pursuant to Article of Directive 91/271, in terms of both phosphorus and nitrogen reduction. In the absence of additional data, it must be held that the Commission has not provided information allowing a determination that the complaint has been made out so far as concerns the agglomeration of Ballincollig New.
As regards the data which are derived from the assessments forwarded by the Environmental Protection Agency in its letter  of November annexed to Ireland’s reply to the reasoned opinion, data upon which  Ireland relies in order to assert that inadequate treatment of nitrogen, or of phosphorus and nitrogen, is no longer relevant for the purpose of establishing the treatment’s compliance with Article of Directive 91/271, it is to be noted that it is indicated on page  of the EPA Review that any change in the designation of a sensitive area will necessitate further analyses.
Ireland maintains, however, that such a necessity concerns only the areas that  the EPA Review recommends be designated for the first time as sensitive.
In that regard, it must be stated, first, that the EPA Review  specifies that the results collected so far as concerns, inter alia, the agglomeration  of Longford require confirmation by further analyses, even though the discharge areas for that agglomeration’s treatment plants were designated as sensitive before November 2016.
Second, as the  Environmental Protection Agency itself acknowledges in its letter  of  November 2016, the findings and conclusions mentioned in the EPA Review are liable to have consequences for the designation of a sensitive area and for the discharge licences of the treatment plants concerned. Thus, in that letter, the Environmental Protection Agency  states that the EPA Review will be followed by the adoption of recommendations and the amendment of statutory instruments. It is thus those amendments that enable compliance with the requirements of  Table of Annex I to Directive 91/to be prescribed.
In this respect, it should be noted that  Article 12(2) of Directive 91/imposes on the Member States the obligation to ensure that the disposal of waste water from urban waste water treatment plants is subject to prior regulations and/or specific authorisation. Under Article 12(3), such instruments are to contain conditions to satisfy the requirements of section B of Annex I to the directive.
Whilst it is true that the findings and conclusions mentioned in the EPA Review concern not only amendments in the identification of the nutrients to be treated, but also the need to designate new sensitive areas, the fact remains that the identification of a nutrient responsible for the eutrophication of the waters of a discharge area  is what determines its designation as a sensitive area.
Thus, the waters of an area may be sensitive to phosphorus or nitrogen, or to both those nutrients.
Therefore, Ireland  cannot assert that, inasmuch as the EPA Review  advocates only limiting the sensitivity to phosphorus of the areas into which the treatment plants of the agglomerations of Killarney, Longford, Navan, Nenagh and Roscrea discharge the treated waters, the amendments which stem therefrom consist only of technical arrangements.
In fact, it is to be noted that Ireland  annexed to its defence  the decisions amending the licences for the treatment plants of certain agglomerations covered by the third complaint, which were adopted between June and July 2017.
However, as the period set by the reasoned opinion  expired on November 2016, the Court cannot take account of such documents for the purpose of determining whether the failure to fulfil obligations that is alleged by the Commission has taken place.
It is therefore on the basis of the data  put forward by the Commission that the Court should examine whether the discharges from the treatment plants of the agglomerations concerned are compliant.
(2)    The agglomerations concerned
As is apparent from Ireland’s reply  to the additional letter of formal notice, the discharges from the treatment plants of the agglomerations of  Killarney, Longford, Navan,  Nenagh and Roscrea do not comply with the requirements of Table of Annex  I to Directive 91/so far as concerns the reduction of nitrogen.
For the reasons given in paragraphs to  above, the data resulting from the letter  of the  Environmental Protection Agency of November and from the EPA Review  annexed thereto cannot be regarded as evidence capable of calling into question the data put forward by the Commission.
Therefore, it must be held that the treatment of urban waste water of the agglomerations of Killarney, Longford, Navan, Nenagh  and Roscrea does not comply with Article of Directive 91/271.
4.      Application of exceptional circumstances and of the concept of ‘best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs’
In addition to the general context, as noted in paragraphs to above, in which the programme for upgrading urban waste water management was initiated, Ireland pleads, in individual instances, legal problems that have led to the treatment of urban waste water not complying with Article of Directive 91/271.
Ireland states, furthermore, that the completion in the near future of the works concerning the systems for treating urban waste water of certain agglomerations covered by the third complaint should within the short term enable the facilities to be rendered compliant with Directive 91/271.
In the light of the considerations noted in paragraphs to above and the fact that Ireland has produced nothing capable of demonstrating that the costs of rendering compliant the facilities for treating urban waste water in the agglomerations covered by the third complaint are disproportionate, it must be concluded that the treatment of urban waste water in the  agglomerations of Athlone, Cork City, Dundalk,  Enniscorthy  apart from  the townland of Killagoley, Fermoy, Killarney, Killybegs, Longford, Mallow, Midleton, Navan, Nenagh,  Portarlington, Ringsend, Roscrea  and Tralee does not comply with Article 5(2) and (3) of  Directive 91/271, read in conjunction with Article thereof and section B of Annex I thereto.
E.      The fourth complaint
By its fourth  complaint, the Commission submits that no prior regulations and/or specific authorisations are provided for relating to the discharges from waste water treatment plants, in accordance with  Article 12(2) and (3) of  Directive 91/271,  as regards the agglomerations of Arklow and Castlebridge.
In the case of the agglomeration  of Arklow, Ireland  highlights the legal difficulties connected with establishing a treatment plant which have not allowed the necessary authorisation procedure to be initiated.
In the case of the agglomeration  of Castlebridge, the waste water is stated to be conveyed to a larger agglomeration  for which examination of a revised licence is underway.
In any event, Ireland  submits that the exceptional circumstances that it has faced warrant dismissal of the fourth complaint.
Since Ireland does not dispute that, on the date on which the period set by the reasoned opinion expired, that is to say,  November 2016, the treatment plants of the agglomerations of Arklow and  Castlebridge did not have valid discharge licences, it must be held that the treatment plants of those agglomerations do not comply with Article of Directive 91/271.
Moreover, as Ireland  failed to produce anything capable of demonstrating that the costs of rendering compliant the facilities for treating urban waste water in the agglomerations covered by the fourth complaint are disproportionate, it must be concluded that the systems for treating urban waste water of the agglomerations of Arklow and Castlebridge do not comply with Article of Directive 91/271.
F.      Conclusion
In the light of all the foregoing considerations, it must be held that Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations:
–        under Article 3(1) and (2) of  Directive 91/and section A and footnote of Annex I thereto by not ensuring that the waters collected in a combined urban waste water and rainwater system are retained and conducted for treatment in compliance with the requirements of that directive so far as concerns the agglomerations of Athlone, Cork City, Enniscorthy  apart from the townland of Killagoley, Fermoy, Mallow, Midleton, Ringaskiddy and  Roscommon Town;
–        under Article 4(1) and/or (3) of Directive 91/271, read in conjunction with Article thereof and section B of Annex I thereto,  by not putting in place secondary or equivalent treatment  so far as concerns the agglomerations  of Arklow, Athlone, Ballybofey/Stranorlar, Cobh, Cork City, Enfield,  Enniscorthy, Fermoy, Killybegs, Mallow, Midleton, Passage/Monkstown, Rathcormac,  Ringaskiddy,  Ringsend, Roscommon Town, Shannon Town, Tubbercurry and Youghal;
–        under Article 5(2) and (3) of Directive 91/271, read in conjunction with Article thereof and section B of Annex I thereto, by not ensuring that urban waste water entering collecting systems from the agglomerations of Athlone, Cork City, Dundalk, Enniscorthy apart from the townland of Killagoley, Fermoy, Killarney, Killybegs, Longford, Mallow, Midleton, Navan, Nenagh, Portarlington, Ringsend, Roscrea and Tralee  be, before discharge into sensitive areas, made subject to treatment more stringent than that described in  Article of  that directive and in accordance with the requirements of section B of Annex I thereto; and  
–        under Article of Directive 91/271, by not ensuring that the disposal of waste water from urban waste water treatment plants of the agglomerations of Arklow and Castlebridge is subject to prior regulations and/or specific authorisation.
The action is dismissed as to the remainder.
V.      Costs
Under Article 138(1) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings.  Since the Commission has applied for costs and Ireland’s failure to fulfil obligations has essentially been established, Ireland must be ordered to pay the costs.
On those grounds, the Court (Tenth Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations:
–        under Article 3(1) and (2) of Council Directive 91/271/EEC of May concerning urban waste water treatment, as amended by Regulation (EC) No 1137/of the European Parliament and of the Council of October 2008, and section A and footnote of Annex I thereto by not ensuring that the waters collected in a combined urban waste water and rainwater system are retained and conducted for treatment in compliance with the requirements of that directive, as amended, so far as concerns the agglomerations of Athlone, Cork City, Enniscorthy apart from the townland of Killagoley, Fermoy, Mallow, Midleton, Ringaskiddy and Roscommon Town;
–        under Article 4(1) and/or (3) of Directive 91/as amended by Regulation No 1137/2008, read in conjunction with Article thereof and section B of Annex I thereto, by not putting in place secondary or equivalent treatment so far as concerns the agglomerations of Arklow, Athlone, Ballybofey/Stranorlar, Cobh, Cork City, Enfield, Enniscorthy, Fermoy, Killybegs, Mallow, Midleton, Passage/Monkstown, Rathcormac, Ringaskiddy, Ringsend, Roscommon Town, Shannon Town, Tubbercurry and Youghal;
–        under Article 5(2) and (3) of Directive 91/as amended by Regulation No 1137/2008, read in conjunction with Article thereof and section B of Annex I thereto, by not ensuring that urban waste water entering collecting systems from the agglomerations of Athlone, Cork City, Dundalk, Enniscorthy apart from the townland of Killagoley, Fermoy, Killarney, Killybegs, Longford, Mallow, Midleton, Navan, Nenagh, Portarlington, Ringsend, Roscrea and Tralee be, before discharge into sensitive areas, made subject to treatment more stringent than that described in Article of that directive, as amended, and in accordance with the requirements of section B of Annex I thereto; and
–        under Article of Directive 91/271, as amended by Regulation No 1137/2008, by not ensuring that the disposal of waste water from urban waste water treatment plants of the agglomerations of Arklow and Castlebridge is subject to prior regulations and/or specific authorisation;
2.      Dismisses the action as to the remainder;
3.      Orders Ireland to pay the costs.
Lenaerts
Biltgen
Levits
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on March 2019.
A. Calot Escobar
 
K. Lenaerts
Registrar
 
      President
*      Language of the case: English.
Top  
