
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-284/État belge
v
Temco Europe SA
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Cour d’appel de Bruxelles)
(Sixth VAT Directive – Article 13B(b) – Exempt transactions – Letting of immovable property – Licence to occupy)
Summary of the judgment
Tax provisions – Harmonisation of laws – Turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax – Exemptions laid down by the Sixth
            Directive – Exemption for the letting of immovable property – Meaning – Grant of a licence in return for a payment set essentially
            on the basis of the area occupied – Included – Condition – Contracts having as their essential object the making available,
            in a passive manner, of premises or parts of buildings in exchange for a payment linked to the passage of time 
(Council Directive 77/388, Art. 13B(b))
Article 13B(b) of Sixth Directive 77/on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes
         must be interpreted as meaning that transactions by which one company, through a number of contracts, simultaneously grants
         associated companies a licence to occupy a single property in return for a payment set essentially on the basis of the area
         occupied and by which the contracts, as performed, have as their essential object the making available, in a passive manner,
         of premises or parts of buildings in return for a payment linked to the passage of time, are transactions comprising the ‘letting
         of immovable property’ within the meaning of that provision and not the provision of a service capable of being categorised
         in a different way. 
      
(see para. 28, operative part)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)November 2004(1)
(Sixth VAT Directive  –  Article 13B(b)  –  Exempt transactions  –  Letting of immovable property  –  Licence to occupy)
 In Case C-284/03,REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Cour d'appel de Bruxelles (Belgium), by decision of June 2003, received at the Court on July 2003, in the proceedings 
            
Belgian State
v
Temco Europe SA,
THE COURT (First Chamber),,
 composed of: P. Jann, President of the Chamber, A. Rosas (Rapporteur), R. Silva de Lapuerta, K. Lenaerts and S. von Bahr,
            Judges,
            
 Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer,Registrar: M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator,
             having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on April 2004,after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
            
–
 the Belgian State, by E. Dominkovits, acting as Agent, and by B. van de Walle de Ghelcke and C. Louveaux, avocats,
            
–
 Temco Europe SA, by J.-P. Magremanne, avocat,
            
–
 the Commission of the European Communities, by E. Traversa and C. Giolito, acting as Agents,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on May 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 The reference for a preliminary ruling relates to the interpretation of Article 13B(b) of Sixth Council Directive 77/388/EEC
         of May on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes – Common system of value added
         tax: uniform basis of assessment (OJ L 145, p. 1) (‘the Sixth Directive’).
         
            
 That reference was made in proceedings between Temco Europe SA (‘Temco Europe’) and the État belge (Belgian State) relating
         to a summons issued against Temco Europe for payment of EUR 125.(BEF 639) in respect of value added tax (‘VAT’)
         which is alleged to have been wrongly deducted by that company, of EUR 708.(BEF 000) representing the amount of
         a fine, and of interest at the legal rate relating to those sums. 
         
Legal framework
Community legislation
            
 Under Title X, headed ‘Exemptions’, Article of the Sixth Directive, itself headed ‘Exemptions within the territory of the
         country’, includes the following provisions: 
         ‘…
         
B.
Other exemptions
Without prejudice to other Community provisions, Member States shall exempt the following under conditions which they shall
            lay down for the purpose of ensuring the correct and straightforward application of the exemptions and of preventing any possible
            evasion, avoidance or abuse: 
         
…
(b)     the leasing or letting of immovable property excluding:
         
1. 
the provision of accommodation, as defined in the laws of the Member States, in the hotel sector or in sectors with a similar
                     function, including the provision of accommodation in holiday camps or on sites developed for use as camping sites; 
                  
2.
the letting of premises and sites for parking vehicles; 
3.
lettings of permanently installed equipment and machinery; 
4.
hire of safes. 
Member States may apply further exclusions to the scope of this exemption; 
…’
         
National legislation
            
 Article of the code civil belge (Belgian Civil Code) states: 
         ‘The letting of things is a contract by which one of the parties undertakes to allow the other the enjoyment of a thing during
         a certain time, and in exchange for a certain sum which the latter undertakes to pay to the former.’
         
            
 Article 44(3)(2) of the code de la taxe sur la valeur ajoutée (Belgian value added tax code) (‘the VAT Code’) provides that,
         inter alia, ‘the leasing and letting of immovable property and the assignment of leases of immovable property and the use
         thereof in accordance with Article 19(1) …’ are exempt from value added tax.
         
The main proceedings and the questions referred
            
 The national court describes the background to the main proceedings as follows:
         ‘Temco Europe SA is liable to VAT in respect of its property cleaning and maintenance business … .
          It is the owner of a property at to Chaussée de Ruisbroeck. Between the end of and the beginning of it had
         refurbishment work carried out to the building at number and deducted the VAT for which it was invoiced on that work.
         It has no place of business in the building.
          Temco Energy Management Company SA, Publi-round SA and Petrus SA are companies belonging to the same group. Together with
         Temco Europe SA they are subject to a common central management.
          On February 1994, Temco Europe SA entered into three contracts [“the contracts”] with those three companies which the parties
         thereto described as “transfers”, under which Temco Europe SA allowed each transferee to carry on its activities in the property,
         as allocated by the board of directors of the transferor, without the transferee having individual rights over any specific
         part of the property. Neither evidence of the transferees’ activities nor the allocation resolutions of the board of directors
         of the transferor have been produced.
          The contracts have been entered into for the duration of the transferee’s activities, and the latter is bound to use the premises
         exclusively for its activity in compliance with the internal rules laid down by the transferor. The transferor’s board of
         directors, however, is entitled at any time without notice to require the transferee to vacate the premises referred to in
         the transfer.
          The transferee is responsible for all expenses required for its activity. Gas and electricity are calculated according to
         consumption and communal outgoings in accordance with the area occupied. The transferee is also liable for repairing deterioration
         of the premises occupied by it on the basis of criteria set by the transferor’s board of directors.
          Rent is payable annually and set at BEF per m² in the part fitted out as offices and BEF per m² in the part fitted
         out for storage plus 0.4% of the transferee’s turnover exclusive of VAT and BEF per annum for each person employed.
          The parties expressly excluded application of Article of the code civil.
          The internal rules establish the provisions for access to the building, cleaning, the rights to affix advertising signs and
         to unlimited access for persons authorised by the transferor and the duty on transferees to ensure that there is:
         
–
connection to telephone, water, gas, electricity and heating services, where applicable in agreement with the other occupiers;
–
access for all occupiers to drinks machines, to the canteen and to the showers;
–
access to the driveways and car parks;
–
responsible storage of items and use of drains and sewers.
 Temco Europe SA has provided no relevant information on the performance of those contracts.
          In a report drawn up on September 1996, the assistant auditor of the VAT authority stated that:
         
–
in respect of two of the occupiers the contracts were entered into after publication of the transfer of their registered offices
               to the building in issue;
            
–
no provision in the contracts defined the transferees’ activities or the use to be made of the premises;
–
there was no monitoring of the portion of the rent linked to turnover, which proportion represented for Petrus SA 7%, for
               Publi-round SA 6% and for Temco Energy SA 0% of the rent.
            
–
the occupiers have a key to access the building and the building has no security guard or concierge, with the effect that
               the restriction on access referred to in the internal rules is purely formalistic.
            
 It is not disputed that the companies remained in occupation of the buildings whilst proceedings were pending.’ 
         
            
 Following an inspection by the administration de la TVA, de l’Enregistrement et des Domaines (VAT, Registration and Property
         Authority) (‘the Authority’), the latter concluded that the contracts were in reality lettings of immovable property exempt
         from VAT under Article 44(3)(2) of the VAT Code, which is the provision transposing Article 13B(b) of the Sixth Directive,
         and that accordingly the deduction of VAT on the refurbishment work on the building at number Chaussée de Ruisbroeck was
         not justified.
         
            
 As a result, the Authority demanded payment from Temco Europe of EUR 125.(BEF 639) in respect of VAT which it
         alleged to have been wrongly deducted, of EUR 708.(BEF 000) representing the amount of a fine, together with interest
         at the legal rate on those sums.
         
            
 As Temco Europe refused to pay those sums, a summons was issued against it by the Authority. Temco Europe lodged a defence
         against that summons, and, by judgment of November 2000, the Tribunal de première instance de Bruxelles (Brussels Court
         of First Instance) (Belgium) annulled it. The Belgian State appealed against that judgment before the court of appeal.
         
            
 The Cour d’appel de Bruxelles (Brussels Court of Appeal) considered the concept of ‘letting of immovable property’ within
         the meaning of Article 13B(b) of the Sixth Directive in relation to contracts such as those that had been concluded in the
         main proceedings. The national court states in that regard:
         ‘In the present case the defendant, the transferor, and the transferees entered into contracts on unequal terms by which the
         transferees were granted a licence to occupy the property. Those contracts were clearly put in place in order not to come
         within the scope of the rental and letting of immovable property.
          One cannot examine those contracts, however, without taking into account the close link between those companies, all sharing
         the same management, which enables the transferees to enjoy the benefit of continuity of occupation and fair performance of
         the terms of the contracts.
          The performance of the contracts has shown that the transferees have continuous and unrestricted access to the premises and
         that they enjoy a high degree of security in occupying their offices and storage premises.’
         
            
 In those circumstances, the Cour d’appel de Bruxelles decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following question
         to the Court for a preliminary reference:
         ‘May Article 13B(b) of the Sixth Directive be interpreted to mean that transactions, corresponding in Belgian law to a contract
         of indefinite duration by which one company, through a number of contracts, simultaneously grants associated companies a licence
         to occupy a single property in return for a payment set partially but essentially on the basis of the area occupied, where
         the inherent insecurity of a licence is absent owing to the fact that the transferee and the transferor are under common management,
         constitute a letting of immovable property within the meaning of Community law, or, in other words, does the independent Community
         law concept of the “letting of immovable property” in Article 13B(b) of the Sixth Directive cover use, for consideration,
         of an immovable asset for purposes other than those of the taxpayer’s business – which definition is adopted in Article 44(3)(2)
         in fine  of the [VAT Code] – that is to say, the grant under a licence of indefinite duration of a non-exclusive right of occupation
         in return for a monthly payment, albeit fluctuating and partly dependent on the profits of one of the contracting parties,
         where the inherent insecurity of a licence is absent owing to the fact that the transferee and the transferor are under common
         management?’
         
The question referred
            
 By its question, the national court is essentially asking whether Article 13B(b) of the Sixth Directive must be interpreted
         as meaning that transactions by which one company, through a number of contracts, simultaneously grants associated companies
         a licence to occupy a single property in return for a payment set essentially on the basis of the area occupied are transactions
         which constitute the ‘letting of immovable property’ within the meaning of that provision.
         
Observations submitted to the Court
            
 Temco Europe submits that the contracts, which Belgian law treats as not being rental contracts, do not satisfy the definition
         of letting under Community law by reason of the absence of an exclusive right of occupation of the property, of the inherent
         insecurity of that right and the fact that payment in respect of that right is not set with regard only to the period of occupation
         of the property.
         
            
 The Belgian State argues that, in order to determine the nature of a contract, it is necessary to have regard to the manner
         of its performance, irrespective of its wording. It also refers to the need to take into account the underlying objective
         of the exemption laid down by Article 13B(b) of the Sixth Directive, the background to the exemption and the objectives and
         scheme of the directive. The criterion relating to the period of the contract is not to be interpreted as meaning that the
         period must always be fixed at the time the contract is concluded. As regards the inherent insecurity of the right of occupation,
         the Belgian State takes the view that this relates to a method of terminating the obligation, which does not affect the substance
         of the service provided.
         
            
 The Commission points out that the national court itself considered that the contracts were entered into on unequal terms
         and lacked any basis in reality, inasmuch as they were clearly put in place in order not to come within the scope of the ‘letting
         of immovable property’. The national court should take the real situation into account and look beneath the contractual terms.
         It also argues that an intention to avoid tax may be inferred, having regard to the absence of an economic justification at
         the time the contracts were concluded and that the national court, which has to decide the merits of the case, could base
         its reasoning on the concept of the abuse of rights which has been applied by the Court in other situations.
         
Findings of the Court
            
 It should be observed at the outset that according to settled case-law the exemptions provided for in Article of the Sixth
         Directive have their own independent meaning in Community law and must therefore be given a Community definition (see Case
         C‑358/Commission v Ireland [2000] ECR I‑6301, paragraph 51; Case C-315/Maierhofer [2003] ECR I-563, paragraph 25; and Case C-275/Sinclair Collis [2003] ECR I-5965, paragraph 22).
         
            
 Secondly, the terms used to specify the exemptions provided for by Article of the Sixth Directive are to be interpreted
         strictly since they constitute exceptions to the general principle that VAT is to be levied on all services supplied for consideration
         by a taxable person (see, inter alia, Commission  v Ireland, paragraph 52; Case C-150/Stockholm Lindöpark [2001] ECR I-493, paragraph 25; and Sinclair Collis, paragraph 23). As the Advocate General rightly states at point of his Opinion, the requirement of strict interpretation
         does not mean, however, that the terms used to specify exemptions should be construed in such a way as to deprive the exemptions
         of their intended effect.
         
            
 As regards the exemptions laid down under Article 13B(b) of the Sixth Directive, it must be noted that that provision does
         not define ‘letting’, nor does it refer to relevant definitions adopted in the legal orders of the Member States (see Case
         C‑326/Goed Wonen [2001] ECR I-6831, paragraph 44, and Sinclair Collis, paragraph 24). That provision must therefore be interpreted in the light of the context in which it is used, and of the
         objectives and the scheme of the Sixth Directive, having particular regard to the underlying purpose of the exemption which
         it establishes (see, to that effect, Goed Wonen, paragraph 50). 
         
            
 In numerous cases, the Court has defined the concept of the letting of immovable property within the meaning of Article 13B(b)
         of the Sixth Directive as essentially the conferring by a landlord on a tenant, for an agreed period and in return for payment,
         of the right to occupy property as if that person were the owner and to exclude any other person from enjoyment of such a
         right (see, to that effect, Goed Wonen, paragraph 55; Case C-409/Mirror Group [2001] ECR I-7175, paragraph 31; Case C-108/Cantor Fitzgerald International [2001] ECR I-7257, paragraph 21; Case C-269/Seeling [2003] ECR I-4101, paragraph 49; and Sinclair Collis, paragraph 25). 
         
            
 While the Court has stressed the importance of the period of the letting in those judgments, it has done so in order to distinguish
         a transaction comprising the letting of immovable property, which is usually a relatively passive activity linked simply to
         the passage of time and not generating any significant added value (see, to that effect, Goed Wonen, paragraph 52), from other activities which are either industrial and commercial in nature, such as the exemptions referred
         to in Article 13B(b)(1) to (4) of the Sixth Directive, or have as their subject‑matter something which is best understood
         as the provision of a service rather than simply the making available of property, such as the right to use a golf course
         (Stockholm Lindöpark, paragraphs to 27), the right to use a bridge in consideration of payment of a toll (Commission  v Ireland) or the right to install cigarette machines in commercial premises (Sinclair Collis, paragraphs to 30). 
         
            
 The actual period of the letting is thus not, of itself, the decisive factor in determining whether a contract is one for
         the letting of immovable property under Community law, even if the fact that accommodation is provided for a brief period
         only may constitute an appropriate basis for distinguishing the provision of hotel accommodation from the letting of dwelling
         accommodation (Case C-346/Blasi [1998] ECR I-481, paragraphs and 24). 
         
            
 In any event, it is not essential that that period be fixed at the time the contract is concluded. It is necessary to take
         into account the reality of the contractual relations (Blasi, paragraph 26). The period of a letting may be shortened or extended by the mutual agreement of the parties during the performance
         of the contract. 
         
            
 Furthermore, while a payment to the landlord which is strictly linked to the period of occupation of the property by the tenant
         appears best to reflect the passive nature of a letting transaction, it is not to be inferred from that that a payment which
         takes into account other factors has the effect of precluding a ‘letting of immovable property’ within the meaning of Article
         13B(b) of the Sixth Directive, particularly where the other factors taken into account are plainly accessory in light of the
         part of the payment linked to the passage of time or pay for no service other than the simple making available of the property.
         
            
 Lastly, as regards the tenant’s right of exclusive occupation of the property, it must be pointed out that this can be restricted
         in the contract concluded with the landlord and only relates to the property as it is defined in that contract. Thus, the
         landlord may reserve the right regularly to visit the property let. Furthermore, a contract of letting may relate to certain
         parts of a property which must be used in common with other occupiers.
         
            
 The presence in the contract of such restrictions on the right to occupy the premises let does not prevent that occupation
         being exclusive as regards all other persons not permitted by law or by the contract to exercise a right over the property
         which is the subject of the contract of letting.
         
            
 As regards the transaction at issue in the main proceedings, it is for the national court to consider all the circumstances
         surrounding it in order to establish its characteristics and to assess whether it can be treated as a ‘letting of immovable
         property’ within the meaning of Article 13B(b) of the Sixth Directive.
         
            
 It is also a matter for that court to establish whether the contracts, as performed, have as their essential object the making
         available, in a passive manner, of premises or parts of buildings in exchange for a payment linked to the passage of time,
         or whether they give rise to the provision of a service capable of being categorised in a different way.
         
            
 The answer to the question referred must therefore be that:
          Article 13B(b) of the Sixth Directive must be interpreted as meaning that transactions by which one company, through a number
         of contracts, simultaneously grants associated companies a licence to occupy a single property in return for a payment set
         essentially on the basis of the area occupied and by which the contracts, as performed, have as their essential object the
         making available, in a passive manner, of premises or parts of buildings in return for a payment linked to the passage of
         time, are transactions comprising the ‘letting of immovable property’ within the meaning of that provision and not the provision
         of a service capable of being categorised in a different way.
         
Costs
            
 Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the proceedings pending before the national
         court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than
         the costs of those parties, are not recoverable.
         
 On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
         Article 13B(b) of Sixth Council Directive 77/388/EEC of May on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States
               relating to turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax: uniform basis of assessment (OJ L 145, p. 1) must be interpreted
               as meaning that transactions by which one company, through a number of contracts, simultaneously grants associated companies
               a licence to occupy a single property in return for a payment set essentially on the basis of the area occupied and by which
               the contracts, as performed, have as their essential object the making available, in a passive manner, of premises or parts
               of buildings in return for a payment linked to the passage of time, are transactions comprising the ‘letting of immovable
               property’ within the meaning of that provision and not the provision of a service capable of being categorised in a different
               way. Signatures.
      
 –
            
Language of the case: French.
Top  
 