
Case C-20/Criminal proceedings
against
Karl Josef Wilhelm Schwibbert
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Tribunale civile e penale di Forlì)
(Directive 98/34/EC – Procedure for the provision of information in the field of technical standards and regulations – Obligation to communicate draft technical regulations – National law requiring the distinctive sign of the national body responsible for collecting copyright royalties to be affixed
         to compact discs placed on the market – Definition of ‛technical regulation’)
      
Opinion of Advocate General Trstenjak delivered on June Judgment of the Court (Third Chamber), November Summary of the Judgment
1.     Preliminary rulings – Admissibility – Need to supply the Court of Justice with sufficient explanation of the factual and legislative
            context 
(Art. EC; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 20)
2.     Approximation of laws – Provision of information in the field of technical standards and regulations and of rules on Information
            Society services – Directive 98/(European Parliament and Council Directive 98/34, Arts 1(3) and (11) and 8(1))
1.     The information provided in orders for reference must not only be such as to enable the Court to reply usefully but must also
         enable the governments of the Member States and other interested parties to submit observations pursuant to Article of
         the Statute of the Court of Justice. It is the Court’s duty to ensure that that opportunity is safeguarded, bearing in mind
         that, by virtue of the abovementioned provision, only the orders for reference are notified to the interested parties. Thus
         it is essential that the national court making the reference should give at the very least some explanation of the reasons
         for the choice of the Community provisions which it requires to be interpreted and of the link it establishes between those
         provisions and the national legislation applicable to the dispute.
      
(see para. 21)
2.     Directive 98/34, laying down a procedure for the provision of information in the field of technical standards and regulations
         and of rules on Information Society services, as amended by Directive 98/48, must be interpreted as meaning that national
         provisions which introduced, after the implementation of Directive 83/laying down a procedure for the provision of information
         in the field of technical standards and regulations, the obligation to affix a given distinctive sign to compact discs of
         works of figurative art for the purposes of marketing them in the Member State concerned, constitute a technical regulation
         which, if not notified to the Commission, cannot be invoked against an individual.
      
Since such a distinctive sign, which is intended to inform consumers and the national authorities that the reproductions are
         lawful, is affixed to the actual medium containing the intellectual work and thus to the product itself, and thus falls within
         the requirements applicable to the products concerned as regards marking or labelling, such a sign constitutes a ‘technical
         specification’ within the meaning of Article 1(3) of Directive 98/34, presupposing that the national measure necessarily refers
         to the product or its packaging as such. Therefore, since that specification is compulsory de jure for the marketing of compact
         discs, the said specification constitutes a ‘technical regulation’ within the meaning of the first subparagraph of Article
         1(11) of the directive.
      
The inclusion of new media, such as compact discs, within the scope of the obligation to affix the given distinctive sign
         must be regarded as a change to a draft technical regulation within the meaning of the third subparagraph of Article 8(1)
         of that directive, and should therefore have been notified to the Commission in so far as the obligation to affix the said
         sign was extended to the products in question after the implementation of Directive 83/189, which is a matter for the national
         court to determine. In that case, individuals may rely on the inapplicability of such a technical regulation before the national
         court, which must decline to apply it.
      
(see paras 35-37, 40-42, 44-and operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
November (*)
      
(Directive 98/34/EC – Procedure for the provision of information in the field of technical standards and regulations – Obligation to communicate draft technical regulations – National law requiring the distinctive sign of the national body responsible for collecting copyright royalties to be affixed
         to compact discs placed on the market – Definition of ‛technical regulation’)
      
In Case C‑20/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Tribunale civile e penale di Forlì (Italy), made by decision
         of December 2004, received at the Court on January 2005, in the criminal proceedings relating to
      
Karl Josef Wilhelm Schwibbert,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of A. Rosas, President of the Chamber, U. Lõhmus (Rapporteur), J. Klučka, A. Ó Caoimh and P. Lindh, Judges,
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: J. Swedenborg, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on April 2007,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Mr Schwibbert, by A. Sirotti Gaudenzi, avvocato,
–       Società Italiana degli Autori ed Editori, by M. Mandel and M. Siragusa, avvocati,
–       the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, and by S. Fiorentino and M. Massella Ducci Teri, avvocati dello
         Stato,
      
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by L. Pignataro and W. Wils, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on June 2007,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article EC, Articles EC to EC, Directive 98/34/EC
         of the European Parliament and of the Council of June laying down a procedure for the provision of information in
         the field of technical standards and regulations and of rules on Information Society services (OJ L 204, p. 37), as amended
         by Directive 98/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of July (OJ L 217, p. 18; ‘Directive 98/34’),
         Council Directive 92/100/EEC of November on rental right and lending right and on certain rights related to copyright
         in the field of intellectual property (OJ L 346, p. 61) and Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the
         Council of May on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related rights in the information society
         (OJ L 167, p. 10).
      
The reference was made in criminal proceedings brought against Mr Schwibbert in Italy, in which he was charged with holding
         compact discs (‘CDs’) which did not bear the distinctive sign of the national body responsible for collecting copyright royalties.
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
Council Directive 83/189/EEC of March (OJ L 109, p. 8) introduced a procedure for the provision of information
         in the field of technical standards and regulations into Community law.
      
Article of Directive 83/is worded as follows:
‘1. Member States shall bring into force the measures necessary in order to comply with this Directive within months following
         its notification and shall forthwith inform the Commission thereof.
      
2. Member States shall ensure that the texts of the main provisions of national law which they adopt in the field governed
         by this Directive are communicated to the Commission.’
      
Directive 83/has been variously and substantially amended, and was consolidated by Directive 98/34.
Article of Directive 98/provides:
‘For the purposes of this Directive, the following meanings shall apply:
(1)      “product”, any industrially manufactured product and any agricultural product, including fish products;
…
(3)      “technical specification”, a specification contained in a document which lays down the characteristics required of a product
         such as levels of quality, performance, safety or dimensions, including the requirements applicable to the product as regards
         the name under which the product is sold, terminology, symbols, testing and test methods, packaging, marking or labelling
         and conformity assessment procedures.
      
…
(4)      “other requirements”, a requirement, other than a technical specification, imposed on a product for the purpose of protecting,
         in particular, consumers or the environment, and which affects its life cycle after it has been placed on the market, such
         as conditions of use, recycling, reuse or disposal, where such conditions can significantly influence the composition or nature
         of the product or its marketing;
      
…
(11)      “technical regulation”, technical specifications and other requirements or rules on services, including the relevant administrative
         provisions, the observance of which is compulsory, de jure or de facto, in the case of marketing, provision of a service, establishment of a service operator or use in a Member State or a major
         part thereof, as well as laws, regulations or administrative provisions of Member States, except those provided for in Article 10,
         prohibiting the manufacture, importation, marketing or use of a product or prohibiting the provision or use of a service,
         or establishment as a service provider.
      
         …’
Articles and of Directive 98/require Member States to notify the Commission of the European Communities of any draft
         technical regulation falling within its scope, except where it merely transposes the full text of an international or European
         standard, in which case information regarding the relevant standard is sufficient, and to postpone the adoption of such drafts
         for several months to allow the Commission to verify that they are compatible with Community law, and in particular with the
         principle of free movement of goods, or to propose a directive, a regulation or a decision on the question.
      
Directive 92/aims to harmonise the legal protection for copyright works and for the subject-matter of related rights protection.
         It seeks to ensure that authors and performers receive an adequate income. To that end, Directive 92/states that the Member
         States are to provide a right to authorise or prohibit the rental and lending of originals and copies of copyright works,
         and other subject-matter as set out in Article 2(1) of that directive. In Chapter II of Directive 92/100, concerning rights
         related to copyright, Article provides that Member States are to provide for the exclusive right to make available to the
         public, by sale or otherwise, the objects listed in that article.
      
 National legislation
According to Law No of April on copyright (GURI No of July 1941; ‘the Law’), the mandatory requirement
         to affix a distinctive sign to any medium containing protected works is an authentification tool and safeguard enabling legitimate
         products to be distinguished from pirated products. The Società Italiana degli Autori ed Editori (Italian Society of Authors
         and Publishers), an ad hoc public body, has protection, mediation and certification responsibilities. The distinctive sign
         thus provided for by the law bears the initials ‘SIAE’.
      
Law No 121/of March (GURI No of March 1987) extended the requirement to affix the distinctive sign ‘SIAE’
         to other media containing intellectual works.
      
When transposing Directive 92/100, the Italian legislature introduced into the Law – pursuant to Legislative Decree No of November (GURI No of December 1994) which repealed Law No 121/– inter alia, Article 171b(1)(c), a provision
         which imposes specific criminal penalties and which is worded as follows:
      
‘1.      Any person who:
...
(c)      sells or rents video cassettes, music cassettes or any other medium containing phonograms or videograms of cinematographic
         or audiovisual works or sequences of moving images which do not bear the mark of the Italian Society of Authors and Publishers
         (SIAE) in accordance with this law and with the implementing regulation
      
shall be punished with a term of imprisonment of between three months and three years and with a fine of between ITL and ITL 000.
      
…’
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
On February 2000, the Procura della Repubblica presso il Tribunale civile e penale di Forlì (Public Prosecutor at the Civil
         and Criminal Court of Forli) opened a judicial investigation in respect of Mr Schwibbert, resident in Italy, the legal representative
         of the company K.J.W.S. Srl, and confirmed that, on and February 2000, Mr Schwibbert was holding a certain number of
         CDs of reproductions of the works of the artists Giorgio De Chirico and Mario Schifano for sale in the company’s warehouses.
         Those CDs, which were imported from Germany on behalf of other companies with a view to being sold at cultural events, did
         not bear the distinctive ‘SIAE’ sign.
      
In the course of inquiries carried out on and February by members of the Guardia di Finanza – Comando Tenenza di
         Cesena (Financial Investigation Unit – Cesena Headquarters), a record of the seizure of those CDs was drawn up in accordance
         with the Code of Criminal Procedure, in which it was stated that, after initial examination, the goods appeared to be counterfeit.
      
On May 2001, the Procura della Repubblica presso il Tribunale civile e penale di Forlì interviewed Mr Schwibbert and charged
         him with having committed an offence under Article 171b(1)(c) of the Law, and brought him before the aforementioned court.
      
The hearing before the Tribunale di Forlì civile e penale was held on December 2004. In the record of the hearing, the
         referring court states that it is not alleged that Mr Schwibbert reproduced the works unlawfully, since he had the necessary
         authorisations, but only that the CDs did not bear the distinctive ‘SIAE’ sign.
      
At that hearing, Mr Schwibbert’s lawyer called on the court to refer a question to the Court of Justice for a preliminary
         ruling. The Tribunale civile e penale di Forlì granted the application but, in its order for reference, the court merely attached
         the lawyer’s statement and did not formulate specific questions itself.
      
On July 2006, the Court of Justice requested clarification from the national court, pursuant to Article 104(5) of the Rules
         of Procedure. The referring court’s reply was received at the Court of Justice on October 2006.
      
According to that reply, the question referred by the Tribunale civile e penale di Forlì is as follows:
‘Are the national provisions concerning the affixing of the SIAE marking compatible with Article EC, Articles EC to EC, Articles 1, 8, and of Directive 98/and Directives 92/and 2001/29?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
 Admissibility
In its written observations and at the hearing, the Italian Government submitted that the reference for a preliminary ruling
         should be dismissed as inadmissible. In its view, the reference does not contain the information necessary to enable the Court
         to provide a helpful answer to the question referred. In that regard, the Italian Government claims that, contrary to the
         requirements of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, the reference does not specify why the interpretation of
         Community rules is necessary and does not clearly set out the national provisions which are actually applicable to the main
         proceedings. In any event, the reference is irrelevant to the outcome of those proceedings.
      
The Commission claims in its written observations that the question referred must be declared inadmissible in so far as it
         relates to the interpretation of Article EC, Articles EC to EC and Directive 92/owing to the absence of sufficient
         information in the order for reference.
      
It should be borne in mind that the information provided in orders for reference must not only be such as to enable the Court
         to reply usefully but must also enable the governments of the Member States and other interested parties to submit observations
         pursuant to Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice (order in Case C‑422/Colonia Versicherung and Others [1999] ECR I‑1279, paragraph 5). It is the Court’s duty to ensure that that opportunity is safeguarded, bearing in mind that,
         by virtue of the abovementioned provision, only the orders for reference are notified to the interested parties (Joined Cases
         141/to 143/Holdijk and Others [1982] ECR 1299, paragraph 6; order in Case C‑326/Banco de Fomento e Exterior [1996] ECR I‑1385, paragraph 7; and Case C‑176/Lehtonen and Castors Braine [2000] ECR I‑2681, paragraph 23). Thus, according to the case-law of the Court, it is essential that the national court should
         give at the very least some explanation of the reasons for the choice of the Community provisions which it requires to be
         interpreted and of the link it establishes between those provisions and the national legislation applicable to the dispute
         (see, in particular, order in Case C‑116/Laguillaumie [2000] ECR I‑4979, paragraph 16, and Joined Cases C‑94/and C‑202/Cipolla and Others [2006] ECR I‑11421, paragraph 38).
      
In the present case, as stated in paragraph of this judgment, the referring court provided clarification at the request
         of the Court of Justice as to the facts of the dispute in the main proceedings and the legal framework under national and
         Community law. Furthermore, the Società Italiana degli Autori ed Editori, the Italian Government and the Commission took the
         view that it was possible to submit observations to the Court on the basis of the information provided by the referring court.
      
As regards Directive 98/34, the interested parties differ in their views as to whether the obligation to affix the distinctive
         sign ‘SIAE’ applies to the CDs at issue in the main proceedings and, if at all, at what point that obligation was extended
         to such media, that is to say before or after the obligation to notify draft technical regulations was introduced into Community
         law. There is no dispute in the present case about the fact that criminal proceedings were initiated against Mr Schwibbert
         in respect of the failure to affix the ‘SIAE’ sign. However, determining the point at which the affixing obligation was in
         fact brought into Italian law is a matter of interpreting national law, which is not within the Court’s jurisdiction. In any
         event, the uncertainty on that point is not such as to render it impossible for the Court to provide a useful answer to the
         question referred as clarified by the referring court as requested.
      
In those circumstances, the Court considers that it has sufficient information to enable it to reply to the question concerning
         Directive 98/34.
      
By contrast, as regards the interpretation of Article EC, Articles EC to EC and Directive 92/100, it must be held
         that the order for reference does not provide the information necessary to enable the Court to provide the referring court
         with a useful reply.
      
It must be borne in mind that those EC Treaty provisions prohibit – between Member States – customs duties on imports and
         exports and all charges having equivalent effect. Directive 92/harmonises the rules relating to rental right and lending
         right and to certain rights related to copyright in the field of intellectual property.
      
However, the particulars provided by the referring court in relation to the factual background to the dispute in the main
         proceedings do not enable the place where the CDs were manufactured to be determined with any certainty, or the fact that
         they were actually imported into Italy to be established. As far as the information concerning the national legal framework
         is concerned, this does not give the Court sufficient information about the characteristics of the financial consideration
         given for obtaining the distinctive sign ‘SIAE’ so as to enable the Court to determine whether it amounts to a customs duty
         or a charge having equivalent effect within the meaning of the aforementioned articles of the Treaty. Nor, finally, do those
         particulars enable the Court to assess whether Directive 92/precludes such national rules.
      
In those circumstances, it is not possible to give a ruling on whether Article EC, Articles EC to EC and Directive
         92/preclude an obligation such as that which is in dispute in the main proceedings.
      
In addition, it must be noted that the question referred also concerns the interpretation of Directive 2001/29. That directive
         is based on the principles and rules already laid down, inter alia, by Directive 92/100, which it amends. Directive 2001/was adopted on May and Article thereof provides that the Member States must comply with it before December 2002.
         However, the events underlying the main proceedings occurred in February 2000, before the directive was adopted. Therefore,
         the question referred for a preliminary ruling is inadmissible in so far as it concerns the interpretation of Directive 2001/29.
      
Consequently, the reference for a preliminary ruling may be deemed admissible only in so far as it concerns the interpretation
         of Directive 98/34.
      
 Substance
By its question, the referring court asks, in essence, whether Articles 1, 8, and of Directive 98/preclude national
         provisions such as those at issue in the main proceedings, inasmuch as the latter provide for the initials of the Società
         Italiana degli Autori ed Editori to be affixed to media containing reproductions of intellectual works.
      
In that regard, the documents before the Court show that, in the main proceedings, criminal proceedings were initiated against
         Mr Schwibbert for failing to affix that distinctive sign to CDs of works of figurative art. It is necessary therefore to consider
         whether the Community legislation referred to by the national court precludes national provisions imposing such an obligation.
      
First, it is necessary to consider whether the obligation to affix such initials can be described as a ‘technical regulation’
         within the meaning of Article of Directive 98/34. If so, it will be necessary to check whether the draft technical regulation
         was notified to the Commission by the Italian authorities, failing which it would be unenforceable against Mr Schwibbert (see,
         in particular, Case C‑194/CIA Security International [1996] ECR I‑2201, paragraphs and 54; Case C‑226/Lemmens [1998] ECR I‑3711, paragraph 33; and Case C‑159/Sapod Audic [2002] ECR I‑5031, paragraph 49).
      
It follows from Article 1(11) of Directive 98/that the definition of ‘technical regulation’ can be broken down into three
         categories: first, the ‘technical specification’ within the meaning of Article 1(3) of that directive; second, the ‘other
         requirement’, as defined in Article 1(4); and, third, the prohibition of the manufacture, importation, marketing or use of
         a product referred to in Article 1(11) (see, in particular, Case C‑267/Lindberg [2005] ECR I‑3247, paragraph 54).
      
As the Court has held, the concept of technical specification presupposes that the national measure refers to the product
         or its packaging as such and thus lays down one of the characteristics required of a product (see, to that effect, Case C‑278/van der Burg [2001] ECR I‑2015, paragraph 20; Case C‑390/Canal Satélite Digital [2002] ECR I‑607, paragraph 45; and also Sapod Audic, paragraph 30, and Lindberg, paragraph 57).
      
In the present case, it is clear, as the Advocate General has stated in points and of her Opinion, that the distinctive
         sign ‘SIAE’, which is intended to inform consumers and the national authorities that the reproductions are lawful, is affixed
         to the actual medium containing the intellectual work and thus to the product itself. It is not, therefore, correct to maintain,
         as the Società Italiana degli Autori ed Editori and the Italian Government have done, that that sign relates solely to the
         intellectual work.
      
Such a distinctive sign constitutes a ‘technical specification’ within the meaning of Article 1(3) of Directive 98/34, since
         it falls within the requirements applicable to the products concerned as regards marking or labelling. Therefore, since observance
         of that specification is compulsory de jure for marketing those products, the specification constitutes a ‘technical regulation’ within the meaning of Article 1(11)
         of that directive (see, to that effect, Case C‑13/Bic Benelux [1997] ECR I‑1753, paragraph 23).
      
Under Article of Directive 98/34, ‘Member States shall immediately communicate to the Commission any draft technical regulation’.
         In the event of non-compliance with that obligation, the technical regulation remains unenforceable against individuals, as
         has been noted in paragraph of this judgment. It is necessary therefore to ascertain whether, in the present case, the
         Member State has fulfilled its obligations under Article of Directive 98/34. If it has not, the technical regulation at
         issue would be unenforceable against Mr Schwibbert.
      
The Società Italiana degli Autori ed Editori and the Italian Government claim that the obligation to affix the distinctive
         sign ‘SIAE’ to media containing intellectual works was already provided for in respect of paper media under the Law –
         some considerable time before the entry into force of the relevant Community directives – and that the statutory amendments
         introduced after their entry into force, in and respectively, did no more than bring the legislation into line with
         technological progress, merely including new media within the scope of that obligation. Accordingly, those statutory amendments
         did not have to be notified to the Commission.
      
In the present case, the documents submitted to the Court appear to show that the obligation to affix the distinctive sign
         ‘SIAE’ became applicable to the media at issue in the main proceedings, namely CDs of works of figurative art, in by
         virtue of Legislative Decree No 685. Accordingly, that obligation should have been communicated to the Commission by the Italian
         Republic because it arose after the introduction, by Directive 83/189, of the procedure for the provision of information in
         the field of technical standards and regulations. Nevertheless, as has been pointed out in paragraph of this judgment,
         it is for the referring court to ascertain whether the obligation at issue had in fact been brought into Italian law at that
         point.
      
In so far as the obligation to affix the distinctive sign ‘SIAE’ was extended to products such as those at issue in the main
         proceedings after the implementation of Directive 83/189, it must be borne in mind that, according to settled case-law, the
         aim of the second part of the first subparagraph of Article 8(1) of Directive 98/is to enable the Commission to have as
         much information as possible on any draft technical regulation with respect to its content, scope and general context in order
         to enable it to exercise as effectively as possible the powers conferred on it by the Directive (see, in particular, CIA Security International, paragraph 50; Case C‑279/94, Commission v Italy [1997] ECR I‑4743, paragraph 40; and Case C‑145/Commission v Belgium [1998] ECR I‑2643, paragraph 12).
      
Similarly, according to the third subparagraph of Article 8(1) of Directive 98/34, ‘Member States shall communicate the draft
         again … if they make changes to the draft that have the effect of significantly altering its scope …’. The inclusion of new
         media, such as CDs, within the scope of the obligation to affix the distinctive sign ‘SIAE’ must be regarded as such a change
         (see, to that effect, Case C‑317/Commission v Germany [1994] ECR I‑2039, paragraph 25, and Lindberg, paragraphs and 85).
      
The Commission stated in its written observations and at the hearing, without being contradicted by the Italian Republic in
         that regard, that that change was not communicated to the Commission by the Italian Republic.
      
According to the case-law of the Court, failure to observe the obligation to notify constitutes a procedural defect in the
         adoption of the technical regulations concerned, and renders those technical regulations inapplicable and therefore unenforceable
         against individuals (see, in particular, CIA Security International, paragraph 54, and Lemmens, paragraph 33). Individuals may rely on that inapplicability before the national court which must decline to apply a national
         technical regulation which has not been notified in accordance with Directive 98/(see, in particular, CIA Security International, paragraph 55, and Sapod Audic, paragraph 50).
      
In view of those points, its must be held that Directive 98/is to be interpreted as meaning that national provisions such
         as those at issue in the main proceedings – in so far as such provisions introduced, after the implementation of Directive
         83/189, the obligation to affix the distinctive sign ‘SIAE’ to CDs of works of figurative art for the purposes of marketing
         them in the Member State concerned – constitute a technical regulation which, if not notified to the Commission, cannot be
         invoked against an individual.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
Directive 98/34/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of June laying down a procedure for the provision
            of information in the field of technical standards and regulations and of rules on Information Society services, as amended
            by Directive 98/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of July 1998, must be interpreted as meaning that national
            provisions such as those at issue in the main proceedings – in so far as such provisions introduced, after the implementation
            of Council Directive 83/189/EEC of March laying down a procedure for the provision of information in the field of
            technical standards and regulations, the obligation to affix the distinctive sign ‘SIAE’ to compact discs of works of figurative
            art for the purposes of marketing them in the Member State concerned – constitute a technical regulation which, if not notified
            to the Commission, cannot be invoked against an individual.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 