
Judgment of the Court (Seventh Chamber) of November – Commission v Italy
(Case C‑13/09)
Failure of a Member State to fulfil its obligations – Directive 2006/86/EC – Traceability requirements – Notification of serious adverse reactions and events – Technical requirements for the coding, processing, preservation, storage and distribution of human tissues and cells – Failure to adopt within the prescribed period
1.                     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Examination of the merits by the Court – Situation to be taken into consideration
            – Situation on expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion (Art. EC) (see para. 9)
2.                     Member States – Obligations – Implementation of directives – Failure to fulfil obligations – National system pleaded as justification
            – Not permissible (Art. EC) (see para. 10)
Re: 
Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Failure to adopt, within the prescribed period, the provisions necessary
                  to comply with Commission Directive 2006/86/EC of October implementing Directive 2004/23/EC of the European Parliament
                  and of the Council as regards traceability requirements, notification of serious adverse reactions and events and certain
                  technical requirements for the coding, processing, preservation, storage and distribution of human tissues and cells (OJ L 294, p. 32).
               
Operative part
The Court: 
1.
	Declares that, by failing to adopt within the prescribed period all the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary
                     to comply with Commission Directive 2006/86/EC of October implementing Directive 2004/23/EC of the European Parliament
                     and of the Council as regards traceability requirements, notification of serious adverse reactions and events and certain
                     technical requirements for the coding, processing, preservation, storage and distribution of human tissues and cells, the
                     Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive;
                  
2.
	Orders the Italian Republic to pay the costs.
Top  
 