
Case C-92/Nina KristiansenvRijksdienst voor Arbeidsvoorziening(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Arbeidsrechtbank van het Arrondissement Tongeren (Belgium))
         
«(Social security – National system of unemployment benefits laying down a rule against overlapping of benefits as regards certain income – Unemployment benefits for former members of the temporary staff of the European Communities – Freedom of movement for workers – National scheme of unemployment insurance – Classification of post-graduate occupation – Occupation of trainee fellowship student – Different classification in other Member States of the EEA – Discrimination)»
Opinion of Advocate General Alber delivered on March Judgment of the Court (Fifth Chamber), December Summary of the Judgment
1..
Officials – Conditions of Employment of Other Servants – Legal nature – Regulation – Obligations of Member States – Observance of the complementary nature of the Community system of unemployment benefits – Entitlement of former member of the temporary staff to Community unemployment benefits – Application of a national rule against the overlapping of benefits  (Art. 249, second para., EC; Conditions of Employment of Other Servants, Art. 28a(1), second subpara.; Council Regulation
                  No 259/68) 
2..
Freedom of movement for persons – Workers – Equal treatment – Variations among Member States arising from differences between national social security legislation – Whether permissible – Conditions – Person carrying on an activity as a post-graduate student – Person deemed to be a trainee fellowship student who is not entitled to any rights under the national system of unemployment
                     benefits – Whether permissible  
                  (Art. 39(2) EC; Council Regulation No 1612/68, Art. 7(4)) 
1.
 By virtue of the second paragraph of Article EC, the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of the European Communities,
         laid down by Regulation No 259/68, have general application, are binding in their entirety and are directly applicable in
         all Member States. It follows that, in addition to having effects within the Community administration, they are also binding
         on Member States in so far as their cooperation is necessary in order to give effect to those measures. According to the second subparagraph of Article 28a(1) of the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants, where a former member
         of the temporary staff is entitled to unemployment benefits under a national scheme, the amount of those benefits will be
         deducted from the allowance paid under the Community system. This provision therefore means that the relationship between
         the Community system of unemployment benefits and the systems of the Member States is a complementary one. Therefore, that
         complementary relationship cannot be disregarded in the application of a national system of unemployment benefits and, specifically,
         of a rule against the overlapping of benefits under that system, to a former member of the temporary staff who resides in
         that Member State and is entitled to unemployment benefits paid under the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants. see paras 32-35, operative part 2.
 Community law does not detract from the power of the Member States to organise their social security systems. In the absence
         of harmonisation at Community level, it is for the legislation of each Member State to determine both the conditions concerning
         the right or duty to be insured with a social security scheme and the conditions for entitlement to benefits. Nevertheless,
         the Member States must comply with Community law when exercising that power. In this respect, while prohibiting each Member State, within the scope of the Treaty, from applying its national law in a
         manner which produces a different result depending on the nationality of the persons concerned, the principle of non-discrimination,
         which is laid down in both Article 39(2) EC and Article of Regulation No 1612/on freedom of movement for workers within
         the Community, does not apply to any variations in treatment which there may be among the Member States, and which arise from
         differences between national laws, so long as these variations affect in the same way those to whom the laws apply, according
         to objective criteria and without regard to their nationality. Therefore, in particular, the principle of non-discrimination laid down by Article 7(4) of Regulation No 1612/does not
         preclude a person carrying on an activity as a post-graduate student, like that performed under a contract intended to enhance
         the professional qualifications of young workers, who receives no salary but does receive a monthly amount to cover travel
         and subsistence costs and who is responsible for payment of social security contributions and taxes, from being deemed, in
         a Member State, to be a trainee fellowship student who is not entitled to any rights under the national system of unemployment
         benefits, even though in other Member States a person carrying on similar activities is deemed to be carrying on an occupational
         activity and is entitled to benefits under the unemployment benefits system. see paras 37-38, 40, operative part JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
décember (*)
      
(Social security - National system of unemployment benefits laying down a rule against overlapping of benefits as regards certain
         income - Unemployment benefits for former members of the temporary staff of the European Communities - Freedom of movement
         for workers - National scheme of unemployment insurance - Classification of post-graduate occupation - Occupation of trainee
         fellowship student - Different classification in other Member States of the EEA - Discrimination)
      
In Case C-92/02, 
REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Arbeidsrechtbank van het Arrondissement Tongeren (Belgium) for a preliminary
         ruling in the proceedings pending before that court between 
      
Nina Kristiansen 
and
Rijksdienst voor Arbeisdvoorziening, 
on the interpretation of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/of the Council of June on the application of social security
         schemes to employed persons, to self-employed persons and to members of their families moving within the Community, as amended
         and updated by Council Regulation (EC) No 118/of December (OJ L 28, p. 1), and of Regulation (EEC) No 1612/of the Council of October on freedom of movement for workers within the Community (OJ, English Special Edition (II), p. 475), 
      
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
composed of: C.W.A. Timmermans, acting for the President of the Fifth Chamber, D.A.O. Edward and A. La Pergola (Rapporteur),
         Judges, 
      
Advocate General: S. Alber, 
Registrar: R. Grass, 
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of the Commission of the European Communities by D. Martin,
         acting as Agent, 
      
having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur, 
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2003, 
gives the following 
Judgment
By a judgment of March 2002, received at the Court on March 2002, the Arbeidsrechtbank van het Arrondissement Tongeren
         (Tongeren District Labour Court) referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC two questions on the
         interpretation of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/of the Council of June on the application of social security schemes
         to employed persons, to self-employed persons and to members of their families moving within the Community, as amended and
         updated by Council Regulation (EC) No 118/of December (OJ L 28, p. 1) (hereinafter Regulation No 1408/71),
         and of Regulation (EEC) No 1612/of the Council of October on freedom of movement for workers within the Community
         (OJ, English Special Edition (II), p. 475). 
      
These questions were raised in a dispute between Mrs Kristiansen and the Rijksdienst voor Arbeidsvoorziening (National Employment
         Office, hereinafter the RVA) relating to an application for unemployment benefit made by her and which had been dismissed
         by the RVA. 
      
 Legal background 
 Community legislation 
Article of Regulation No 1408/71, entitled Aggregation of periods of insurance or employment, provides as follows: 
1. The competent institution of a Member State whose legislation makes the acquisition, retention or recovery of the right
         to benefits subject to the completion of periods of insurance shall take into account, to the extent necessary, periods of
         insurance or employment completed as an employed person under the legislation of any other Member State, as though they were
         periods completed under the legislation which it administers, provided, however, that the periods of employment would have
         been counted as periods of insurance had they been completed under that legislation. 
      
2. The competent institution of a Member State whose legislation makes the acquisition, retention or recovery of the right
         to benefits subject to the completion of periods of employment shall take into account, to the extent necessary, periods of
         insurance or employment completed as an employed person under the legislation of any other Member State, as though they were
         periods of employment completed under the legislation which it administers. 
      
3. Except in the cases referred to in Article 71(1)(a)(ii) and (b)(ii), application of the provisions of paragraphs and
         shall be subject to the condition that the person concerned should have completed lastly: 
      
–       - in the case of paragraph 1, periods of insurance, 
–       - in the case of paragraph 2, periods of employment, 
in accordance with the provisions of the legislation under which the benefits are claimed. 
4. Where the length of the period during which benefits may be granted depends on the length of periods of insurance or employment,
         the provisions of paragraph or shall apply, as appropriate. 
      
Article 28a of the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of the European Communities (hereinafter the Conditions of Employment),
         inserted by Council Regulation (ECSC, EEC, Euratom) No 2799/of September amending the Staff Regulations of officials
         and the conditions of employment of other servants of the European Communities (OJ L 265, p. 1), provides as follows:
         
      
1. A former member of the temporary staff who is unemployed when his service with an institution of the European Communities
         has been terminated: 
      
–       - who is not in receipt of a retirement or invalidity pension from the European Communities, 
–       - whose service is not terminated by resignation or by cancellation of the contract for disciplinary reasons, 
–       - who has completed a minimum of six months' service, 
–       - and who is resident in a Member State of the Communities, 
shall be eligible for a monthly unemployment allowance under the conditions laid down below. 
Where he is entitled to unemployment benefits under a national scheme, he shall be obliged to declare this to the institution
         to which he belonged, which shall immediately inform the Commission thereof. In such cases, the amount of those benefits will
         be deducted from the allowance paid under paragraph 3. 
      
2. To be eligible for this unemployment allowance, a former member of the temporary staff shall: 
(a) be registered, at his own request, as seeking employment with the employment authorities of the Member State in which
         he establishes his residence; 
      
(b) fulfil the obligations laid down by the law of that Member State for persons in receipt of unemployment benefits under
         that law; 
      
(c) forward every month to the institution to which he belonged, which shall immediately forward it to the Commission, a certificate
         issued by the competent national employment authority stating whether or not he has fulfilled the obligations and conditions
         referred to in (a) and (b). 
      
The allowance may be granted or maintained by the Community, even where the national obligations referred to under (b) have
         not been fulfilled, in cases of illness, accident, maternity, invalidity or a situation recognised as being similar or where
         the national authority, competent to meet those obligations, has given a dispensation. 
      
... 
4. The unemployment allowance shall be paid to the former member of the temporary staff for a maximum of months from the
         date of termination of service. If, however, during that period the former member of the temporary staff ceases to fulfil
         the conditions laid down in paragraphs and 2, payment of the unemployment allowance shall be suspended. Payment shall be
         resumed if before the expiry of that period the former member of the temporary staff again fulfils the said conditions and
         has not acquired the right to national unemployment benefit. 
      
... 
8. The unemployment allowances paid to a former member of the temporary staff who is unemployed shall be subject to Regulation
         (EEC, Euratom, ECSC) No 260/laying down the conditions and procedure for applying the tax for the benefit of the European
         Communities. 
      
9. The national departments with responsibility for employment and unemployment, acting in accordance with their national
         legislation, and the Commission shall cooperate with each other in an effective manner in order to ensure that this Article
         is properly applied. 
      
Article 7(4) of Regulation No 1612/provides that: 
Any clause of a collective or individual agreement or of any other collective regulation concerning eligibility for employment,
         employment, remuneration and other conditions of work or dismissal shall be null and void in so far as it lays down or authorises
         discriminatory conditions in respect of workers who are nationals of the other Member States. 
      
 National legislation 
Article of the Royal Decree of November concerning rules on unemployment (Belgisch Staatsblad of December 1991, hereinafter the Royal Decree) provides as follows: 
      
In order to be eligible for unemployment benefit, a full-time worker must have completed a waiting period comprising the following
         number of working days: 
      
... 
2. during the months preceding the claim, if the worker is more than and less than years of age, 
... 
The reference period referred to in the first paragraph is extended by the number of days included in the period: 
... 
3. of at least six months in which the person concerned carries on an occupation in the course of which the person concerned
         does not come under the social security system in respect of unemployment; the extension may not be for more than nine years.
         
      
Article 37(1) of the Royal Decree provides as follows: 
In the application of this section, periods of employment are to be taken into account in an occupation or undertaking subject
         to social security in respect of unemployment, and for which simultaneously: 
      
1. payment of at least the minimum wage has been made 
... 
2. deductions for social security, including those in respect of unemployment, have been made. 
Article of the Royal Decree states that: 
In order to be eligible for unemployment benefit, the unemployed person must have ceased to be in work and in receipt of remuneration
         for reasons beyond his control. 
      
Article 46(1) of the Royal Decree is worded as follows: 
The following in particular are regarded as remuneration within the meaning of Article 44: 
... 
5. payment to which the employee is entitled on termination of his employment, with the exception of compensation for non-material
         damage and payment which is awarded in addition to unemployment benefit; 
      
... 
For the purposes of the first subparagraph of Article 46(1)(5), payment or part of the payment which a person who is involuntarily
         unemployed receives as a consequence of the termination of an employment relationship is deemed to be payment awarded in addition
         to unemployment benefit, if the following conditions are fulfilled: 
      
–       - the payment was not regarded by the parties as representing payment in lieu of notice; 
–       - the payment or part of the payment must not have been paid in substitution for the benefits normally awarded under arrangements
         relating to the termination of employment, in so far as such benefits have in fact been paid. 
      
Article of the Ministerial Decree of November relative to the application of the rules relating to unemployment
         (Belgisch Staatsblad of January 1992, hereinafter the Ministerial Decree) provides as follows: 
      
When calculating the necessary days of work, services are not to be taken into account which have been performed in an occupation
         or in an undertaking not subject to social security in respect of unemployment, even if deductions were made. 
      
 The main proceedings and the questions referred 
Mrs Kristiansen was born on November and is a Norwegian national. From June to November she carried
         on an occupational activity in Norway, having completed her university studies there. During this period of occupational activity,
         she was subject to the Norwegian social security system. 
      
From November to October 1996, Mrs Kristiansen worked for the Institute for Reference Materials and Measurements
         (hereinafter the IRMM) in Geel, Belgium, under an Individual Fellowship Contract with the Commission of the European Communities
         (hereinafter the Fellowship Contract). The primary objective of this contract was to enhance the professional qualifications
         of young workers. Towards that end, Mrs Kristiansen took part in a research training project, and the conditions relating
         to the project were set out in an annex to her contract. Those conditions provided that she was not to receive a salary, but
         she was paid a monthly amount to cover her travel and subsistence costs. Furthermore, payment of social security contributions
         and taxes was her responsibility. She was not subject to the Belgian social security system. 
      
After the Fellowship Contract expired, Mrs Kristiansen was unemployed for one month. 
From December to November 1999, she worked under a contract as a temporary member of staff with the Commission,
         where she was subject to the social security scheme applying to officials and servants of the European Communities. 
      
After that contract expired, Mrs Kristiansen applied for unemployment benefit in Belgium. By decision of June 2000, the
         RVA dismissed that application on the ground that she did not fulfil the conditions laid down by Belgian legislation, which
         required her to have completed working days or equivalent days during the relevant reference period, which comprised the
         months preceding her application. 
      
In its decision, the RVA refused to take into account the services performed by Mrs Kristiansen as an employee of the Commission
         during the period from December to November 1999. It based its decision on the fact that these services were performed
         in an occupation or an undertaking not subject to social security in respect of unemployment, and could accordingly not be
         taken into account by virtue of Article 37(1) of the Royal Decree and Article of the Ministerial Decree. However, the RVA
         took the view that the occupational activity concerned extended the reference period for eligibility under the Belgian national
         system of unemployment benefits, by virtue of Article 30(3) of the Royal Decree. 
      
By contrast, the RVA held that, as the activities carried on by Mrs Kristiansen with the IRMM between November and
         October constituted a training period, which had been undertaken by Mrs Kristiansen as a trainee fellowship student,
         this period did not extend the reference period under Article 30(3) of the Royal Decree. 
      
In those circumstances, Mrs Kristiansen had failed to show that she had completed a sufficient number of working days to be
         entitled to unemployment benefits under Belgian legislation. 
      
Mrs Kristiansen challenged the decision of the RVA before the Arbeidsrechtbank van het Arrondissement Tongeren. 
Mrs Kristiansen argued before the national court that the activities carried out by her with the IRMM under the Fellowship
         Contract constituted an occupational activity. She submitted in that regard that such a period of training with the IRMM was
         subject to a special status under international law, arising under the Agreement on the European Economic Area of May (OJ L 1, p. 3, hereinafter the EEA Agreement). She pointed out that in certain Member States which are parties to the
         EEA Agreement, a post-graduate position with the IRMM is treated as constituting an occupational activity, whether or not
         subject to the social security system, whereas in Belgium it is treated as a training period for fellowship students. In that
         Member State, a fellowship student is not entitled to participate on a voluntary basis in the social security system which
         governs occupational activities. Mrs Kristiansen claimed that an inequality of this nature in the social security status of
         a person carrying on post-graduate activities was contrary to Article 7(4) of Regulation No 1612/68. 
      
The RVA argued that the activity undertaken by Mrs Kristiansen with the IRMM was not an occupational activity, but constituted
         a training period for fellowship students. It was clear from Article of the annex to the Fellowship Contract, which set
         out the general conditions applying under the contract, that the person concerned had received no salary, but had been paid
         a monthly amount to cover her travel and subsistence costs, and that she was not subject to the social security system. It
         followed that the activity carried on by Mrs Kristiansen with the IRMM could also not be taken into account for the purposes
         of extending the reference period for entitlement to unemployment benefits. 
      
The national court is of the view that there are two issues which require to be resolved. The first raises the question of
         whether former members of the temporary staff of the Commission residing in Belgium may be entitled to unemployment benefits
         under Belgian legislation after the termination of their occupational activity with that institution, even though no deductions
         for social security have been made and those concerned may be entitled to unemployment benefits paid by the Commission. The
         second issue raises the question of whether the decision of the RVA that a post-graduate student taken on by the IRMM under
         the Fellowship Contract is deemed to be a trainee fellowship student is contrary to Community legislation in that it is in
         breach of the principle of non-discrimination, or even of the principle of the free movement of workers. 
      
Those were the circumstances in which the Arbeidsrechtbank van het Arrondissement Tongeren decided to stay the proceedings
         and refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling: 
      
1. In respect of members of the temporary staff of the EC who, after the end of their period of service with the EC, reside
         in Belgium, and in respect of whom no contributions were deducted in favour of the social security system, and who are entitled
         to unemployment benefits paid by the EC, do the provisions of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/preclude national legislation from
         being fully applied to them, including the national rule against the overlapping of benefits under which, in accordance with
         the conditions governing the award of unemployment benefit, the employee must be out of work and not in receipt of remuneration,
         the latter term being defined to include in particular: payment in lieu of notice or any compensation payable to the employee
         in respect of termination of his contract of employment, with the exception of compensation for non-material damage? 
      
2. Does it run counter to Regulation (EEC) No 1612/of the Council (Article 7(4) of Title II), which provides that uniformity
         in social security matters must be pursued and that there may be no discrimination, that (in the applicant's view) there is
         inequality in the social security status of post-graduate students within the EEA in that in various Member States of the
         EEA a post-graduate student is deemed to carry on an occupational activity, whether or not subject to social security, and
         in Belgium a post-graduate student (in the applicant's view unjustly) is deemed to be a trainee fellowship student, who must
         arrange for his own social security cover under the Belgian national system although that is not possible on a voluntary basis
         (at any rate in regard to unemployment insurance)? 
      
 The questions referred 
It must be stated at the outset that under Articles and of and Annexes V and VI to the EEA Agreement, Regulations No
         1612/and No 1408/apply to Norwegian nationals. As it is clear from the order for reference that Mrs Kristiansen, who
         resides in Belgium, is a Norwegian national, she is entitled to rely on the provisions of those regulations. 
      
 The first question 
The first question referred by the national court asks in essence whether Regulation No 1408/precludes a national system
         of unemployment benefits, and, more specifically, a national rule against the overlapping of benefits under that system, from
         being applied to a former temporary member of the Commission staff who resides in a Member State and is entitled to unemployment
         benefits paid by the Commission. 
      
In that regard, it is evident from the order for reference that Mrs Kristiansen carried on the activity of a temporary member
         of the Commission staff between December and November and that she subsequently received unemployment benefits
         under the Conditions of Employment in her capacity as a former temporary member of the Commission staff. 
      
It follows, first, as the Commission has rightly pointed out in its observations, that the first question concerns the Conditions
         of Employment and, more specifically, the relationship between the provisions of those conditions which apply to former members
         of the temporary staff and the rules against overlapping under the Belgian unemployment benefits system. 
      
Secondly, it is clear from settled case-law that, in order to provide a satisfactory answer to the national court which has
         referred a question to it, the Court of Justice may deem it necessary to consider provisions of Community law to which the
         national court has not referred in its question (Case 35/Tissier [1986] ECR 1207, paragraph 9; Case C-315/Bagli Pennacchiotti [1990] ECR I-1323, paragraph 10, and Case C-107/Teckal [1999] ECR I-8121, paragraph 39). 
      
As regards the conditions applying to former members of the temporary staff, Article 28a of the Conditions of Employment lays
         down a special rule concerning the relationship between Community unemployment benefits and those payable under national schemes.
         
      
That being so, in order to provide an interpretation of Community law that will be useful to the national court, it is the
         relevant provisions of the Conditions of Employment that require to be interpreted and not those of Regulation No 1408/71.
         
      
It should first be noted in this regard that, as the Advocate General has mentioned at point of his Opinion, the Court
         has consistently held that Community law does not detract from the power of the Member States to organise their social security
         systems and that, in the absence of harmonisation at Community level, it is for the legislation of each Member State to determine
         both the conditions concerning the right or duty to be insured with a social security scheme and the conditions for entitlement
         to benefits. Nevertheless, the Member States must comply with Community law when exercising that power (Case C-157/Geraets-Smits and Peerbooms [2001] ECR I-5473, paragraphs to 46). 
      
Secondly, as the Commission stated in its observations, the Conditions of Employment were adopted by means of a Council regulation
         which, by virtue of the second paragraph of Article EC, has general application, is binding in its entirety and is directly
         applicable in all Member States. It follows that, in addition to having effects within the Community administration, the Conditions
         of Employment are binding on Member States in so far as their cooperation is necessary in order to give effect to those measures
         (Case 186/Commission v Belgium [1987] ECR 2029, paragraph 21). 
      
Against that background, it should be noted that the second subparagraph of Article 28a(1) of the Conditions of Employment
         states that, where a former member of the temporary staff is entitled to unemployment benefits under a national scheme, the
         amount of those benefits will be deducted from the allowance paid under the [Community system]. This provision therefore means
         that the relationship between the Community system of unemployment benefits and the systems of the Member States is a complementary
         one. 
      
Since it is based on the second subparagraph of Article 28a(1) of the Conditions of Employment, the complementary effect of
         the Community unemployment benefit system is binding on the Member States and cannot be disregarded by national legislation
         (Commission v Belgium, cited above, paragraph 23). 
      
In the light of the above, the answer to the first question must be that the second subparagraph of Article 28a(1) of the
         Conditions of Employment means that the relationship between the Community system of unemployment benefits and those of the
         Member States is a complementary one, which cannot be disregarded by a Member State in the application of its system of unemployment
         benefits and, specifically, of a rule against the overlapping of benefits under that system, to a former member of the temporary
         staff who resides in that Member State and is entitled to unemployment benefits paid under the Conditions of Employment. 
      
 The second question 
The second question referred by the national court asks in essence whether it is contrary to the principle of non-discrimination
         laid down by Article 7(4) of Regulation No 1612/for a person carrying on an activity as a post-graduate student, in the
         manner envisaged by the Fellowship Contract, to be deemed, in a Member State, to be a trainee fellowship student who is not
         entitled to any rights under the national system of unemployment benefits, even though in other Member States a person carrying
         on similar activities is deemed to be carrying on an occupational activity and is entitled to benefits under such an unemployment
         benefits system. 
      
In that regard, suffice it to note, first, that, as was mentioned at paragraph of this judgment, Community law does not
         detract from the power of the Member States to organise their social security systems and that, in the absence of harmonisation
         at Community level, it is for the legislation of each Member State to determine both the conditions concerning the right or
         duty to be insured with a social security scheme and the conditions for entitlement to benefits (Geraets-Smits and Peerbooms, cited above, paragraphs and 45). 
      
Secondly, while prohibiting each Member State, within the scope of the EC Treaty, from applying its national law in a manner
         which produces a different result depending on the nationality of the persons concerned, the principle of non-discrimination,
         which is laid down in both Article 39(2) EC and Article of Regulation No 1612/68, does not apply to any variations in treatment
         which there may be among the Member States, and which arise from differences between national laws, so long as these variations
         affect in the same way those to whom the laws apply, according to objective criteria and without regard to their nationality.
         
      
Against that background, and with specific regard to the Belgian legislation relating to social security, that legislation
         cannot be considered to be contrary to Community law on the ground only that it deems the post-graduate activities carried
         on by Mrs Kristiansen with the IRMM to be those of a trainee fellowship student who is not entitled to any rights under the
         national system of unemployment benefits, so long as a Belgian national who has carried on the same activity is treated in
         the same way. 
      
In the light of the above, the answer to the second question must be that the principle of non-discrimination laid down by
         Article 7(4) of Regulation No 1612/does not preclude a person carrying on an activity as a post-graduate student, such
         as the person in the main proceedings, from being deemed, in a Member State, to be a trainee fellowship student who is not
         entitled to any rights under the national system of unemployment benefits, even though in other Member States a person carrying
         on similar activities is deemed to be carrying on an occupational activity and is entitled to benefits under the unemployment
         benefits system. 
      
 Costs 
The costs incurred by the Commission, which has submitted observations to the Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings
         are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the proceedings pending before the national court, the decision on
         costs is a matter for that court. 
      
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
in answer to the questions referred to it by the Arbeidsrechtbank van het Arrondissement Tongeren by judgment of March
         2002, hereby rules: 
      
1)      The second subparagraph of Article 28a(1) of the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of the European Communities means
            that the relationship between the Community system of unemployment benefits and those of the Member States is a complementary
            one, which cannot be disregarded by a Member State in the application of its system of unemployment benefits and, specifically,
            of a rule against the overlapping of benefits under that system, to a former member of the temporary staff who resides in
            that Member State and is entitled to unemployment benefits paid under the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of the
            European Communities. 
2)      The principle of non-discrimination laid down by Article 7(4) of Regulation (EEC) No 1612/of the Council of October
            on freedom of movement for workers within the Community does not preclude a person carrying on an activity as a post-graduate
            student, such as the person in the main proceedings, from being deemed, in a Member State, to be a trainee fellowship student
            who is not entitled to any rights under the national system of unemployment benefits, even though in other Member States a
            person carrying on similar activities is deemed to be carrying on an occupational activity and is entitled to benefits under
            the unemployment benefits system. 
Timmermans 
Edward
La Pergola
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on December 2003. 
R. Grass 
 
      V. Skouris
Registrar 
 
      President 
* Langue de procédure: le néerlandais.
      
Top  
 