
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-333/Commission of the European Communities
v
Grand Duchy of Luxembourg
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Failure to transpose Directive 98/50/EC – Transfer of undertakings – Safeguarding of employees’ rights)
Summary of the Judgment
Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Examination of the merits by the Court – Situation to be taken into consideration
            – Situation on expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion 
(Art. EC)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)June 2004(1)
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations  –  Failure to transpose Directive 98/50/EC  –  Transfer of undertakings –  Safeguarding of employees' rights)
 In Case C-333/03,
            
Commission of the European Communities, represented by M.-J. Jonczy, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant,
v
Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, represented by S. Schreiner, acting as Agent,
            
defendant,
 APPLICATION for a declaration that, by failing to adopt the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply
            with Council Directive 98/50/EC of June amending Directive 77/187/EEC on the approximation of the laws of the Member
            States relating to the safeguarding of employees' rights in the event of transfers of undertakings, businesses or parts of
            businesses (OJ L 201, p. 88) or, in any event, by failing to inform the Commission thereof, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg
            has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive,
            
THE COURT (Third Chamber),,
 composed of: A. Rosas, acting for the President of the Third Chamber, R. Schintgen and N. Colneric (Rapporteur), Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed,Registrar: R. Grass,
            
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By application lodged at the Court Registry on July 2003, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action
         under Article EC for a declaration that, by failing to adopt the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary
         to comply with Council Directive 98/50/EC of June amending Directive 77/187/EEC on the approximation of the laws of
         the Member States relating to the safeguarding of employees’ rights in the event of transfers of undertakings, businesses
         or parts of businesses (OJ L 201, p. 88, hereinafter ‘the Directive’) or, in any event, by failing to inform the Commission
         thereof, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg has failed to fulfil its obligations under the Directive.
         
Legal framework and pre-litigation procedure
            
 Article of the Directive provides:
         ‘1. Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this
         Directive by July at the latest …
          2. When Member States adopt the measures referred to in paragraph 1, they shall contain a reference to this Directive or shall
         be accompanied by such reference on the occasion [of] their official publication. The methods of making such reference shall
         be laid down by Member States.
          Member States shall inform the Commission immediately of the measures they take to implement this Directive.’
         
            
 Council Directive 77/187/EEC of February (OJ L 61, p. 26) was repealed by Council Directive 2001/23/EC of March
         on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the safeguarding of employees’ rights in the event
         of transfers of undertakings, businesses or parts of undertakings or businesses (OJ L 82, p. 16). According to Article
         of Directive 2001/23, Directive 77/187, as amended, is repealed without prejudice to the obligations of the Member States
         concerning the time‑limits for implementation set out in Annex I, Part B to Directive 2001/23. Annex I, Part B, provides that
         the deadline for transposing Directive 98/is July 2001.
         
            
 Since no national measures transposing the Directive had been communicated to it, the Commission initiated the procedure for
         failure to fulfil obligations laid down in Article EC. Having given the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg formal notice to submit
         its observations, it issued a reasoned opinion on April 2003, calling on that Member State to take the measures necessary
         to comply with the opinion within two months of the date of its notification. 
         
            
 As the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg did not reply to the opinion, the Commission decided to bring the present action. 
         
The actionArguments of the parties
            
 The Commission states that the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg has failed to take the measures necessary to comply with the Directive,
         or, in any event, has failed to inform the Commission thereof, and has thereby failed to fulfil its obligations under the
         Directive.
         
            
 The Grand Duchy of Luxembourg submits that draft law No regulating the safeguarding of employees’ rights in the event
         of transfers of undertakings, businesses or parts of businesses, which was intended to transpose the Directive, was submitted
         to the Chambre des députés (Chamber of Deputies) on December 2001. Following two opinions issued by the Conseil d’État
         (Council of State) in May and July 2003, the Labour and Employment Committee of the Chambre des députés decided on July
         that the text of the draft law should be amended. Those amendments were approved by the Conseil de gouvernement (Government
         in council) on July and were forwarded to the Conseil d’État and the Chambre des députés. At its sitting of July
         2003, the committee decided to place the draft law on the agenda of the Chambre des députés in order that it might be adopted
         in October 2003.
         
Findings of the Court
            
 According to settled case-law, the question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations must be determined
         by reference to the situation prevailing in the Member State at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion (see,
         inter alia, Case C-147/Commission  v France [2001] ECR I-2387, paragraph 26, and Case C‑173/Commission  v Greece [2002] ECR I-6129, paragraph 7). 
         
            
 It is not disputed that the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg failed to take the measures necessary to transpose the Directive within
         the time-limit set by the reasoned opinion.
         
            
 It must accordingly be held that, by failing to adopt the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply
         with the Directive, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive.
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. As the Commission has asked that the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg be ordered
         to pay the costs and the latter has been unsuccessful, it must be ordered to pay the costs.
         
On those grounds,
THE COURT (Third Chamber)
 hereby:
         
 
1.
Declares that, by failing to adopt the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Council Directive
                     98/50/EC of June amending Directive 77/187/EEC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the
                     safeguarding of employees’ rights in the event of transfers of undertakings, businesses or parts of businesses, the Grand
                     Duchy of Luxembourg has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive;
                  
 
2.
Orders the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg to pay the costs.
Rosas
Schintgen
Colneric
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on June 2004.
         
R. Grass
A. Rosas
Registrar
President of the Third Chamber
 –
            
Language of the case: French.
Top  
 