
Case C-74/Bâtiments et Ponts Construction SA
and 
WISAG Produktionsservice GmbH, formerly ThyssenKrupp Industriservice GmbH
v
Berlaymont SA
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Cour de cassation (Belgium))
(Public works contracts – Directive 93/37/EEC – Article – Grounds for exclusion – Obligations relating to the payment of social security contributions and taxes – Tenderers’ registration obligation, on pain of exclusion – ‘Registration Committee’ and its powers – Examination of the validity of certificates issued by the competent authorities of the Member State in which a foreign tenderer
         is established)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Approximation of laws – Procedures for the award of public works contracts – Directive 93/– Grounds for exclusion from
            participation in a contract
(Council Directive 93/37, Art. 24, first para.)
2.        Approximation of laws – Procedures for the award of public works contracts – Directive 93/– Grounds for exclusion from
            participation in a contract 
(Council Directive 93/37, Art. 24, first para.)
1.        The law of the Union is to be interpreted as not precluding national legislation which imposes on a contractor established
         in another Member State, in order to be awarded a contract in the contracting authority’s Member State, an obligation to hold
         a registration, in the latter Member State, certifying that none of the grounds for exclusion listed in the first paragraph
         of Article of Directive 93/concerning the coordination of procedures for the award of public works contracts applies
         to the contractor, provided that such obligation does not hinder or delay the contractor’s participation in the public contract
         in question or give rise to excessive administrative charges, and provided that its sole objective is to check the professional
         qualities of the contractor concerned, for the purposes of that provision. 
      
The fact that a contractor established in another Member State has produced certificates issued by the competent authorities
         of that State is not sufficient to confirm, conclusively, that it has fulfilled its obligations in that regard. First, points
         (e) and (f) of the first paragraph of Article of Directive 93/provide that the contractor must have fulfilled its social
         security and tax obligations in the contracting authority’s Member State also. Secondly, by referring to certificates issued
         by the competent authority in the Member State concerned, the second indent in the second paragraph of Article permits
         a separate check on such a contractor in the Member State in which the public contract in question is to be awarded. 
      
Thus, a registration obligation cannot be regarded as an additional ground for exclusion, in addition to those exhaustively
         listed in the first paragraph of Article of Directive 93/37, if it is designed as a means of implementing that provision,
         solely to check the evidence that a contractor wishing to participate in a public contract does not fall fowl of one of those
         grounds for exclusion, particularly those relating to the payment of social security contributions and taxes.
      
(see paras 40, 44, 53, operative part 1)
2.        The law of the Union is to be interpreted as precluding national legislation under which the checking of the certificates
         issued to a contractor of another Member State by the tax and social security authorities of that Member State is entrusted
         to an authority other than the contracting authority where:
      
–      the majority on that other authority is composed of persons appointed by the employers’ and workers’ organisations in the
         construction sector of the province in which the public contract in question is to be awarded, and
      
–      that power extends to a check on the substance of the validity of those certificates.
While, the provisions of Directive 93/concerning the coordination of procedures for the award of public works contracts
         do not, as a matter of principle, preclude national law from entrusting a check of the absence of grounds for exclusion, for
         the purposes of the first paragraph of Article of that directive, to an authority other than the contracting authority,
         the composition and powers of such authority must, however, be reconcilable with the objective of ensuring compliance with
         the law of the European Union on public procurement.
      
(see paras 55, 58, 66, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Public works contracts – Directive 93/37/EEC – Article – Grounds for exclusion – Obligations relating to the payment of social security contributions and taxes – Tenderers’ registration obligation, on pain of exclusion – ‘Registration Committee’ and its powers – Examination of the validity of certificates issued by the competent authorities of the Member State in which a foreign tenderer
         is established)
      
In Case C‑74/09,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Cour de Cassation (Belgium), made by decision of January
         2009, received at the Court on February 2009, in the proceedings
      
Bâtiments et Ponts Construction SA,
WISAG Produktionsservice GmbH, formerly ThyssenKrupp Industrieservice GmbH,
      
v
Berlaymont SA,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, R. Silva de Lapuerta, E. Juhász (Rapporteur), G. Arestis and J. Malenovský,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: N. Nanchev, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on March 2010,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Bâtiments et Ponts Construction SA and WISAG Produktionsservice GmbH, formerly ThyssenKrupp Industrieservice GmbH, by D. Lagasse
         and E. van Nuffel, avocats,
      
–        Berlaymont SA, by X. Dieux, J.-P. Gunther, J.-Q. De Cuyper, C. Breuvart and S. Bartholomeeusen, avocats,
–        the Belgian Government, by J.-C. Halleux and C. Pochet, acting as Agents,
–        the Czech Government, by M. Smolek, acting as Agent,
–        the European Commission, by M. Konstantinidis and J.‑B. Laignelot, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on April 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles EC and EC and of the relevant provisions,
         particularly Article 24, of Council Directive 93/37/EEC of June concerning the coordination of procedures for the
         award of public works contracts (OJ L 199, p. 54).
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings between, on the one hand, Bâtiments et Ponts Construction SA (‘BPC’),
         a company incorporated under Belgian law, and WISAG Produktionsservice GmbH (‘WIG’), formerly ThyssenKrupp Industrieservice
         GmbH, formerly WIG Industrieinstandhaltung GmbH, a company incorporated under German law, and, on the other, Berlaymont SA (‘Berlaymont 2000’), a company incorporated under Belgian law, concerning the exclusion by the latter, in its capacity
         as contracting authority, from participation in a public works contract of the consortium formed for that purpose by the two
         former companies.
      
 Legal context
 Legislation of the Union
The provisions, relevant to the main proceedings, of Directive 93/37, which, in the meantime, has been replaced by Directive
         2004/18/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of March on the coordination of procedures for the award
         of public works contracts, public supply contracts and public service contracts (OJ L 134, p. 114), are those of Article
         of Directive 93/and those in Title IV thereof, and more particularly in Chapter 2, entitled ‘Criteria for qualitative
         selection’, of Title IV, which chapter contains Articles to 29.
      
Article 6(6) of Directive 93/was in the following terms:
      
‘Contracting authorities shall ensure that there is no discrimination between the various contractors.’
Article of Directive 93/provided as follows:
      
‘Any contractor may be excluded from participation in the contract who:
(a)      is bankrupt or is being wound up, whose affairs are being administered by the court, who has entered into an arrangement with
         creditors, who has suspended business activities or who is in any analogous situation arising from a similar procedure under
         national laws and regulations;
      
(b)      is the subject of proceedings for a declaration of bankruptcy, for an order for compulsory winding up or administration by
         the court or for an arrangement with creditors or of any other similar proceedings under national laws or regulations;
      
(c)      has been convicted of an offence concerning his professional conduct by a judgment which has the force of res judicata;
      
(d)      has been guilty of grave professional misconduct proved by any means which the contracting authorities can justify;
(e)      has not fulfilled obligations relating to the payment of social security contributions in accordance with the legal provisions
         of the country in which he is established or with those of the country of the contracting authority;
      
(f)      has not fulfilled obligations relating to the payment of taxes in accordance with the legal provisions of the country in which
         he is established or those of the country of the contracting authority;
      
(g)      is guilty of serious misrepresentation in supplying the information required under this Chapter.
Where the contracting authority requires of the contractor proof that none of the cases quoted in (a), (b), (c), (e) or (f)
         applies to him, it shall accept as sufficient evidence:
      
–        for points (a), (b) or (c), the production of an extract from the “judicial record” or, failing this, of an equivalent document
         issued by a competent judicial or administrative authority in the country of origin [or] in the country whence that person
         comes showing that these requirements have been met;
      
–        for points (e) or (f), a certificate issued by the competent authority in the Member State concerned.
Where the country concerned does not issue such documents or certificates, they may be replaced [by] a declaration on oath
         or, in Member States where there is no provision for declarations on oath, by a solemn declaration made by the person concerned
         before a judicial or administrative authority, a notary or a competent professional or trade body, in the country of origin
         or in the country whence that person comes.
      
Member States shall designate the authorities and bodies competent to issue these documents and shall forthwith inform the
         other Member States and the Commission thereof.’
      
The first and third indents of Article of Directive 93/provided:
      
‘Any contractor wishing to take part in a public works contract may be requested to prove his enrolment in the professional
         or trade register under the conditions laid down by the laws of the Member State in which he is established:
      
–        in Belgium the “Registre du Commerce – Handelsregister”,
…
–        in Germany, the “Handelsregister” and the “Handwerksrolle”’.
Article of Directive 93/provided:
      
‘1. Evidence of the contractor’s financial and economic standing may, as a general rule, be furnished by one or more of the
         following references:
      
(a)      appropriate statements from bankers;
(b)      the presentation of the firm’s balance sheets or extracts from the balance sheets, where publication of the balance sheet
         is required under the law of the country in which the contractor is established;
      
(c)      a statement of the firm’s overall turnover and the turnover on construction works for the three previous financial years.
2. The contracting authorities shall specify in the notice or in the invitation to tender which reference or references they
         have chosen and what references other than those mentioned under paragraph 1(a), (b) or (c) are to be produced.
      
3. If, for any valid reason, the contractor is unable to supply the references requested by the contracting authorities, he
         may prove his economic and financial standing by any other document which the contracting authorities consider appropriate.’
      
Article of Directive 93/was worded as follows:
      
‘1. Evidence of the contractor’s technical capability may be furnished by:
(a)      the contractor’s educational and professional qualifications and/or those of the firm’s managerial staff and, in particular,
         those of the person or persons responsible for carrying out the works;
      
(b)      a list of the works carried out over the past five years, accompanied by certificates of satisfactory execution for the most
         important works. These certificates shall indicate the value, date and site of the works and shall specify whether they were
         carried out according to the rules of the trade and properly completed. Where necessary, the competent authority shall submit
         these certificates to the contracting authority direct;
      
(c)      a statement of the tools, plant and technical equipment available to the contractor for carrying out the work;
(d)      a statement of the firm’s average annual manpower and the number of managerial staff for the last three years;
(e)      a statement of the technicians or technical bodies which the contractor can call upon for carrying out the work, whether or
         not they belong to the firm.
      
2. The contracting authorities shall specify in the invitation to tender which of these references are to be produced.’
Article of Directive 93/was in the following terms:
      
‘Within the limits of Articles to 27, the contracting authority may invite the contractor to supplement the certificates
         and documents submitted or to clarify them.’
      
Article of Directive 93/provided:
      
‘1. Member States who have official lists of recognized contractors must adapt them to the provisions of Article 24(a) to
         (d) and (g) and of Articles 25, and 27.
      
2. Contractors registered in the official lists may, for each contract, submit to the contracting authority a certificate
         of registration issued by the competent authority. This certificate shall state the reference which enabled them to be registered
         in the list and the classification given in this list.
      
3. Certified registration in the official lists by the competent bodies shall, for the contracting authorities of other Member
         States, constitute a presumption of suitability for works corresponding to the contractor’s classification only as regards
         Articles 24(a) to (d) and (g), 25, 26(b) and (c) and 27(b) and (d).
      
Information which can be deduced from registration in official lists may not be questioned. However, with regard to the payment
         of social security contributions, an additional certificate may be required of any registered contractor whenever a contract
         is offered.
      
The contracting authorities of other Member States shall apply the above provisions only in favour of contractors who are
         established in the country holding the official list.
      
4. For the registration of contractors of other Member States in an official list, no further proofs and statements may be
         required other than those requested of nationals and, in any event, only those provided for under Articles to 27.
      
5. Member States holding an official list shall communicate to other Member States the address of the body to which requests
         for registration may be made.’
      
 National legislation
The market in question in the main proceedings was governed, in particular, by the Royal Decree of April concerning
         public works, supply and service contracts (Moniteur belge of July 1977, p. 9539). Article thereof, in Section 2, entitled ‘Drawing up the tender’, provided:
      
‘…
3. A Belgian tenderer which employs staff to whom the Law of June amending the Decree-Law of December on social
         security for workers applies must, for its tender to be regarded as valid, attach thereto a certificate of the National Social
         Security Office stating that it has paid social security and subsistence protection contributions or present such a certificate
         to the administration before the opening of tenders …
      
4. A foreign tenderer must, for its tender to be regarded as valid, attach thereto or present to the administration before
         the opening of tenders:
      
(a)      a certificate issued by the competent authority stating that the tenderer has complied with its obligations relating to the
         payment of social security contributions in accordance with the legal provisions of the country in which it is established
         …
      
…
7. A tenderer must, for its tender to be regarded as valid, be registered as a contractor pursuant to Article 299a of the
         Income Tax Code and Article 30a of the Law of June amending the Decree-Law of December on social security
         for workers.’
      
The detailed rules of that registration obligation are governed by the Royal Decree of October (Moniteur belge of October 1978, p. 11707; ‘the Royal Decree of 1978’).
      
Article of the Royal Decree of 1978, in Section entitled ‘Conditions to be satisfied in order to be registered as a contractor’,
         provides in its paragraph 1:
      
‘Registration as a contractor … shall be granted only to contractors which satisfy the following conditions:
…
2.      in respect of an activity referred to in Article 1, they must be registered in the companies’ register or professional register
         in accordance with the requirements laid down in the legal provisions of the Member State in which they are established;
      
…
7.      where a company is involved, the directors, managers or persons empowered to enter into obligations on behalf of the company
         may not include any persons who are prohibited from performing such tasks under Royal Decree No of October referred
         to in subparagraph 6;
      
…
10.      they must not have committed, during the five year period preceding the application for registration, any repeated or serious
         infringements relating to tax obligations …
      
11.      they must not, at the time of the application for registration, be in arrears with the payment of taxes, contributions levied
         by the National Social Security Office or contributions levied by the Subsistence Protection Fund or on its behalf; …;
      
12.      they must possess sufficient financial, administrative and technical resources to ensure fulfilment of their tax and social
         security obligations.’
      
Under Article of the Royal Decree of 1978, an application to be registered as a contractor must be submitted to the Chairman
         of the ‘Registration Committee’ of the province in which the applicant has its principal place of business. In the case of
         applicants not established in Belgium, the committee of the province in which the construction site in question is situated
         is to be competent.
      
Article of the Royal Decree of is in the following terms:
      
‘(1) For it not to be inadmissible, the following documents must be attached to the application:
…
3.      from each applicant: a copy of the entry in the professional register on the conditions laid down in the legal provisions
         of the country in which it is established …;
      
…
5.      from a [foreign] applicant: certificates issued by the competent authority in the Member State in which it is established
         confirming that it is not in arrears with the payment of taxes or social security contributions in that Member State.
      
…
2.      The registration committee referred to in Section below can require the applicant to provide further documents or information
         which it deems necessary to determine whether or not the conditions laid down in Article 2(1) have been fulfilled.
      
…’
Article of the Royal Decree of 1978, in Section 4, entitled ‘Registration Committee’, provides:
      
‘(1) Each registration committee shall be composed of nine members appointed by Us in accordance with the procedures set out
         below:
      
1.      three members who shall be officials appointed on the proposal of, respectively,
(a) the Minister for Social Security;
(b) the Minister for Finance;
(c) the Minister for Employment and Work;
2.      three members shall be appointed on the proposal of the organisations representing employers in the construction industry;
3.      three members shall be appointed on the proposal of the organisations representing employees in the construction industry;
         …
      
(2)      Each committee shall be chaired by one of the officials referred to in Paragraph (1)(1)(a) and (b) appointed by Us for this
         purpose on the proposal of the two ministers referred to therein …’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
On September 1990, Berlaymont was formed by the Régie des Bâtiments (Buildings Agency), a legal person established
         under Belgian public law, and three banking institutions. Berlaymont 2000’s main purpose was the renovation of the Berlaymont
         Building and the drawing up of the contract documents, work schedule and budget associated with that renovation. That building
         had been constructed on land acquired by the Belgian State in and occupied by the Commission’s services until 1991. It
         has again been occupied by the Commission’s services since the completion of the renovation works in 2004.
      
In 1994, Berlaymont invited tenders for the renovation works, the value of which was estimated at around BEF 1.billion.
         It drew up, to that end, special contract conditions and had a contract notice published in the Official Journal of the European Communities on December 1994. Article 1.G of the special contract conditions stated: ‘As regards the works which form the subject-matter
         of the present contract, the contractor must be registered in Belgium’.
      
On February 1995, Berlaymont published an amended notice in the Official Journal of the European Communities which provided certain additional information regarding the registration requirements for tenderers. 
      
That notice stated that:
      
‘As regards the works which form the subject-matter of the present contract, the contractor must furnish proof that it is
         regarded as having fulfilled its obligations relating to social security contributions, tax and VAT; this proof must be contained
         in a registration.
      
The application for registration is to be made in accordance with the Royal Decree of October 1978.
As regards the validity of the tender (at the time it is submitted), it will be sufficient for a copy of the application for
         registration to be attached to the tender. No decision to award the contract will be taken before the competent authority
         has ruled on the application.’
      
The special conditions were also consequentially amended and state that ‘[i]n its tender, the tenderer will confirm that it
         has taken account of this amendment notice No 1, failing which its tender will be void’.
      
In order to participate in the tender proceedings, BPC and WIG formed a consortium named BPC-WIG (‘BPC-WIG’). On March
         1995, BPC‑WIG submitted a tender for the contract in question. WIG had attached to that tender two certificates issued by
         the German tax and social security authorities dated August and February according to which ‘the tax administration
         has no objection to WIG’s participation in a public works contract’ and ‘all social security contributions have always been
         paid punctually by WIG’. However neither WIG not BPC-WIG attached to their tender evidence of their registration or of their
         applications for registration as required, however,  by the Belgian legislation. Applications for registration were not submitted
         by those two entities until after the expiry of the time-limit for submitting tenders, that is to say by BPC-WIG on April
         and by WIG on May and the registrations were not granted until July 1995, which was after the contract was awarded.
         BPC, as a company incorporated under Belgian law, was already registered in Belgium.
      
By decision of June 1995, Berlaymont 2000’s Board of Directors awarded the contract to another consortium.
      
BPC and WIG brought an action for annulment of that award decision before the Conseil d’État (Council of State). By judgment
         of March a Chamber of the Council of State dismissed the proceedings before it on the grounds that WIG was not, at
         the time its tender was submitted, registered as a contractor in accordance with Article 15(7) of the Royal Decree of April
         concerning public works, supply and service contacts, and held that at the date of the decision to award the contract,
         the applicants were ineligible for such award and rejected their claim.
      
Meanwhile, on June 1996, BPC and WIG brought before the Tribunal de première instance de Bruxelles (Court of First Instance,
         Brussels) an action for damages for the loss caused by their exclusion from the contract. By judgment of November 2002,
         that court dismissed the action as inadmissible. By application of April 2003, BPC and WIG brought an appeal against that
         decision. By judgment of March 2007, the Cour d’appel de Bruxelles (Court of Appeal, Brussels) upheld the decision at first
         instance. 
      
The referring court has set out, in its decision, the reasoning followed by the Cour d’appel de Bruxelles. It points out that
         the applicants had not attached to their tender the applications for registration which were, however, necessary for WIG and
         BPC-WIG. The tax and social security certificates issued by the competent German authorities and attached to the tenders of
         WIG and BPC-WIG did not amount to registration but met a different production requirement, whilst also being necessary to
         obtain registration. Thus, the applicants failed to satisfy an essential requirement of the Belgian legislation and, therefore,
         their tender was null and void, which excluded them automatically and at the outset from the award procedure.
      
As regards the additional registration obligation, the Cour d’appel de Bruxelles accepted that the first paragraph of Article
         of Directive 93/does not include failure to register among the grounds referred to therein for exclusion from participation
         in a contract. It accepted also that, under the second paragraph of Article of that directive, where the contracting authority
         requires of the contractor proof that the cases referred to in points (e) and (f) of the first paragraph do not apply to it,
         the authority is to accept as sufficient evidence a certificate issued by the competent authority in the Member State concerned.
         However, that court considered that other provisions of Directive 93/led to the conclusion that the registration obligation,
         on pain of exclusion from the contract, was not prohibited.
      
It points out, in that regard, that the logical reason for the registration procedure was to enable the Belgian authorities
         to satisfy themselves that a contractor possessed sufficient financial, administrative and technical resources to ensure fulfilment
         of its tax and social security obligations. Consequently, the certificates emanating from the German authorities would not
         suffice to provide such a guarantee. The Cour d’appel de Bruxelles refers in that regard to Articles 26, and 29(4) of Directive
         93/37, which, in its view, confer on the contracting authority the right to require from contractors additional evidence and
         declarations. Consequently, that court considered that a reference to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling would
         be irrelevant.
      
Their appeal dismissed, BPC and WIG, on September 2007, appealed on a point of law to the Cour de cassation (Court of Cassation).
      
Harbouring doubts as regards the compliance of the legislation in question in the main proceedings with the provisions of
         the EC Treaty in respect of the free movement of services and the provisions of Article of Directive 93/37, the Cour de
         cassation decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Is the obligation to hold a registration in order to be awarded a public contract in Belgium, such as that imposed by Article
         1.G of the special conditions, applicable in the present case, contrary to the principle of freedom of movement within the
         European Union and to the second paragraph of Article of Directive 93/… if it had to be interpreted as permitting the
         Belgian contracting authority to exclude from the tender procedure a foreign contractor who does not hold a registration but
         has produced equivalent certificates from his national authorities?
      
2.      Is it contrary to the principle of freedom of movement within the European Union and to the second paragraph of Article of Directive 93/to grant a Belgian contracting authority the power to require foreign tenderers to submit to a Belgian
         authority – the committee for the registration of contractors – for assessment of the validity of the certificates which have
         been issued to them by the tax and social security authorities of their State, attesting that they have fulfilled the obligations
         imposed on them relating to tax and social security?’
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 Admissibility of the reference for a preliminary ruling
The Commission expresses doubts as regards the admissibility of the request for a preliminary ruling, because the referring
         court confines itself, in the order for reference, to reproducing the reasoning in the judgment of the Cour d’appel de Bruxelles,
         does not define sufficiently the factual and legislative context of the dispute in the main proceedings and does not give
         sufficient explanation of the reasons for selecting the provisions of the law of the Union, the interpretation of which it
         seeks.
      
Those doubts are unfounded.
      
First of all, the referring court cannot be accused of merely repeating, in its decision, the judgment of the Cour d’appel
         de Bruxelles which forms the subject matter of the appeal on a point of law before it. The referring court expresses, by such
         repeat, its doubts as regards the compliance of the conclusions reached in that judgment with the relevant provisions of the
         law of the Union, namely those of the Treaty in respect of free movement of services and those of Article of Directive
         93/37.
      
As the Advocate General noted in paragraph of her Opinion, the order for reference explains sufficiently what is at issue
         in the main proceedings and the factual and legislative context in which the questions referred arose, matters which have,
         moreover, enabled the parties concerned, for the purposes of the second paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court
         of Justice of the European Union, properly to submit their observations.
      
Finally, the relationship between the context thus described of what is at issue in the main proceedings and the provisions
         of Union law, the interpretation of which is sought, is abundantly clear from the contents of the Court file and needs no
         particular explanation.
      
Therefore, the information thus provided is sufficient to meet the requirements of the Court’s settled case-law (see, to that
         effect, Case C‑42/Liga Portuguesa de Futebol Profissional and Bwin International [2009] ECR I‑0000, paragraph and the case‑law cited) and to enable the Court to provide helpful replies to the referring
         court. Accordingly, the reference for a preliminary ruling is admissible.
      
 The first question
By this question, the national court is asking, in essence, whether the general principles of the law of the Union on public
         procurement and the second paragraph of Article of Directive 93/are to be interpreted as precluding national legislation,
         such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which imposes on a contractor established in another Member State an obligation
         to hold a registration, in the contracting authority’s Member State, in order to be awarded a contract in the latter Member
         State, notwithstanding the fact that the contractor has produced certificates issued by the authorities of its Member State
         of establishment which attest, in particular, that it has fulfilled, in that State, its obligations relating to the payment
         of social security contributions and taxes.
      
At the outset, it is important to make clear that the registration at issue in the main proceedings is not covered by the
         provisions of Article or of Directive 93/37.
      
It is apparent, indeed, from the contents of the file submitted to the Court that the objective of that registration obligation
         is to establish contractors’ professional qualities, for the purposes of the first paragraph of Article of Directive 93/37,
         more particularly as regards their position in respect of the payment of social security contributions and taxes.
      
It is appropriate to point out, first, that the fact that a contractor established in another Member State has produced certificates
         issued by the competent authorities of that State is not sufficient to confirm, conclusively, that it has fulfilled its obligations
         in that regard. Indeed, first, points (e) and (f) of the first paragraph of Article of Directive 93/provide that the
         contractor must have fulfilled its social security and tax obligations in the contracting authority’s Member State also. Secondly,
         by referring to certificates issued by the competent authority in the Member State concerned, the second indent in the second
         paragraph of Article permits a separate check on such a contractor in the Member State in which the public contract in
         question is to be awarded.
      
It is conceivable that the contractor in question may have carried on an economic activity in the contracting authority’s
         Member State capable of giving rise to debts for social security contributions and tax in that Member State. Such debts could
         arise not only from economic activities carried on in the course of performing public contracts, but also from activities
         outside that framework. In addition, even if that contractor has not carried on any economic activity in the contracting authority’s
         Member State, it is legitimate for that State’s authorities to wish to be able to satisfy themselves of that fact.
      
Consequently, national legislation cannot be regarded as being contrary to the rules of the Union solely because it lays down
         a registration obligation for the purposes of such a check also for contractors established in a Member State other than that
         in which the public contract is to be awarded.
      
It is appropriate to point out, secondly, that according to the Court’s settled case‑law, the first paragraph of Article of Directive 93/lists, exhaustively, the grounds capable of justifying the exclusion of a contractor from participation
         in a contract which relate solely to its professional qualities. Moreover, the Court also added that Member States have the
         right to provide, in addition to the grounds for exclusion expressly referred to in that provision, for grounds for exclusion
         designed to ensure observance of the principles of equal treatment and transparency (see, to that effect, Case C‑213/Michaniki [2008] ECR I‑9999, paragraphs 43, and 47, and Case C‑538/Assitur [2009] ECR I‑4219, paragraphs and 21).
      
A registration obligation such as that in question in the main proceedings cannot be regarded as an additional ground for
         exclusion, in addition to those exhaustively listed in the first paragraph of Article of Directive 93/37, if it is designed
         as a means of implementing that provision, solely to check the evidence that a contractor wishing to participate in a public
         contract does not fall fowl of one of those grounds for exclusion, particularly those relating to the payment of social security
         contributions and taxes.
      
In this case, for the purposes of the registration in question, commonly referred to as ‘registration for tax purposes’ in
         the documents in the Court file, the contractor concerned must submit, to the authority competent for that purpose, an application,
         accompanied by the certificates provided for in the second paragraph of Article of Directive 93/and required by the
         applicable national legislation which lays down the corresponding grounds for exclusion.
      
Thus, a contractor established in another Member State must produce to that authority the certificates issued by the authorities
         of its Member State of establishment which it should usually submit, under the above provision of Directive 93/37, to the
         contracting authority concerned. Also, if such a contractor had already carried on an economic activity in the contracting
         authority’s Member State, it should be able to submit the certificates issued by the competent authorities of that State or
         else, if it had not carried on such an activity, be in a position to declare that fact. The authority in question must, for
         its part, certify the absence of grounds for exclusion by granting a registration certificate which will, subsequently, have
         to be submitted to the contracting authority for the purposes of participation in the public contract in question.
      
Under the second paragraph of Article of Directive 93/37, where the contracting authority requires of the contractor proof
         that the cases referred to in points (e) and (f) of that provision do not apply to it, the authority is to accept as sufficient
         evidence a certificate issued by the competent authority in the Member State concerned.
      
That provision does not preclude a check being made, before the tenders are opened, of the certificates submitted by a contractor
         or of the absence, in its case, of grounds for exclusion in general.
      
None the less, that check must be confined to the professional qualities of contractors, for the purposes of the first paragraph
         of Article of Directive 93/37, particularly as regards the fulfilment of their obligations in respect of social security
         contributions and taxes. In addition, as the Advocate General points out in paragraph of her Opinion, it may not complicate
         or delay the participation of the contractor concerned in the procedure for the award of the public contract or give rise
         to excessive  administrative charges.
      
It is for the referring court to determine whether the registration obligation in question in the main proceedings satisfies
         those criteria.
      
The referring court must, in particular, examine whether the requirements laid down in Article 2(1)(7) of the Royal Decree
         of 1978, under which a company is excluded from participating in a public contract if among its directors, managers or persons
         empowered to enter into obligations on its behalf are persons who are prohibited from performing such tasks under the national
         legislation, and in Article 2(1)(12) of the Royal Decree of 1978, under which the participation of a contractor in a procedure
         for the award of a public contract is precluded if it does not possess ‘sufficient financial, administrative and technical
         resources to ensure fulfilment of [its] tax and social security obligations’, on which points the contents of the court file
         do not provide sufficient materials for their determination, may be authorised by the first paragraph of Article of Directive 93/37.
      
It is, however, apparent from the contents of the Court file that the mere production, to the contracting authority, of the
         application for registration accompanied by the submission of the tender constituted sufficient compliance, in the case in
         the main proceedings, to admit the contractors concerned to participate in the contract at issue, since the decision to award
         the contract could not be made before the conclusion of the registration procedure.
      
In view of the foregoing, the reply to the first question is that the law of the Union is to be interpreted as not precluding
         national legislation which imposes on a contractor established in another Member State, in order to be awarded a contract
         in the contracting authority’s Member State, an obligation to hold a registration, in the latter Member State, certifying
         that none of the grounds for exclusion listed in the first paragraph of Article of Directive 93/applies to the contractor,
         provided that such obligation does not hinder or delay the contractor’s participation in the public contract in question or
         give rise to excessive administrative charges, and provided that its sole objective is to check the professional qualities
         of the contractor concerned, for the purposes of that provision.
      
 The second question
By this question, the national court is asking, in essence, whether the general principles of the law of the Union on public
         procurement and the second paragraph of Article of Directive 93/are to be interpreted as precluding national legislation
         which provides for a check, by an authority such as that in question in the main proceedings, of certificates issued by the
         tax and social security authorities of other Member States attesting that contractors established in those Member States have
         fulfilled their obligations in the areas concerned.
      
In that regard, it is appropriate to point out that the provisions of Directive 93/do not, as a matter of principle, preclude
         national law from entrusting a check of the absence of grounds for exclusion, for the purposes of the first paragraph of Article
         of that directive, to an authority other than the contracting authority.
      
As the Advocate General points out in paragraph of her Opinion, such a check, prior to the opening of tenders, may be appropriate
         for the purposes of the proper conduct of a public contract. Indeed, in view of the possibly insufficient technical expertise
         and limited organisational capacities of certain contracting authorities, such as, for example, a local authority of modest
         size or an organisation with few staff, it may be appropriate to entrust to a specialist authority, with powers at the national
         or local level, the administrative treatment and the centralised checking of the evidence concerning the professional qualities
         of the candidates for different public contracts.
      
It is appropriate to add that the Court, in its judgment in Michaniki, has already accepted, under well defined conditions, the possibility that an authority other than the contracting authority
         may adopt a decision leading to the exclusion of a contractor from a procedure for the award of a public works contract. In
         that regard, it is irrelevant that the subject matter of the case which led to that judgment was not a ground for exclusion
         under Directive 93/37, but a ground for exclusion established in addition to those defined by that directive and intended
         to ensure compliance with the principles of equal treatment and transparency. 
      
The Court must also consider whether the composition and powers of the authority to which, under the national legislation
         at issue in the main proceedings, that check is entrusted can be reconciled with the objective of ensuring compliance with
         the law of the Union on public procurement.
      
In that regard, it is clear, first, from the contents of the Court file that, under that legislation, the competent authorities
         in respect of registration, ‘Registration Committees’, are established at provincial level with tripartite composition. Under
         Article of the Royal Decree of 1978, they are composed of three officials appointed by the public authorities, one of whom
         assumes the chairmanship, and six persons, three of whom are appointed on the proposal of the organisations representing employers
         and three on the proposal of the organisations representing workers in the construction sector in the province in question.
      
The majority on those authorities is composed of persons representing private interests and nothing in the Court file indicates
         that their participation in them is purely consultative.
      
Such authorities, in view of their composition, cannot be regarded as impartial and neutral. Indeed, that majority participation
         of representatives of private interests could lead those representatives to obstruct the access of other operators to the
         market concerned and, in any event, because such operators are obliged to submit to the determination of their potential competitors
         as regards their personal and professional qualities, such an authority involves a situation of unequal conditions of competition
         and lack of objectivity and impartiality, inconsistent with a system of undistorted competition, such as that laid down by
         the law of the Union (see, by analogy, Case C‑49/MOTOE [2008] ECR I‑4863, paragraphs and and the case‑law cited, and Case C‑169/Hartlauer [2009] ECR I‑1721, paragraph and case‑law cited).
      
It is appropriate, secondly, to draw attention to the fact that, as seems to be clear from the referring court’s question,
         the legislation at issue in the main proceedings confers on registration committees power to examine the validity of the certificates
         issued by the competent authority of the Member State concerned as regards contractors’ fulfilment of their social security
         and tax obligations.
      
The Royal Decree of contains no provision expressly conferring such power on registration committees, and the scope of
         such power is not set out in the referring court’s request. If that power must involve the exercise of a check as regards
         the substance of the requirements which underlie the issue of certificates by the competent authorities of the Member States
         concerned, it would be clearly incompatible with the first paragraph of Article of Directive 93/37, which does not provide
         for such a ground for exclusion, and with the second indent of the second paragraph of that article, which unequivocally requires
         the acceptance of those certificates as sufficient evidence of the fulfilment of contractors’ social security and tax obligations.
         Moreover, a ground for exclusion founded on a check as regards the substance of those certificates would not be justified
         on the basis of the result reached by the Court in Michaniki.
      
Therefore, as the Advocate General points out in paragraphs to of her Opinion, the authority responsible for examining
         those certificates has no discretion of its own as regards their substance and must confine itself to a summary check of their
         formal elements. It may thus check only the authenticity of the certificates, whether they were established on a sufficiently
         recent date and whether the authority which issued them manifestly lacked the power to do so.
      
It is for the referring court to determine the situation of the appellants in the main proceedings in the light of the rulings
         on interpretation set forth above. However, it does not appear that the composition of the Registration Committee and the
         extent of the check it carried out could have affected that situation, since, as is clear from the contents of the Court file,
         the appellants obtained their registration without difficulty. The reason why they were not admitted to participate in the
         contract in question in the main proceedings is based on the fact that their respective applications for registration had
         been submitted late, that is to say after the expiry of the time-limit for submitting tenders, in circumstances in which the
         requirement to hold a registration is not regarded, in itself, as being contrary to the law of the Union.
      
In the light of the foregoing considerations, the reply to the second question is that the law of the Union is to be interpreted
         as precluding national legislation under which the checking of the certificates issued to a contractor of another Member State
         by the tax and social security authorities of that Member State is entrusted to an authority other than the contracting authority
         where:
      
–        the majority on that other authority is composed of persons appointed by the employers’ and workers’ organisations in the
         construction sector of the province in which the public contract in question is to be awarded, and 
      
–        that power extends to a check on the substance of the validity of those certificates.
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      The law of the Union is to be interpreted as not precluding national legislation which imposes on a contractor established
            in another Member State, in order to be awarded a contract in the contracting authority’s Member State, an obligation to hold
            a registration, in the latter Member State, certifying that none of the grounds for exclusion listed in the first paragraph
            of Article of Council Directive 93/37/EEC of June concerning the coordination of procedures for the award of public
            works contracts applies to the contractor, provided that such obligation does not hinder or delay the contractor’s participation
            in the public contract in question or give rise to excessive administrative charges, and provided that its sole objective
            is to check the professional qualities of the contractor concerned, for the purposes of that provision.
2.      The law of the Union is to be interpreted as precluding national legislation under which the checking of the certificates
            issued to a contractor of another Member State by the tax and social security authorities of that Member State is entrusted
            to an authority other than the contracting authority where:
–        the majority on that other authority is composed of persons appointed by the employers’ and workers’ organisations in the
            construction sector of the province in which the public contract in question is to be awarded, and
–        that power extends to a check on the substance of the validity of those certificates.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 