
ORDER OF THE COURT (Seventh Chamber)
January (*)
      
(Appeal — Community trade mark — Regulation (EC) No 207/— Articles 15(1) and 51(1)(a) — Word mark RECARO — Application for revocation — Partial refusal by the Board of Appeal of OHIM)
In Case C‑57/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, brought on January 2014,
Recaro Holding GmbH, formerly Recaro Beteiligungs-GmbH, established in Stuttgart (Germany), represented by J. Weiser, Rechtsanwalt,
      
applicant,
the other party to the proceedings being:
Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM),
defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Seventh Chamber),
composed of J.-C. Bonichot, President of the Chamber, A. Arabadjiev and J.L. da Cruz Vilaça (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: E. Sharpston,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to give a ruling by reasoned order, pursuant to Article of the Rules
         of Procedure of the Court of Justice,
      
makes the following
Order
By its appeal, Recaro Holding GmbH (‘Recaro’), formerly Recaro Beteiligungs-GmbH, asks the Court to set aside the judgment
         in Recaro v OHIM — Certino Mode (RECARO) (T‑524/12, EU:T:2013:604; ‘the judgment under appeal’) by which the General Court of the European Union dismissed its action
         for annulment of the decision of the First Board of Appeal of the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks
         and Designs) (OHIM) of September (Case R 1761/2011-1; ‘the contested decision’), made following revocation proceedings
         between Recaro and Certino Mode SL (‘Certino’), a company established in Spain.
      
 Legal context
Council Regulation (EC) No 40/of December on the Community trade mark (OJ L 11, p. 1) was repealed and replaced
         by Council Regulation (EC) No 207/of February on the Community trade mark (OJ L 78, p. 1).
      
Article 15(1) of Regulation No 207/provides:
      
‘If, within a period of five years following registration, the proprietor has not put the Community trade mark to genuine
         use in the Community in connection with the goods or services in respect of which it is registered, or if such use has been
         suspended during an uninterrupted period of five years, the Community trade mark shall be subject to the sanctions provided
         for in this Regulation, unless there are proper reasons for non-use.
      
...’
Article 51(1)(a) of that regulation states:
      
‘The rights of the proprietor of the Community trade mark shall be declared to be revoked on application to the Office or
         on the basis of a counterclaim in infringement proceedings:
      
(a)      if, within a continuous period of five years, the trade mark has not been put to genuine use in the Community in connection
         with the goods or services in respect of which it is registered, and there are no proper reasons for non-use ...’
      
 Background to the dispute
On June 1999, Certino obtained from OHIM the registration, under No 434, of the word mark RECARO (‘the contested trade
         mark’) on the basis of Regulation No 40/94.
      
The goods covered by that registration are in Classes and of the Nice Agreement concerning the International Classification
         of Goods and Services for the Purposes of the Registration of Marks of June 1957, as revised and amended (‘the Nice Agreement’),
         and correspond, for each of those classes, to the following description:
      
–        Class 10: ‘Orthopaedic footwear’;
–        Class 25: ‘Footwear (except orthopaedic)’.
On September 2009, Recaro submitted an application pursuant to Article 51(1)(a) of Regulation No 207/for revocation
         of Certino’s rights in the contested trade mark, on the ground that the mark in question had not been put to genuine use.
      
By decision of June 2011, the Cancellation Division of OHIM found that the mark in question had not been put to genuine
         use and revoked all of Certino’s rights in that trade mark.
      
On August 2011, Certino lodged an appeal with OHIM against that decision pursuant to Articles to of Regulation No 207/2009,
         asserting that it had put the contested trade mark to genuine use and providing additional evidence.
      
By the contested decision, the First Board of Appeal of OHIM (‘the Board of Appeal’) partially upheld Certino’s appeal, restoring
         its rights in the contested trade mark in respect of the ‘footwear (except orthopaedic)’ in Class of the Nice Agreement,
         but dismissing the appeal with regard to the ‘orthopaedic footwear’ in Class of that agreement.
      
The Board of Appeal held, in particular, that the orders received from two purchasers and the orders sent to a footwear manufacturer
         clearly demonstrated significant use of the contested trade mark in connection with the footwear in Class of the Nice Agreement
         throughout the relevant period. In addition, other evidence, such as Certino’s presence at trade fairs and an article published
         online concerning that company’s products, were found by the Board to establish use of the contested trade mark. However,
         the Board of Appeal found, in common with the Cancellation Division, that no evidence had been produced demonstrating use
         of the contested trade mark in connection with the ‘orthopaedic footwear’ in Class of the Nice Agreement.
      
 Procedure before the General Court and the judgment under appeal
By application lodged at the Registry of the General Court on December 2012, Recaro brought an action for annulment of the
         contested decision. In support of its action, Recaro raised three pleas in law, alleging respectively: (i) infringement of
         Article 51(1)(a) of Regulation No 207/2009, read in conjunction with Article of that regulation, in that the Board of Appeal
         should not have found that there was genuine use of the contested trade mark in connection with the ‘footwear’ in Class of the Nice Agreement; (ii) infringement of Article 76(2) of Regulation No 207/2009, read in conjunction with Rule 50(1) of
         Commission Regulation (EC) No 2868/of December implementing Regulation No 40/(OJ L 303, p. 1); and (iii)
         infringement of Article of Regulation No 207/2009, submitting that, in failing to give a ruling on the relevance of evidence
         submitted out of time, the Board had failed to fulfil its duty to state reasons.
      
The General Court held that all those pleas in law were unfounded and, accordingly, dismissed the action in its entirety.
      
 Forms of order sought by the appellant before the Court of Justice
Recaro claims that the Court should:
      
–        set aside the judgment under appeal and give a definitive ruling on the dispute, amending the contested decision to revoke
         all of Certino’s rights in the contested trade mark or, in the alternative, refer the case back to the General Court;
      
–        order OHIM — and, if appropriate, Certino — to pay the costs.
 The appeal
Under Article of its Rules of Procedure, where an appeal is, in whole or in part, manifestly inadmissible or manifestly
         unfounded, the Court may, at any time, acting on a proposal from the Judge-Rapporteur and after hearing the Advocate General,
         decide by reasoned order to dismiss that appeal in whole or in part.
      
It is appropriate to apply that provision in the present case.
      
 Recaro’s arguments
Recaro relies on a single ground of appeal, alleging infringement of Article 51(1)(a) of Regulation No 207/2009, read in conjunction
         with Article of that regulation. That ground is divided into three parts.
      
By the first part of its single ground of appeal, Recaro submits that, for the purposes of assessing whether the contested
         trade mark had been put to genuine use, the General Court referred to certain pictures which were undated or which predated
         the period from September to September (‘the relevant period’) even though, according to the case-law of the
         Court of Justice, only evidence pertaining to the relevant period may be taken into account (order in La Mer Technology, C‑259/02, EU:C:2004:50, paragraph 30, and judgment in Colloseum Holding, C‑12/12, EU:C:2013:253, paragraph 31).
      
In particular, Recaro argues that the General Court based its assessment on pictures dating from or (that is, predating
         the relevant period), both in the context of demonstrating use of the contested trade mark in connection with the goods covered
         by that trade mark registration (paragraph of the judgment under appeal) and in the context of assessing the use of that
         mark as registered (paragraph of that judgment). Regarding the undated pictures, Recaro asserts that they may not be taken
         into account even to corroborate other evidence which is dated, since there is no connection between them and that evidence.
      
Thus, according to Recaro, the judgment under appeal is vitiated by an error of law, in so far as the General Court used those
         pictures as the basis for its assessment as to whether there was genuine use, and should therefore be set aside. Recaro relies
         in that regard on paragraph of the judgment in Il Ponte Finanziaria v OHIM (C‑234/P, EU:C:2007:514), arguing that, although the assessment of evidence for the purposes of ascertaining whether there
         is genuine use is a question of fact which is not open to review by the Court of Justice on appeal, the question of which
         evidence may be used in that assessment is a question of law and as such is open to review by the Court.
      
By the second part of its single ground of appeal, Recaro alleges distortion of the facts by the General Court. Thus, first,
         by using the expression ‘some of the pictures are not dated or predate [the relevant period]’ in paragraph of the judgment
         under appeal, that court implied that there were other pictures which were dated and which pertained to the relevant period,
         which is not consistent with the actual evidence in the case-file. Second, in paragraph of that judgment, the General Court
         distorted the meaning of the statement provided by Certino’s sales director, since that person at no time stated that the
         highest-selling type of rubber-soled sandal was marketed under the contested trade mark.
      
By the third part of its single ground of appeal, Recaro argues that the General Court disregarded the rules regarding the
         burden of proof. First, as regards demonstrating use of the contested trade mark in connection with the goods in respect of
         which it was registered and in the form in which it was registered, the General Court disregarded, in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, the rule that it is for Certino to prove genuine use of the contested trade mark, rather than
         for Recaro to prove that the mark in question has been used for other products or in a form other than the form registered.
         Second, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the General Court merely stated that some evidence ‘point[ed] to’ the
         use of the contested trade mark in connection with the ‘footwear’ in Class of the Nice Agreement, instead of basing its
         findings on specific evidence produced by Certino demonstrating genuine use of that trade mark.
      
 Findings of the Court
As regards the first part of the single ground of appeal, Recaro submits in essence that the General Court erred in law in
         basing its assessment of whether there was genuine use of the contested trade mark on pictures which were undated or which
         predated the relevant period.
      
In that regard, it should be noted that, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, the General Court assessed the
         use of the contested trade mark in connection with the goods in respect of which it was registered, using as its basis, not —
         as Recaro alleges — evidence which was undated or which predated the relevant period, but a body of evidence.
      
First, the General Court found that the purchase orders considered could be regarded as relating to the marketing of footwear
         under the contested trade mark. Secondly, it took into account the licensing contract concluded between Certino and a footwear
         manufacturer. Thirdly, that court analysed a statement provided by Certino’s sales director, according to which that company
         has commercial relations with partners concerning the sale of footwear under the contested trade mark. Recaro does not dispute
         that evidence, with the exception of the sales director’s remarks regarding the highest-selling type of footwear, which Recaro
         argues were distorted.
      
It was solely in order to corroborate the other evidence in the case-file before it that the General Court, acting in accordance
         with paragraphs and of its judgment in Certmedica International and Lehning entreprise v OHIM — Lehning entreprise and Certmedica International (L112) (T‑77/and T‑78/10, EU:T:2012:95), took into consideration evidence which was undated or which predated the relevant
         period.
      
The same is true of paragraph of the judgment under appeal concerning the use of the contested trade mark as registered.
         In that regard, the General Court, having observed in paragraph of that judgment that the specific representation of a
         word mark is not generally of such a nature as to alter the distinctive character of that mark as registered, found in essence
         that the evidence before it confirmed that the contested trade mark was being used in a form which did not alter its distinctive
         character. In that context, the General Court made reference to the pictures which were undated or which predated the relevant
         period only as ‘additional evidence supporting the other evidence’.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the first part of the single ground of appeal must be rejected as manifestly unfounded.
      
As regards the second part of the single ground of appeal, it should be noted that the supposed distortion of facts invoked
         by Recaro is based on a clear misreading of the judgment under appeal and, in any event, is not obvious from the documents
         in the case-file (see, to that effect, order in Zoo Sport v OHIM, C‑676/P, EU:C:2014:2080, paragraph 22).
      
Indeed, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the General Court merely states that some of the pictures referred to
         in the contested decision were undated or predated the relevant period. It cannot be inferred from that statement that the
         General Court meant to imply that there are other pictures which are dated or which pertain to the relevant period. Moreover,
         as that court rightly observed, it is common ground that Certino’s sales director confirmed, by his statements, that Certino’s
         commercial relations with its partners concerned footwear sold under the contested trade mark. Consequently, the supposed
         distortion invoked by Recaro of that director’s remarks regarding the highest-selling product would not be of such a nature
         as to undermine the General Court’s assessment regarding the genuine nature of the use of the contested trade mark.
      
In those circumstances, the second part of the single ground of appeal must be rejected as manifestly unfounded.
      
As regards the third part of the single ground of appeal, it should be observed that, as can be seen from paragraphs and
         of the judgment under appeal, the General Court is merely stating that there is no evidence to support the arguments put
         forward by Recaro to challenge the lawfulness of the contested decision and that, consequently, the General Court is in no
         way reversing the burden of proof.
      
Therefore, that third part must be rejected as manifestly unfounded.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the present appeal must be dismissed in its entirety as manifestly unfounded.
      
 Costs
Under Article of the Rules of Procedure, applicable to appeal proceedings by virtue of Article 184(1) of those Rules,
         a decision as to costs is to be given in the order which closes the proceedings. In the present case, Recaro is to be ordered
         to bear its own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Seventh Chamber) hereby:
1.      Dismisses the appeal;
2.      Orders Recaro Holding GmbH to bear its own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 