
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
June (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 2004/35/EC – Environmental liability with regard to the prevention and remedying of environmental damage – Failure to transpose)
In Case C‑417/08,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on September 2008,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by A.‑A. Gilly and U. Wölker, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, represented by S. Ossowski, acting as Agent,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
composed of M. Ilešič, President of the Chamber, E. Levits and J.‑J. Kasel (Rapporteur), Judges, 
Advocate General: Y. Bot,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities claims that the Court should declare that, by failing to adopt
         the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Directive 2004/35/EC of the European Parliament
         and of the Council of April on environmental liability with regard to the prevention and remedying of environmental
         damage (OJ L 143, p. 56) or, in any event, by failing to notify those provisions to the Commission, the United Kingdom
         of Great Britain and Northern Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of that directive.
      
Article of Directive 2004/provides that Member States are to bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative
         provisions necessary to comply with the directive by April and that they are forthwith to inform the Commission thereof.
      
Having received no information to enable it to find that the provisions needed to transpose Directive 2004/into national
         law had been adopted by the United Kingdom, the Commission initiated the infringement procedure provided for in Article EC.
         On February 2008, after having given that Member State formal notice to submit its observations, the Commission delivered
         a reasoned opinion calling on the Member State to take the measures necessary to comply with the reasoned opinion within two
         months of its notification.
      
As the United Kingdom Government’s reply to that reasoned opinion indicated that the provisions needed to transpose Directive
         2004/had not yet been adopted, the Commission decided to bring the present action.
      
In the defence, the government acknowledges that, on April 2007, Directive 2004/had neither been transposed in the United
         Kingdom nor Gibraltar and that the legislative procedure seeking to ensure that transposition was still under way.
      
In that connection, it should be borne in mind that the Court has consistently held that the question whether a Member State
         has failed to fulfil its obligations must be determined by reference to the situation prevailing in that Member State at the
         end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion, and that the Court cannot take account of any subsequent changes (see,
         inter alia, Case C‑168/Commission v Spain [2004] ECR I‑8227, paragraph 24; judgment of September in Case C‑354/Commission v Luxembourg, paragraph 7; and judgment of December in Case C‑41/Commission v Czech Republic, paragraph 9).
      
In the present case, it is not in dispute that, on the date that the period laid down in the reasoned opinion expired, the
         United Kingdom had not adopted the measures necessary in order to transpose Directive 2004/into national law.
      
It follows that the action brought by the Commission must be considered to be well founded.
      
In those circumstances, it must be declared that, by failing to adopt the laws, regulations and administrative provisions
         necessary to comply with Directive 2004/35, the United Kingdom has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of that
         directive.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the United Kingdom has been
         unsuccessful, the United Kingdom must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fifth Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, by failing to adopt the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Directive 2004/35/EC
            of the European Parliament and of the Council of April on environmental liability with regard to the prevention and
            remedying of environmental damage, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations
            under Article of that directive;
2.      Orders the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 