
Case C-310/Ministerul Justiţiei și Libertăţilor Cetăţenești
v
Ştefan Agafiţei and Others 
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Curtea de Apel Bacău)
(Salary rights of judges – Discrimination on grounds of membership of a socio-professional category or place of work – Conditions for compensation for the harm suffered – Directives 2000/43/EC and 2000/78/EC – Inapplicability – Inadmissibility of the reference for a preliminary ruling)
Summary of the Judgment
Preliminary rulings – Jurisdiction of the Court – Limits – Request for interpretation of provisions of Union law manifestly
            inapplicable in the main proceedings 
(Art. TFEU; Council Directives 2000/43, Art. 15, and 2000/78, Art. 17)
A reference by a national court for a preliminary ruling may be rejected if, inter alia, it is obvious that Union law cannot
         be applied, either directly or indirectly, to the circumstances of the case.
      
That applies to a reference for a preliminary ruling from a national court relating to Article of Directive 2000/implementing
         the principle of equal treatment between persons irrespective of racial or ethnic origin and Article of Directive 2000/establishing a general framework for equal treatment in employment and occupation, the purpose of which is not to ascertain
         whether a situation in which persons are discriminated against as regards pay on the basis of socio-professional category
         or place of work falls within the scope of those provisions, but which is in fact based on the assumption that that is the
         case in order to seek an interpretation from the Court, even though those provisions of Union law clearly cannot be applied,
         either directly or indirectly, to the circumstances of the case. 
      
Article of Directive 2000/and Article of Directive 2000/clearly cannot be applied to discrimination as regards
         pay on the basis of socio-professional category or place of work. The principle of equal treatment enshrined in those directives
         applies by reference to the grounds exhaustively listed in Article thereof. 
      
When, in regulating purely internal situations, domestic legislation seeks to adopt the same solutions as those adopted in
         Union law in order, for example, to avoid discrimination against foreign nationals or any distortion of competition or to
         provide for one single procedure in comparable situations, it is clearly in the Union interest that, in order to forestall
         future differences of interpretation, provisions or concepts taken from Union law should be interpreted uniformly, irrespective
         of the circumstances in which they are to apply.
      
That is not the case where a national provision establishes a compensation scheme, pursuant to Article of Directive 2000/and Article of Directive 2000/78, for infringements of the rules prohibiting discrimination laid down by those directives,
         if that scheme also applies as regards infringements of the rules prohibiting discrimination applicable under national law
         alone. 
      
Moreover, the need to ensure uniform interpretation of the provisions of Union law can justify extending the Court’s jurisdiction
         to the content of such provisions, including in situations in which, because a rule of national law refers to such provisions,
         they are applicable indirectly to a given situation. Such a consideration cannot, however, without disregarding the divisions
         of powers between the Union and its Member States, confer on that provision of Union law primacy over higher‑ranking provisions
         of domestic law which would require, in such a situation, the rule of national law or any interpretation of it to be disregarded.
      
(see paras 28, 32-34, 39-48, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Salary rights of judges – Discrimination on grounds of membership of a socio-professional category or place of work – Conditions for compensation for the harm suffered – Directives 2000/43/EC and 2000/78/EC – Inapplicability – Inadmissibility of the reference for a preliminary ruling)
In Case C‑310/10,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the Curtea de Apel Bacău (Romania), made by decision of June 2010, received at the Court on June 2010, in the proceedings
      
Ministerul Justiţiei și Libertăţilor Cetăţenești
v
Ştefan Agafiţei,
Raluca Apetroaei,
Marcel Bărbieru,
Sorin Budeanu,
Luminiţa Chiagă,
Mihaela Crăciun,
Sorin-Vasile Curpăn,
Mihaela Dabija,
Mia-Cristina Damian,
Sorina Danalache,
Oana-Alina Dogaru,
Geanina Dorneanu,
Adina-Cătălina Galavan,
Gabriel Grancea,
Mădălina Radu (Hobjilă),
Nicolae Cătălin Iacobuţ,
Roxana Lăcătușu,
Sergiu Lupașcu,
Smaranda Maftei,
Silvia Mărmureanu,
Maria Oborocianu,
Simona Panfil,
Oana-Georgeta Pânzaru,
Laurenţiu Păduraru,
Elena Pîrjol-Năstase,
Ioana Pocovnicu,
Alina Pușcașu,
Cezar Ştefănescu,
Roxana Ştefănescu,
Ciprian Ţimiraș,
Cristina Vintilă,
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of J.-C. Bonichot, President of the Chamber, K. Schiemann (Rapporteur), L. Bay Larsen, A. Prechal and E. Jarašiūnas,
         Judges, 
      
Advocate General: Y. Bot,
Registrar: R. Şereş, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on April 2011,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        the Romanian Government, represented initially by A. Popescu and V. Angelescu, and subsequently by R.H. Radu and R.-I. Munteanu,
         acting as Agents,
      
–        Ireland, by D. O’Hagan, acting as Agent, and by A. Collins SC and N. Travers BL,
–        the European Commission, by J. Enegren and L. Bouyon, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article of Council Directive 2000/43/EC of June
         implementing the principle of equal treatment between persons irrespective of racial or ethnic origin (OJ L 180,
         p. 22) and Article of Council Directive 2000/78/EC of November establishing a general framework for equal treatment
         in employment and occupation (OJ L 303, p. 16) and, in the event of conflict between those provisions and national legislation
         or a judgment of the Curtea Constituțională (Constitutional Court), the consequences flowing from the primacy of European
         Union law. 
      
 Legal context
 European Union legislation
Article of Directive 2000/provides as follows:
      
‘The purpose of this Directive is to lay down a framework for combating discrimination on the grounds of racial or ethnic
         origin, with a view to putting into effect in the Member States the principle of equal treatment.’
      
Article 2(1) of Directive 2000/is worded as follows:
      
‘For the purposes of this Directive, the principle of equal treatment shall mean that there shall be no direct or indirect
         discrimination based on racial or ethnic origin.’
      
Article of Directive 2000/provides as follows:
      
‘The purpose of this Directive is to lay down a general framework for combating discrimination on the grounds of religion
         or belief, disability, age or sexual orientation as regards employment and occupation, with a view to putting into effect
         in the Member States the principle of equal treatment.’ 
      
Article 2(1) of Directive 2000/is worded as follows:
      
‘For the purposes of this Directive, the “principle of equal treatment” shall mean that there shall be no direct or indirect
         discrimination whatsoever on any of the grounds referred to in Article 1.’ 
      
Article of Directive 2000/and Article of Directive 2000/78, entitled ‘Scope’, provide in paragraphs (1)(c) thereof
         that, within the limits of the powers conferred upon the Community, those directives are to apply to all persons, as regards
         both the public and private sectors, including public bodies, in relation to employment and working conditions, including
         dismissals and pay.
      
Article 14(a) of Directive 2000/and Article 16(a) of Directive 2000/provide that Member States are to take the necessary
         measures to ensure that any laws, regulations and administrative provisions contrary to the principle of equal treatment are
         abolished.
      
Article of Directive 2000/states:
      
‘Member States shall lay down the rules on sanctions applicable to infringements of the national provisions adopted pursuant
         to this Directive and shall take all measures necessary to ensure that they are applied. The sanctions, which may comprise
         the payment of compensation to the victim, must be effective, proportionate and dissuasive. ...’ 
      
Article of Directive 2000/provides as follows: 
      
‘Member States shall lay down the rules on sanctions applicable to infringements of the national provisions adopted pursuant
         to this Directive and shall take all measures necessary to ensure that they are applied. The sanctions, which may comprise
         the payment of compensation to the victim, must be effective, proportionate and dissuasive. ...’ 
      
 National legislation
Government Legislative Decree No 137/on the prevention and punishment of all forms of discrimination (Monitorul Oficial al României, Part I, No of September 2000) is intended inter alia to transpose Directives 2000/and 2000/into national law.
         
      
Article 1(2)(e)(i) of Legislative Decree No 137/provides as follows: 
      
‘The principle that all citizens shall be equal and the principle that there shall be no privileges or discrimination shall
         be ensured, inter alia, in the exercise of the following rights: 
      
…
(e)      economic, social and cultural rights, in particular: 
(i)      the right to work, to free choice of employment, to fair and satisfactory working conditions, to protection against unemployment,
         to equal pay for the same work and to fair and satisfactory remuneration’. 
      
Article 2(1) of Legislative Decree No 137/is worded as follows: 
      
‘For the purposes of this Legislative Decree, discrimination shall mean any distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference
         applied on grounds of race, nationality, ethnic origin, language, religion, social class, belief, gender, sexual orientation,
         age, disability, non-contagious chronic illness, HIV-positive status, membership of a disadvantaged group and any other criterion
         the purpose or effect of which is to restrict or refuse the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal footing, of human
         rights and fundamental freedoms or the rights recognised by law in the political, economic, social and cultural sphere or
         in any other area of public life.’ 
      
Article 27(1) of Legislative Decree No 137/provides as follows:
      
‘Any person who considers himself to be the victim of discrimination may seek before the court compensation and the restoration
         of the status quo ante or the elimination of the situation to which the discrimination gave rise, in accordance with the provisions
         of general law. …’ 
      
By Decisions Nos to of July 2008, Decision No of December and Decision No of February 2010, the
         Curtea Constituțională declared that various provisions of Legislative Decree No 137/2000, including Article thereof, are
         to be regarded as unconstitutional, in so far as, under the terms of those provisions, the courts have jurisdiction to annul
         or to decline to apply legislative acts with the force of law which they consider to be discriminatory and to replace them
         with rules developed in the case-law or provisions contained in other legislative acts. 
      
In accordance with the first paragraph of Article and points to of Annex 1(A) to Ordonanța de Urgență a Guvernului
         (Urgent Government Legislative Decree) No 27/2006, as amended and supplemented by Law No 45/(‘OUG 27/2006’), the public
         prosecutors of the Direcția Națională Anticorupție (National Anti‑Corruption Directorate) (‘DNA’) and the Direcția de Investigare
         a Infracțiunilor de Criminalitate Organizată și Terorism (Directorate for Investigating Organised Crime and Terrorism) (‘DIICOT’)
         are paid a salary corresponding to that of prosecutors with the Prosecutor’s Office of the Înalta Curte de Casație și Justiție
         (Supreme Court of Cassation). 
      
It is apparent from the explanations provided by the referring court that in order to be eligible for the post of public prosecutor
         with the Înalta Curte de Casație și Justiție and, therefore, for payment of the remuneration linked to that post, the person
         concerned must satisfy, inter alia, the requirement of eight years’ service in the judiciary or the public prosecution service,
         whereas that is not the case with DNA or DIICOT prosecutors. 
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
At first instance, the applicants, who are judges, brought an action before the Tribunalul Bacău (Bacău District Court) against,
         inter alia, that court, the Curtea de Apel Bacău and the Ministerul Justiţiei și Libertăţilor Cetăţenești (Romanian Ministry
         of Justice) for compensation for the harm they consider they have suffered as a result of the discriminatory treatment as
         regards remuneration to which they are subjected on account of the status accorded in this regard to DNA and DIICOT prosecutors.
         
      
In a judgment of April 2008, the Tribunalul Bacău found that those applicants had been discriminated against on grounds
         of socio‑professional category and place of work, criteria which correspond apparently to that of ‘social class’ referred
         to Article 2(1) of Legislative Decree No 137/2000, and that the principle laid down in Article 6(2) of the codul muncii (Employment
         Code) of equal pay for equal work had, in the circumstances, been infringed. 
      
Consequently, the Tribunalul Bacău upheld the action brought before it and, on the basis of Article 27(1) of Legislative Decree
         No 137/2000, ordered the defendants to grant to the applicants salary credits equal to the difference between the salary which
         they already received and that provided for under OUG No 27/for DNA and DIICOT prosecutors, with effect from the date
         of entry into force of OUG No 27/2006. 
      
In support of the appeal which it lodged against that judgment, the Ministerul Justiţiei și Libertăţilor Cetăţenești contends,
         inter alia, that the Tribunalul Bacău has exceeded the limits of its jurisdiction by conferring upon itself legislative powers,
         in breach of Decisions Nos to 820, No and No of the Curtea Constituțională, referred to above. 
      
In those circumstances, the Curtea de Apel Bacău decided to stay the appeal proceedings and to refer the following questions
         to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling: 
      
‘(1)      Do Article of Directive [2000/43] and Article of Directive [2000/78] – both transposed into national law by [Legislative
         Decree No 137/2000], as republished and amended – preclude national legislation or a judgment of the Curtea Constituțională
         prohibiting the national judicial authorities from awarding to claimants who have been discriminated against compensation
         for material and/or non‑material damage which is considered appropriate in cases in which the compensation for the damage
         caused by discrimination relates to salary rights provided for by law granted to a socio‑professional category other than
         that to which the claimants belong (see, to that effect, judgments of the Curtea Constituțională No of December and No of February 2010)?
      
(2)      If the answer to Question is in the affirmative, are the national courts required to await the repeal or amendment of the
         provisions of national law – and/or a change in the case‑law of the Curtea Constituțională – which are, ex hypothesi, contrary to the provisions of [European Union] law, or are the courts required to apply [European Union] law, as interpreted
         by the Court of Justice of the European Union, directly and immediately to the proceedings pending before them, declining
         to apply any provision of national law or any judgment of the Curtea Constituțională which is contrary to the provisions of
         [European Union] law?’ 
      
 The purpose of the questions referred to the Court
Read in the light of the information set out in the order for reference, the questions referred to the Court relate in essence,
         first, to whether, once Article of Directive 2000/and Article of Directive 2000/have been implemented in national
         law by means inter alia of a provision such as Article of Legislative Decree No 137/2000, Article and Article must
         be interpreted as precluding the possibility for the Curtea Constituțională of finding that that provision of national law
         cannot give rise to the right, for persons who have been discriminated against as regards pay on the basis of socio-professional
         category or place of work, to compensation in the form of salary rights provided for by law for another socio-professional
         category. On the assumption that that is the case, the questions seek to ascertain, second, whether a national court is then
         required to disregard such a provision of national law or the constitutional case-law in question without being obliged to
         await the amendment of that provision by legislative means or a new interpretation of the provision by the constitutional
         court which are appropriate for ensuring its compliance with European Union law. 
      
 Whether the questions referred are admissible
The Romanian Government and Ireland entertain doubts in their written observations as to whether the questions referred are
         admissible, in particular on the ground that the situation at issue in the main proceedings does not fall within the scope
         of Directives 2000/and 2000/or, more generally, of European Union law. 
      
In that regard, it should first be noted that, under Article TFEU, the Court of Justice has jurisdiction to give preliminary
         rulings concerning the interpretation of the Treaties and of acts of the institutions of the European Union. 
      
According to settled case-law, the procedure provided for in Article TFEU is a means of cooperation between the Court
         of Justice and national courts. It follows that it is for the national courts alone which are seised of the case and are responsible
         for the judgment to be delivered to determine, in view of the special features of each case, both the need for a preliminary
         ruling in order to enable them to give their judgment and the relevance of the questions which they put to the Court (see,
         in particular, Joined Cases C‑297/and C‑197/Dzodzi [1990] ECR I‑3763, paragraphs and 34; Case C‑28/Leur‑Bloem [1997] ECR I‑4161, paragraph 24; and Case C‑409/Winner Wetten [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph and the case‑law cited). 
      
Consequently, where questions submitted by national courts concern the interpretation of a provision of European Union law,
         the Court is, in principle, obliged to give a ruling (see, in particular, Dzodzi, paragraph 35; Leur‑Bloem, paragraph 25; and Winner Wetten, paragraph and the case‑law cited). 
      
Nevertheless, the Court has also stated that, in exceptional circumstances, it can examine the conditions in which the case
         was referred to it by the national court, in order to confirm its own jurisdiction (see, inter alia, Case C‑13/Chacón Navas [2006] ECR I‑6467, paragraph and the case‑law cited). The Court may refuse to rule on a question referred for a preliminary
         ruling by a national court only where it is quite obvious that the interpretation of European Union law that is sought bears
         no relation to the actual facts of the main action or its purpose, where the problem is hypothetical, or where the Court does
         not have before it the factual or legal material necessary to enable it to give a useful answer to the questions submitted
         to it (see, inter alia, Chacón Navas, paragraph 33, and Winner Wetten, paragraph and the case‑law cited). 
      
It is therefore apparent from settled case-law that a reference by a national court can be rejected if, inter alia, it is
         obvious that European Union law cannot be applied, either directly or indirectly, to the circumstances of the case (see, inter
         alia, Leur Bloem, paragraph and the case‑law cited). 
      
In the present case, it should be noted at the outset that the Curtea de Apel Bacău is not asking the Court whether a situation
         such as that at issue in the main proceedings falls within the scope of Directives 2000/and 2000/78, in particular Articles
         and respectively thereof, to which the questions referred relate. 
      
It must, however, be pointed out that, as submitted by the Romanian Government, Ireland and the European Commission, that
         is not the case here. 
      
Article of Directive 2000/states that the purpose of the directive is to lay down a general framework, as regards employment
         and occupation, for combating discrimination on the grounds of religion or belief, disability, age or sexual orientation.
         The purpose of Directive 2000/43, as is apparent from Article thereof, is to lay down a framework for combating discrimination
         on the grounds of racial or ethnic origin. 
      
However, it is apparent from the order for reference that the discrimination at issue in the main proceedings is not based
         on any of the grounds thus listed in those directives, but operates instead on the basis of the socio-professional category,
         within the meaning of national legislation, to which the persons concerned belong, or their place of work. 
      
It follows that a situation such as that at issue in the main proceedings falls outside the general frameworks established
         by Directives 2000/and 2000/respectively for combating certain forms of discrimination. 
      
As is apparent from Article 2(1) of those directives in particular, the principle of equal treatment enshrined in the directives
         applies by reference to the grounds exhaustively listed in Article thereof (see, to that effect, Case C‑303/Coleman [2008] ECR I‑5603, paragraphs and 46). 
      
It should also be recalled in that connection that Article EC – now Article TFEU – which contains only rules governing
         the competences of the Community and on the basis of which the directives in question were adopted, does not refer to discrimination
         on grounds of socio-professional category or place of work, so that neither Article EC nor Article TFEU can even constitute
         a legal basis for Council measures to combat such discrimination (see, to that effect, Chacón Navas, paragraph 55, and Coleman, paragraph 46). 
      
It follows from all the foregoing that a situation such as that at issue in the main proceedings falls outside the scope of
         measures adopted on the basis of Article EC, in particular Directives 2000/and 2000/78, so that Articles and respectively
         of those directives, to which the reference for a preliminary ruling refers, do not relate to such a situation (see, by analogy,
         the order of March in Case C‑217/Mariano, paragraph 27). 
      
However, since the Curtea de Apel Bacău has stated, both in the grounds of the order for reference and in the first question
         referred, that Legislative Decree No 137/transposes Directives 2000/and 2000/into national law, it is necessary
         also to consider whether an interpretation by the Court of Articles and is capable of being justified, as submitted
         by the Commission, on the ground that those provisions were rendered applicable by domestic law to circumstances such as those
         at issue in the main proceedings as a result of the reference made by that law to those provisions. 
      
The Court has repeatedly held that it has jurisdiction to give preliminary rulings on questions concerning European Union
         provisions in situations where the facts of the cases being considered by the national courts were outside the scope of European
         Union law and therefore fell within the competence of the Member States alone, but where those provisions of European Union
         law had been rendered applicable by domestic law due to a reference made by that law to the content of those provisions (see,
         inter alia, Leur-Bloem, paragraphs and and the case‑law cited, and Case C‑247/Schoonbroodt [1998] ECR I‑8095, paragraphs and 15). 
      
The Court has stated in particular in that regard that where, in regulating purely internal situations, domestic legislation
         seeks to adopt the same solutions as those adopted in European Union law in order, for example, to avoid discrimination against
         foreign nationals or any distortion of competition or to provide for one single procedure in comparable situations, it is
         clearly in the European Union interest that, in order to forestall future differences of interpretation, provisions or concepts
         taken from European Union law should be interpreted uniformly, irrespective of the circumstances in which they are to apply
         (see, inter alia, Leur Bloem, paragraph and the case-law cited, and Case C‑130/Giloy [1997] ECR I‑4291, paragraph 28). 
      
However, that is not the case here. 
      
As has just been pointed out and is admittedly clear from the order for reference, the purpose of Legislative Decree No 137/is, inter alia, to transpose Directives 2000/and 2000/into national law and Article of the decree, which provides
         that discrimination prohibited under the decree gives rise to liability on the part of those responsible for it and to the
         right to obtain compensation on the part of victims of such discrimination, implements Article of Directive 2000/and
         Article of Directive 2000/78. None the less, it does not follow that the interpretation of Article of the decree, in
         cases in which it is applicable to discrimination which is prohibited under national law alone and falls outside the scope
         of those directives, should be contingent on the provisions of the directives or, more generally, those of European Union
         law. 
      
Indeed, it has not in any way been established that, in the present case, it is clearly in the European Union interest that
         provisions or concepts taken from European Union law should be interpreted uniformly, irrespective of the circumstances in
         which they are to apply, in such a way as to confer jurisdiction on the Court to answer the questions referred to it for a
         preliminary ruling by the national court. 
      
First of all, the order for reference does not contain sufficiently precise information from which it can be inferred that,
         by making infringements of rules prohibiting discrimination under Directives 2000/and 2000/and infringements of rules
         prohibiting discrimination under national law alone subject to one and the same compensation scheme, the national legislature
         intended, as regards infringements of the national rules, to refer to the content of provisions of European Union law or to
         adopt the same solutions as those adopted by those provisions. 
      
Next, it should be noted, first, that rules on sanctions such as those which the Member States are required to implement under
         Article of Directive 2000/and Article of Directive 2000/constitute an adjunct to the substantive rules prohibiting
         discrimination laid down by those directives, such rules on sanctions being intended to ensure that those substantive rules
         are effective. However, as pointed out at paragraphs to above, those directives do not contain any rule prohibiting
         discrimination on the ground of professional category, such as the rule at issue in the main proceedings. 
      
Second, Article of Directive 2000/and Article of Directive 2000/simply require the Member States to introduce
         rules on sanctions applicable to infringements of the national provisions adopted pursuant to those directives and state that
         such sanctions must be effective, proportionate and dissuasive and that they may comprise the payment of compensation. It
         follows that the various specific measures required to implement the provisions of European Union law concerned can hardly
         be regarded, where they are intended to apply to situations which fall outside the scope of those provisions, as referring
         to concepts used in those provisions or as adopting the same solutions as those adopted by those provisions, which it would
         be necessary to interpret in a uniform manner irrespective of the circumstances in which they are to apply. 
      
Lastly, it should be noted that, in the present case, the questions referred do not in essence seek an interpretation of the
         substantive content of Article of Directive 2000/and Article of Directive 2000/78. They seek rather a determination
         as to whether the principle of the primacy of European Union law precludes a rule of domestic law having constitutional status,
         as interpreted by the constitutional court of the Member State concerned, which, in a situation falling outside the scope
         of those provisions of European Union law, requires the domestic rule which moreover transposes those provisions of European
         Union law to be disapplied or that rule to be interpreted in a way that would be contrary to those provisions if that situation
         fell within their scope. 
      
The need to ensure uniform interpretation of the provisions of European Union law may, as pointed out above, justify extending
         the Court’s jurisdiction in matters of interpretation to the content of such provisions, including in situations in which,
         because a rule of national law refers to such provisions, they are applicable indirectly to a given situation. Such a consideration
         cannot, however, without disregarding the divisions of powers between the European Union and its Member States, confer on
         that provision of European Union law primacy over higher‑ranking provisions of domestic law which would require that, in such
         a situation, the rule of national law or any interpretation of it must be disregarded. 
      
It follows from all the foregoing that the questions referred by the Curtea de Apel Bacău, the purpose of which is not to
         ascertain whether a situation such as that at issue in the main proceedings falls within the scope of Article of Directive 2000/or Article of Directive 2000/78, but which are in fact based on the assumption that that is the case in order to seek an
         interpretation from the Court, even though those provisions of European Union law clearly cannot be applied, either directly
         or indirectly, to the circumstances of the case, are inadmissible. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable. 
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby rules:
The reference for a preliminary ruling from the Curtea de Apel Bacău (Romania) is inadmissible.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Romanian.
      
Top  
 