
Avis juridique important
|
61989JJudgment of the Court of June 1990.  -  Commission of the European Communities v Italian Republic.  -  Obligation to provide the Commission with information - Non-fulfilment.  -  Case C-48/89.  
European Court reports Page I-Pub.RJ Page Pub somm 
Summary
Parties
Operative part
Keywords
++++Member States - Obligations - Implementation of directives - Failure - Justification - Not permissible  ( EEC Treaty, Art . )  
Summary
As the Court has consistently held, a Member State may not plead provisions, practices or circumstances existing in its internal legal system in order to justify a failure to comply with the obligations and time-limits laid down in Community directives . 
Parties
In Case C-48/Commission of the European Communities, represented by S . Fabro, a member of its Legal Department, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of Georgios Kremlis, a member of its Legal Department, Wagner Centre, Kirchberg,  applicant,  v  Italian Republic, represented by Luigi Ferrari Bravo, Head of the Contentious Diplomatic Affairs Department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, acting as Agent, assisted by P . G . Ferri, avvocato dello Stato, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the Italian Embassy, rue Marie-Adélaïde,  defendant,  APPLICATION for a declaration, pursuant to Article of the EEC Treaty, that the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Council Directive 75/442/EEC of July on waste ( Official Journal 1975, L 194, p . ), Council Directive 76/403/EEC of April on the disposal of polychlorinated biphenyls and polychlorinated terphenyls ( Official Journal 1976, L 108, p . 41, and Council Directive 78/319/EEC of March on toxic and dangerous waste ( Official Journal 1978, L 84, p . ) and Article of the EEC Treaty  THE COURT  composed of : O . Due, President, F . A . Schockweiler and M . Zuleeg ( Presidents of Chambers ), G . F . Mancini, R . Joliet, T . F . O' Higgins, J . C . Moitinho de Almeida, G . C . Rodríguez Iglesias and F . Grévisse, Judges,  ( the grounds of the judgment are not reproduced )  hereby :  
Operative part
( ) Declares that by failing to provide the plans and reports referred to in Articles 3() and of Council Directive 75/442/EEC of July on waste, Article of Council Directive 76/403/EEC of April on the disposal of polychlorinated biphenyls and polychlorinated terphenyls, and Articles 12() and of Council Directive 78/319/EEC of March on toxic and dangerous waste, the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under those directives;  ( ) Dismisses the application in all other respects;  ( ) Orders the Italian Republic to pay the costs .  
Top  
 