
Case C-498/Maira María Robledillo Núñez
v
Fondo de Garantía Salarial (Fogasa)
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Juzgado de lo Social Único de Algeciras)
(Social policy – Protection of workers in the event of insolvency of the employer – Directive 80/987/EEC amended by Directive 2002/74/EC – First paragraph of Article and Article 10(a) – Compensation for unfair dismissal agreed under an extra‑judicial conciliation procedure – Payment guaranteed by the guarantee institution – Payment conditional upon the adoption of a judicial decision – Principles of equality and non‑discrimination)
Summary of the Judgment
Social policy – Approximation of laws – Protection of workers in the event of insolvency of the employer – Directive 80/(Council Directive 80/987, as amended by Directive 2002/74, Art. 3, first para., and 10(a))
The first paragraph of Article of Directive 80/987, relating to the protection of employees in the event of the insolvency
         of their employer, as amended by Directive 2002/74, is to be interpreted as meaning that a Member State has the power to exclude
         compensation granted for unfair dismissal from the payment guarantee of the guarantee institutions pursuant to that provision
         where they have been recognised by an extra‑judicial conciliation settlement and such exclusion, objectively justified, constitutes
         a measure necessary to avoid abuses within the meaning of Article 10(a) of that directive.
      
(see para. 44, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
February (*)
      
(Social policy – Protection of workers in the event of insolvency of the employer – Directive 80/987/EEC amended by Directive 2002/74/EC – First paragraph of Article and Article 10(a) – Compensation for unfair dismissal agreed under an extra‑judicial conciliation procedure – Payment guaranteed by the guarantee institution – Payment conditional upon the adoption of a judicial decision – Principles of equality and non‑discrimination)
In Case C‑498/06,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Juzgado de lo Social Único de Algeciras (Spain), made by
         decision of September 2006, received at the Court on December 2006, in the proceedings
      
Maira María Robledillo Núñez
v
Fondo de Garantía Salarial (Fogasa),
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, G. Arestis, R. Silva de Lapuerta, E. Juhász and T. von Danwitz (Rapporteur),
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: M. Poiares Maduro,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on November 2007,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        the Spanish Government, by J. Rodríguez Cárcamo and B. Plaza Cruz, acting as Agents,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by J. Enegren and R. Vidal Puig, acting as Agents, 
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Council Directive 80/987/EEC of October relating
         to the protection of employees in the event of the insolvency of their employer (OJ L 283, p. 23), as amended by Directive 2002/74/EC
         of the European Parliament and of the Council of September (OJ L 270, p. 10, ‘Directive 80/987’).
      
The reference was made in the context of proceedings between Ms Robledillo Núñez and Fondo de Garantía Salarial (Wages Guarantee
         Fund, ‘Fogasa’) concerning its refusal to pay her, by virtue of its secondary liability, compensation for unfair dismissal,
         that payment having been agreed under an extra‑judicial conciliation settlement between Ms Robledillo Núñez and her employer.
      
 Legislative framework
 Community legislation
Article 1(1) of Directive 80/provides that ‘[t]his Directive shall apply to employees’ claims arising from contracts of
         employment or employment relationships and existing against employers who are in a state of insolvency within the meaning
         of Article 2(1)’.
      
Article 2(2) of Directive 80/states that the Directive is without prejudice to national law as regards the definition
         of the terms ‘employee’, ‘employer’, ‘pay’, ‘right conferring immediate entitlement’ and ‘right conferring prospective entitlement’.
      
The first paragraph of Article of Directive 80/provides:
      
‘Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that guarantee institutions guarantee, subject to Article 4, payment
         of employees’ outstanding claims resulting from contracts of employment or employment relationships, including, where provided
         for by national law, severance pay on termination of employment relationships.’
      
Article 10(a) and (b) of Directive 80/provides:
      
‘This Directive shall not affect the option of Member States:
(a)      to take the measures necessary to avoid abuses;
(b)      to refuse or reduce the liability referred to in Article or the guarantee obligation referred to in Article if it appears
         that fulfilment of the obligation is unjustifiable because of the existence of special links between the employee and the
         employer and of common interests resulting in collusion between them.’
      
According to Article 3, Directive 2002/came into force on October 2002.
      
 Spanish legislation
 The claims for which Fogasa is responsible
Article 33(1) of Legislative Royal Decree 1/approving the amended text of the Workers’ Statute (Estatuto de los Trabajadores)
         of March (BOE No of March 1995, p. 9654), in the version in force from December (‘the Workers’ Statute’),
         provides:
      
‘The Wages Guarantee Fund … shall pay to workers the remuneration owed to them in the event of insolvency, suspension of payments,
         bankruptcy or judicial administration of their employers.
      
For the purposes of the preceding subparagraph, remuneration shall include the amount which a conciliation settlement or a
         judicial decision recognises as such on the basis of the definition laid down in Article 26(1), as well as “salarios de tramitación”
         [wages for the period between the dismissal and disposal of proceedings] in the cases laid down by the Law …’
      
Article 33(2) of the Workers’ Statute, in the version resulting from Law 60/of December (BOE No of December 1997,
         p. 37453), provided:
      
‘The Wages Guarantee Fund, in the cases referred to in the previous paragraph, shall pay the compensation fixed by a judgment
         or administrative decision in favour of workers on account of their dismissal or of the termination of their contracts in
         accordance with Articles 50, and 52(c) of this Law, up to a maximum of one year’s pay, it being understood that the daily
         wage, taken as the basis for that computation, may not exceed twice the minimum inter‑professional wage.
      
…’
Article 33(2) of the Workers’ Statute, in the version resulting from Law 43/of December for improving growth
         and employment (BOE No of December 2006, p. 46586), resulting from Legislative Royal Decree No 5/(Real Decreto
         Ley 5/2006) of June (BOE No of June 2006, p. 22670), which came into force on June 2006, states:
      
‘In the cases referred to in the previous paragraph, the Wages Guarantee Fund shall pay the compensation fixed by a judgment,
         an order, a judicial conciliation settlement or an administrative decision in favour of workers because of dismissal or termination
         of contracts in accordance with Articles 50, and of this Law, and in accordance with Article of Law 22/of July on insolvency …’
      
Under Article of the Workers’ Statute, an unfair dismissal, recognised as such by the employer in a judicial or extra‑judicial
         conciliation settlement or laid down in a judicial decision, gives rise for the employer to the obligation to pay the employee
         concerned, first, the ‘salarios de tramitación’, namely the salaries which fell due during the proceedings challenging the
         dismissal, and, second, compensation for termination of the contract of employment.
      
 The extra‑judicial conciliation
Legislative Royal Decree 2/approving the amended text of the Law on Employment Procedure (Ley de Procedimiento laboral)
         of April (BOE No of April 1995, p. 10695, the ‘LPL’) lays down the rules for extra‑judicial and pre‑litigation
         conciliation.
      
Article of the LPL, which lays down rules for challenging a conciliation agreement, provides:
      
‘1.      Conciliation agreements may be challenged, by the parties and by those to whom they may cause a detriment, before the court
         with jurisdiction to hear the case which is the subject of the conciliation by bringing an action for nullity based on grounds
         capable of vitiating contracts.
      
2.      The action shall become time‑barred days after the adoption of the agreement. For any parties adversely affected, the time‑limit
         shall run from the day that they became aware of the agreement.’
      
The operation of the conciliation services is governed by the Royal Decree 2756/of November (BOE No of December 1979,
         p. 28015), which governs the role of the Instituto de Mediación, Arbitraje y Conciliación (Centre for Mediation, Arbitration
         and Conciliation). Articles 5, 8, and of the Royal Decree provide:
      
‘Article 1.      Conciliation settlements shall be concluded before the Centre for Mediation, Arbitration and Conciliation of the place of
         performance of the services or the place of residence of the interested parties, at the applicant’s choice.
      
2.      Conciliation settlements shall take place before the Director, the President of the Arbitration Tribunal, the Secretary or
         any other official of the Centre, on condition that they hold a degree (‘Licenciatura’) in law.
      
The parties to the conciliation procedure must have the same legal capacity as that required for parties to court proceedings
         in employment law matters.
      
…
Article 1.      Once the application is received and registered, it shall be examined to determine whether it complies with the requirements.
         Details shall, if necessary, be requested to ensure that the summonses of the interested parties are correct. A copy, duly
         dated and stamped, shall be delivered by personal service with signed confirmation of receipt to the person who is to appear,
         who shall be informed of the place, day and time of the conciliation, which must take place within the legally prescribed
         time‑limits. Where the person being summoned is not the applicant and refuses to accept the summons, he shall be notified
         in the same way as the other interested parties.
      
…
Article Once the hearing is open, after calling the parties, who may appear accompanied by an intermediary, the conciliator shall
         verify their identity, capacity and authority to represent their principals and, after the applicant has given his agreement,
         he shall allow them to speak in order for them to set out their claims and their pleas in law.  The production of documents
         and other evidence is optional.
      
Next, he shall invite the interested parties to reach an agreement, assisted, where appropriate, by the intermediaries, permitting
         them to speak as often as is necessary and suggesting equitable solutions to them. He shall keep order during the discussion
         which he shall be empowered to suspend in the case of disruption or if it proves impossible to reach an agreement: in both
         cases the procedure shall then be treated as concluded without agreement.
      
The conciliator shall keep a minute of the hearing and record as clearly as possible the content of the agreements concluded
         by the interested parties. If no agreement is concluded, he shall expressly state this.
      
The official record shall be signed by the interested parties and by the conciliator and if one of them does not know how
         to sign or is unable to sign, this shall be noted and the intermediary shall be able to sign in his stead. Similarly, the
         refusal to sign shall be expressly noted along with the grounds for the refusal, if known, and the procedure shall then be
         treated as concluded without an agreement.
      
Immediately after the conciliation settlement, the conciliator shall deliver a certified copy of the minute to the interested
         parties.
      
Article What has been decided upon at the conciliation before the Centre for Mediation, Arbitration and Conciliation constitutes final
         judgment, and may be enforced in courts with employment law jurisdiction.
      
…’
 Judicial conciliation
Judicial conciliation is governed by Article of the LPL, which reads as follows:
      
‘1.      The judicial body, adjudicating at a public hearing, shall attempt conciliation by indicating to the parties their rights
         and obligations without prejudice to the content of any possible judgment. If the judicial body considers that the content
         of the conciliation agreement constitutes a serious detriment to one of the parties, evasion of the law or a misuse of rights,
         it shall not approve it.
      
2.      It may approve the agreement at any moment before giving judgment.
…’
Regarding Fogasa’s participation in the judicial employment Law proceedings, Article of the LPL provides:
      
‘1.      The Wages Guarantee Fund may appear as a party at any stage in proceedings which may lead to payment by the Wages Guarantee
         Fund of salaries or compensation to workers, without such intervention causing the delay or suspension of the proceedings.
      
…’
 Fogasa’s rights and obligations
Under Articles and of the LPL, which govern Fogasa’s participation in the procedure for declaring undertakings insolvent:
      
‘Article 1.      Prior to the declaration of insolvency, if the Wages Guarantee Fund has not already been called, it shall be heard within
         a maximum period of fifteen days, so that it may seek adoption of appropriate measures and designate the assets of the principal
         person liable which are known to it.
      
2.      In the thirty days following the adoption of the measures sought by the Wages Guarantee Fund, the court to which the matter
         has been referred shall deliver an order which declares, where necessary, the total or partial insolvency of the employer
         and fixes, in that case, the value at which the goods seized are assessed. The insolvency shall be considered for all purposes
         to be provisional until the assets of the employer are known or until the assets which have been seized are sold.
      
…
Article 1.      Where the goods liable to be seized are deployed in the production process of the debtor undertaking and the activity of that
         undertaking is continuing, the Wages Guarantee Fund may request a suspension of execution for a period of thirty days …
      
2.      Once the Wages Guarantee Fund has found that it is impossible to pay the salaries owed, … it shall make this known, stating
         the grounds in support, by requesting a declaration of insolvency for the sole purpose of affording the benefit of the wages
         guarantee.’
      
Article 28(3) of Royal Decree 505/1985, of March 1985, governing the organisation and operation of the Wages Guarantee Fund
         (BOE No 92, of April 1985, p. 10203), lays down the rules concerning the treatment of requests for benefits from Fogasa
         in the following terms:
      
‘At the end of any period of investigation referred to at subparagraph above, the General Secretariat shall, within five
         days, deliver a decision in which it upholds totally or partially or rejects the claims. Abusive and fraudulent claims, along
         with those in respect of which payment is unjustified because of the existence of a common interest of the employees and employers
         in creating the appearance of legal insolvency with the purpose of obtaining provision from the Wages Guarantee Fund, must
         be rejected.’
      
 The main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
The applicant in the main proceedings, Maria Robledillo Núñez, was on the staff of Linya Fish S.L. (‘Linya Fish’) from October to January 2003, when she was dismissed by that undertaking.
      
Following the application for conciliation made by Ms Robledillo Núñez to the Algeciras Centre for Mediation, Arbitration
         and Conciliation, the parties concluded a conciliation agreement on April on account of the unfairness of her dismissal
         whereby Linya Fish recognised that it owed Ms Robledillo Núñez the sum of EUR (‘the compensation for dismissal’), although,
         according to the national court, that compensation could not in any event exceed EUR 186.
      
On May 2004, as part of the enforcement proceedings brought by Ms Robledillo Núñez against Linya Fish in that court, a provisional
         insolvency order was made. On November 2004, on the basis of that decision Ms Robledillo Núñez requested that Fogasa pay
         her the benefit corresponding to the compensation for dismissal which Linya Fish had not yet paid her.
      
By a decision of January 2005, Fogasa dismissed that application in its entirety on the basis that the compensation for
         dismissal had not been awarded by a judgment or administrative decision.
      
On May 2006, the petitioner brought an action before the Juzgado de lo Social Único de Algeciras, against Fogasa’s decision
         to dismiss her application. She challenged the latter’s refusal to pay her the compensation for dismissal provided for in
         that conciliation agreement.
      
In the grounds of its order for reference, the national court states that, at Article 33(2) of the Workers’ Statute in the
         versions in force before June 2006, Spanish law provides for payment of compensation due by reason of the termination of
         an employment relationship, but only where that compensation is recognised by a judgment or administrative decision in favour
         of employees by reason of dismissal or termination of contract. As they are not mentioned in that provision of the Workers’
         Statute, compensation recognised in an extra‑judicial conciliation procedure is not therefore, according to the national court,
         among those for which Fogasa is responsible.
      
Referring to the order in C‑177/Guerrero Pecino [2005] ECR I‑10887, concerning compensation fixed in a judicial conciliation procedure, the national court notes the difference
         between extra‑judicial conciliation and judicial conciliation, in that judicial conciliation takes place before a court which
         can refuse to approve it, in application of Article 84(1) of the LPL, whilst extra‑judicial conciliation takes place before
         a body specifically entrusted with that task, which is not invested with any power to review the content of the agreement
         nor any jurisdiction to approve or disapprove that agreement. That legal distinction between those two methods of conciliation
         seeks to operate as a break on possible fraudulent behaviour. However, according to the same court, Fogasa was entitled to
         refuse completely to pay the compensation for dismissal fixed according to the extra‑judicial conciliation procedure, by basing
         itself on the fraud found in the procedure to be followed in order to obtain benefits from that body where the employer is
         insolvent.
      
Against that background, the Juzgado de lo Social Único de Algeciras decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following
         question to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Having regard to the general principle of equality and non‑discrimination, is there no objective justification for the difference
         in treatment created by Article 33(2) of the … Workers’ Statute (in its current version and in the previous one which remained
         in force until June 2004) and, consequently, must compensation for dismissal payable to an employee pursuant to extra-judicial
         conciliation be included in the ambit of Council Directive 80/… on the approximation of the laws of the Member States
         relating to the protection of employees in the event of the insolvency of their employer, in the version amended by Directive 2002/…, given that Article 33(1) of the Workers’ Statute recognises this type of conciliation in relation to the payment by the
         guarantee institution of the ‘salarios de tramitación’ which also arise from the dismissal?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
By its question, the national court, relying on the order in Guerrero Pecino, asks whether excluding compensation for unfair dismissal from the payment guarantee of the guarantee institutions provided
         for in the first paragraph of Article of Directive 80/is objectively justified as a measure necessary to avoid abuses
         adopted under Article 10(a) of that directive where the compensation is recognised by an extra‑judicial conciliation settlement.
      
At the outset, it should be stated that, according to the first paragraph of Article of Directive 80/987, Member States
         are to take the measures necessary to ensure that the guarantee institutions guarantee, subject to Article of that directive,
         payment of employees’ outstanding claims resulting from contracts of employment or employment relationships, including, where
         provided for by national law, severance pay on termination of employment relationships.
      
It follows that the national legislation at issue in the main proceedings falls within the scope of Directive 80/987, since
         it brings the payment of severance pay on termination of the employment relationship within the protection granted by the
         competent guarantee institution, despite the fact that that institution is in no way required to make the payment pursuant
         to the first paragraph of Article of that directive (see Case C‑81/Cordero Alonso [2006] ECR I‑7569, paragraph 31, and Case C‑246/Velasco Navarro [2008] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 32).
      
Therefore, the power of national law, recognised by that directive, to specify the benefits payable by the guarantee institution
         is conditional upon the requirements flowing from the general principle of equality and non‑discrimination (Case C‑442/Rodríguez Caballero [2002] ECR I‑11915, paragraphs to 33, and Case C‑520/Olaso Valero [2004] ECR I‑12065, paragraphs and 35).
      
As workers who have been unfairly dismissed are in a comparable situation in so far as they are entitled to compensation when
         they are not reinstated (see Rodríguez Caballero, paragraph 33, and Olaso Valero, paragraph 35), it follows that the compensation for dismissal recognised in the extra‑judicial conciliation procedure cannot
         be treated differently from other compensation due by denying them the compensation falling under Article 33(2) of the Workers’
         Statute, unless that difference in treatment can be objectively justified (see, to that effect, the order in Guerrero Pecino, paragraphs and 28, and Olaso Valero, paragraphs and 36).
      
With regard to such a justification, it should be noted that Article 10(a) of Directive 80/confers on Member States the
         right to adopt necessary measures to avoid abuses (see Rodríguez Caballero, paragraph 36). Accordingly, Spanish law provides that compensation for dismissal granted following an extra‑judicial conciliation
         procedure is excluded from benefiting from Fogasa’s assumption of responsibility.
      
Such exclusion cannot be considered necessary in order to attain the objective pursued by Article 10(a) where the guarantee
         institution has sufficient means to enable it to avoid abuse. According to the case‑law of the Court, such is particularly
         the case where the conciliation is supervised by a judicial body (see, to that effect, Rodríguez Caballero, paragraphs and 37, and Olaso Valero, paragraph 37).
      
In that regard, the Spanish Government is of the view that extra‑judicial conciliation is not comparable to judicial conciliation
         because it does not include sufficient guarantees for the avoidance of abuse. Conversely, the Commission of the European Communities
         considers that the difference in treatment described in the order for reference lacks any objective justification. Fogasa
         is invested with appropriate and sufficient means to detect and prevent fraud in specific cases.
      
First, it should be noted that, according to the order for reference, an agreement on compensation for dismissal concluded
         during extra‑judicial conciliation proceedings occurs without the involvement of any judicial body. In particular, the drawing
         up of such an agreement is not supervised by a judge. As is clear, in particular, from Article of Royal Decree 2756/1979,
         the conciliator is not invested with powers which allow him to influence the conciliation procedure.
      
In that respect, it must be pointed out that Article of the LPL makes no provision for intervention by Fogasa during the
         extra‑judicial conciliation procedure. Unlike the judicial conciliation procedure, the guarantee institution is not authorised
         to participate in an extra‑judicial conciliation procedure. Consequently, Fogasa is not, in practice, in a position to become
         aware of circumstances constituting abuse or fraud.
      
Likewise, Fogasa’s participation in the procedure for declaring the employer concerned insolvent does not permit it to challenge
         a claim relating to compensation for dismissal which it suspects was established abusively. It is clear from Articles and of the LPL that that procedure only concerns the employer’s insolvency and the declaration to that effect. Conversely,
         once the insolvency is declared, the procedure does not have the objective of reviewing the legality of the claims for which
         Fogasa is responsible.
      
Second, according to Royal Decree 2756/1979, extra-judicial conciliation settlement leading to an agreement on compensation
         for dismissal takes place before the Centre for Mediation, Arbitration and Conciliation. The agreement so concluded is not
         subject to the approval of a judicial body since the conciliator, unlike a judicial body pursuant to Article of the LPL
         in a judicial conciliation, is not empowered to review the content of the agreement.
      
With regard, third, to the possibility of the guarantee institution refusing, by reasoned decision, to pay the compensation
         for dismissal for which it is responsible (see, to that effect, Rodríguez Caballero, paragraph 36), it is clear from Article 28.of Royal Decree 505/that such an institution is only empowered actually
         to reject the request for payment if it is able, for example in any subsequent judicial procedure, to adduce evidence of circumstances
         supporting a finding of abuse within the meaning of that provision. However, in practice, it is hard to imagine how the guarantee
         institution concerned could, where appropriate, establish and prove such circumstances, since it is not permitted to take
         part in the extra‑judicial conciliation procedure. That is equally true with regard to the power of the guarantee institution
         to bring an action under Article 67(1) of the LPL.
      
It must therefore be held that compensation for dismissal recognised by an extra‑judicial conciliation settlement does not
         offer sufficient guarantees of the avoidance of abuse, unlike compensation in a conciliation procedure carried out in the
         presence of a judicial body, in which the guarantee institution has the right to intervene.
      
That conclusion is not called into question by legislation on ‘salarios de tramitación’ appearing in Article 33(1) of the
         Workers’ Statute which does not provide protection equivalent to that relating to the compensation awarded pursuant to Article 33(2)
         of the Workers’ Statute in order to avoid abuses. In that regard, it is clear from the order for reference that, by its question,
         the national court also wishes to know whether, for the compensation provided for in Article 33(2), the protection measure
         at issue is actually ‘necessary’ within the meaning of Article 10(a) of Directive 80/987.
      
In that regard, it should be noted that, when they are recognised in an extra‑judicial conciliation settlement, claims such
         as ‘salarios de tramitación’, by their very nature, are not generally liable to be fixed in circumstances where there is abuse.
         As such claims are calculated and established according to objective criteria, they do not leave the parties a sufficiently
         wide discretion to encourage abuses when they are determined, unlike compensation calculated in accordance with Article 33(2)
         of the Workers’ Statute.
      
The need to exclude compensation recognised in an extra‑judicial conciliation settlement from the guarantee by the guarantee
         institution of payment of outstanding claims cannot therefore be called into question in the light of the treatment from which
         claims such as ‘salarios de tramitación’ benefit.
      
In the light of all the foregoing considerations, the answer to the question referred by the national court must be that the
         first paragraph of Article of Directive 80/is to be interpreted as meaning that a Member State has the power to exclude
         compensation granted for unfair dismissal from the payment guarantee of the guarantee institutions pursuant to that provision
         where they have been recognised by an extra‑judicial conciliation settlement and such exclusion, objectively justified, constitutes
         a measure necessary to avoid abuses within the meaning of Article 10(a) of that directive.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby rules:
The first paragraph of Article of Council Directive 80/987/EEC of October relating to the protection of employees
            in the event of the insolvency of their employer, as amended by Directive 2002/74/EC of the European Parliament and of the
            Council of September 2002, is to be interpreted as meaning that a Member State has the power to exclude compensation granted
            for unfair dismissal from the payment guarantee of the guarantee institutions pursuant to that provision where they have been
            recognised by an extra‑judicial conciliation settlement and such exclusion, objectively justified, constitutes a measure necessary
            to avoid abuses within the meaning of Article 10(a) of that directive.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Spanish.
      
Top  
 