
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber) 
December (*)
      
(Appeal – Dumping – Regulation (EC) No 172/– Imports of ferro-silicon originating in China, Egypt, Kazakhstan, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Russia – Partial interim review − Regulation (EC) No 384/– Article 3(7) – Known factors – Injury to the European Union industry – Causal link)
In Case C‑10/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, brought on January 2012,
Transnational Company ‘Kazchrome’ AO, established in Aktobe (Kazakhstan), 
      
ENRC Marketing AG, established in Kloten (Switzerland),
      
represented by A. Willems and S. De Knop, avocats,
appellants,
the other parties to the proceedings being:
Council of the European Union, represented by J.-P. Hix, acting as Agent, assisted by G. Berrish, Rechtsanwalt,
      
defendant at first instance,
European Commission, represented by H. van Vliet and S. Thomas, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
Euroalliages, established in Brussels (Belgium), represented by J. Bourgeois, Y. van Gerven and N. McNelis, avocats,
      
interveners at first instance,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of R. Silva de Lapuerta, President of the Chamber, J.L. da Cruz Vilaça, G. Arestis (Rapporteur), J.‑C. Bonichot and
         A. Arabadjiev, Judges,
      
Advocate General: M. Wathelet,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having regard to the written procedure,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By their appeal, Transnational Company ‘Kazchrome’ AO and ENRC Marketing AG (‘the appellants’) seek to have set aside the
         judgment of the General Court of the European Union of October in Case T‑192/Transnational Company ‘Kazchrome’ and ENRC Marketing v Council [2011] ECR II‑(‘the judgment under appeal’), in which the General Court dismissed their action for partial annulment
         of Council Regulation (EC) No 172/of February imposing a definitive anti-dumping duty and collecting definitively
         the provisional duty imposed on imports of ferro-silicon originating in the People’s Republic of China, Egypt, Kazakhstan,
         the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Russia (OJ L 55, p. 6) (‘the regulation at issue’), in so far as it applies
         to the appellants.
      
 Legal context
Council Regulation (EC) No 384/of December on protection against dumped imports from countries not members of the
         European Community (OJ L 56, p. 1) was replaced and codified by Council Regulation (EC) No 1225/of November on protection against dumped imports from countries not members of the European Community (OJ L 343, p. 51; corrigendum
         in OJ L 7, p. 22). However, having regard to the date on which the regulation at issue was adopted, the dispute must
         be examined on the basis of Regulation No 384/(‘the basic regulation’).
      
Article 1(1) of the basic regulation provided as follows:
      
‘An anti-dumping duty may be applied to any dumped product whose release for free circulation in the Community causes injury.’
Paragraphs 1, and to of Article of the basic regulation, entitled ‘Determination of injury’, provided as follows:
      
‘1.      Pursuant to this Regulation, the term “injury” shall, unless otherwise specified, be taken to mean material injury to the
         Community industry, threat of material injury to the Community industry or material retardation of the establishment of such
         an industry and shall be interpreted in accordance with the provisions of this Article. 
      
2.      A determination of injury shall be based on positive evidence and shall involve an objective examination of both (a) the volume
         of the dumped imports and the effect of the dumped imports on prices in the Community market for like products and (b) the
         consequent impact of those imports on the Community industry. 
      
…
5.      The examination of the impact of the dumped imports on the Community industry concerned shall include an evaluation of all
         relevant economic factors and indices having a bearing on the state of the industry, including the fact that an industry is
         still in the process of recovering from the effects of past dumping or subsidisation, the magnitude of the actual margin of
         dumping, actual and potential decline in sales, profits, output, market share, productivity, return on investments, utilisation
         of capacity; factors affecting Community prices; actual and potential negative effects on cash flow, inventories, employment,
         wages, growth, ability to raise capital or investments. This list is not exhaustive, nor can any one or more of these factors
         necessarily give decisive guidance. 
      
6.      It must be demonstrated, from all the relevant evidence presented in relation to paragraph 2, that the dumped imports are
         causing injury within the meaning of this Regulation. Specifically, this shall entail a demonstration that the volume and/or
         price levels identified pursuant to paragraph are responsible for an impact on the Community industry as provided for in
         paragraph 5, and that this impact exists to a degree which enables it to be classified as material.
      
7.      Known factors other than the dumped imports which at the same time are injuring the Community industry shall also be examined
         to ensure that injury caused by these other factors is not attributed to the dumped imports under paragraph 6. Factors which
         may be considered in this respect include the volume and prices of imports not sold at dumping prices, contraction in demand
         or changes in the patterns of consumption, restrictive trade practices of, and competition between, third-country and Community
         producers, developments in technology and the export performance and productivity of the Community industry.’
      
 Background to the dispute and the procedure before the General Court
The background to the dispute is set out as follows in paragraphs 1, 2, and of the judgment under appeal:
      
‘The [appellants] are companies engaged in the production and sale of ferro‑silicon, one of the raw materials used in the manufacture
         of steel and iron. Kazchrome, which is established in Kazakhstan, sells its entire production to ENRC Marketing, which is
         established in Switzerland. The latter in turn sells Kazchrome’s production throughout the world.
      
Following a complaint filed on October by Euroalliages (the Liaison Committee of the Ferro-Alloy Industry), the Commission
         of the European Communities … initiated an anti-dumping proceeding, concerning imports of ferro-silicon originating in the
         former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, China, Egypt, Kazakhstan and Russia, pursuant to [the basic regulation] … and, in particular,
         pursuant to Article of the basic regulation …
      
...
On August 2007, the Commission published Commission Regulation (EC) No 994/of August imposing a provisional
         anti-dumping duty on imports of ferro-silicon originating in the People’s Republic of China, Egypt, Kazakhstan, the former
         Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Russia (OJ L 223, p. 1; “the provisional regulation”). In particular, the provisional
         regulation imposed a provisional anti-dumping duty the rate of which was set at 33.9% for imports of ferro-silicon from Kazakhstan.
         …
      
…
On February 2008, the Council of the European Union adopted [the regulation at issue]. Under [the regulation at issue],
         the rate of the definitive anti-dumping duty applicable to the net, free-at-Community-frontier price, before duty, was set
         at 33.9% for the products from Kazakhstan.’
      
The appellants put forward four pleas in law in support of their action, all of which were rejected.
      
 Forms of order sought by the parties
By their appeal, the appellants claim that the Court should:
      
–        set aside the judgment under appeal, in so far as the General Court did not annul the regulation at issue and ordered the
         appellants to pay the costs of the proceedings before the General Court; 
      
–        adopt a definitive ruling and annul the regulation at issue in so far as it applies to the appellants;
–        order the Council to pay the costs of both sets of proceedings; 
–        order any interveners to pay the costs of both sets of proceedings.
The Council contends that the Court should: 
      
–        dismiss the appeal;
–        in the alternative, dismiss the action; 
–        in the further alternative, refer the case back to the General Court; and
–        in any event, order the appellants to pay the costs of both sets of proceedings.
Euroalliages contends that the Court should: 
      
–        dismiss the appeal; and
–        order the appellants to pay the costs of the proceedings, including all costs incurred by Euroalliages in its intervention
         in both sets of proceedings.
      
The Commission contends that the Court of Justice should:
      
–        dismiss the appeal; and 
–        order the appellants to pay the costs incurred by the Commission. 
 The appeal
The appellants rely on three grounds in support of their appeal. 
      
 First ground of appeal
The first ground of appeal, alleging an error of law in the application of Article 3(7) of the basic regulation, is divided
         into two parts. By the first part of this ground of appeal, the appellants claim that the General Court wrongly decided not
         to annul the regulation at issue even though it had found that the institutions of the European Union had breached that provision
         of the basic regulation. By the second part of their first ground of appeal, the appellants claim that the General Court erred
         in law by imposing on them the burden of proving that a correct non-attribution analysis of other known factors would have
         led those institutions to a different conclusion as regards the causal link. 
      
 The first part of the first ground of appeal
–       Arguments of the parties
In the opinion of the appellants, the General Court erred in law in deciding that the established breaches of Article 3(7)
         of the basic regulation were not sufficient to justify annulment of the regulation at issue. Relying on the judgment in Case
         C‑358/Extramet Industrie v Council [1992] ECR I‑3813, the appellants claim that, where the error in law lies in a breach of Article 3(7) of the basic regulation
         by reason of the fact that the institutions of the European Union did not carry out a non-attribution analysis of the other
         two known factors, the regulation at issue must automatically be annulled.
      
The appellants maintain that, by not annulling the regulation at issue, even though it had found that those institutions had
         breached Article 3(7) of the basic regulation, the General Court misapplied the test laid down in its judgment in Case T‑35/Shanghai Teraoka Electronic v Council [2004] ECR II‑3663, according to which the error or deficiency found in the analysis in question must have an impact on the
         determination of the existence of injury, and therefore on the content of the regulation adopted as a result of that analysis,
         in order to be able to lead to annulment of that regulation.
      
In the opinion of the appellants, that test is not applicable in the present case. Unlike the facts in Shanghai Teraoka Electronic v Council, there was in the present case no non-attribution analysis of the known factors, apart from the dumped imports.
      
In addition, the applicants state that the judgment in Case C‑141/P Foshan Shunde Yongjian Housewares & Hardware v Council [2009] ECR I‑developed the test laid down in Shanghai Teraoka Electronic v Council in that an irregularity could lead to annulment of the regulation at issue if, had it not been for that irregularity, the
         administrative procedure might have had a different outcome. In the present case, the appellants claim that the General Court
         found in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal that it was possible to follow the appellants’ interpretation
         of the data. In the opinion of the appellants, the General Court was therefore obliged to annul the regulation at issue in
         the light of the judgment in Foshan Shunde Yongjian Housewares & Hardware v Council.
      
The European Union institutions and Euroalliages dispute the merits of those arguments and contend that they should be rejected.
         In particular, the European Union institutions consider that the General Court erred in law by holding that the Council had
         breached Article 3(7) of the basic regulation in not carrying out a non-attribution analysis of the other known factors. The
         Commission asks the Court to uphold the judgment under appeal, while making a substitution of grounds, and to hold that those
         institutions did not breach that provision.
      
–       Findings of the Court
In its assessment of the effects of the injury which the investments made by the Community industry caused that same industry,
         the General Court considered, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that it is clear from recital of the preamble
         to the provisional regulation that considerable investments were made by the Community industry in and over the investigation
         period. The General Court found that the provisional regulation and the regulation at issue contain no assessment of whether
         or not those investments constitute a ‘self-inflicted injury’. According to the General Court, bearing in mind the amounts
         which they represented during the investigation period, those investments may have contributed to the injury suffered by the
         Community industry. In those circumstances, it found that ‘the institutions infringed Article 3(7) of the basic regulation
         by failing to separate and distinguish the effects of those investments from the effects of the dumped imports’.
      
Moreover, it is clear from paragraph of the judgment under appeal that, since the data produced by the applicants indeed
         show that certain producers were unprofitable in and 2004, ‘the institutions were under a duty to assess the impact of
         that situation on the injury suffered by the Community industry as a whole, which they failed to do’.
      
In that regard, it must be stated that Article 3(5) of the basic regulation provides that the examination of the impact of
         the dumped imports on the Community industry concerned includes an evaluation of all relevant economic factors and indices
         having a bearing on the state of that Community industry. That provision contains a list of factors which may be taken into
         account and states that that list is not exhaustive and that decisive guidance is not necessarily given by any one or more
         of those factors (see the judgment of November in Case C‑13/P CHEMK and KF v Council, paragraph 56).
      
Article 3(7) of the basic regulation provides that known factors, other than the dumped imports, which are injuring the Community
         industry at the same time must be examined in order to ensure that injury caused by those other factors is not attributed
         to the dumped imports pursuant to paragraph 6. Article 3(6) of the basic regulation states that it must be demonstrated, from
         all the relevant evidence presented, that the dumped imports are causing material injury to the Community industry (see Case
         C‑398/AGST Draht- und Biegetechnik [2008] ECR I‑1057, paragraph 31).
      
It is settled case-law that the determination of the existence of harm caused to the Community industry requires an appraisal
         of complex economic situations and the judicial review of such an appraisal must therefore be limited to verifying whether
         relevant procedural rules have been complied with, whether the facts relied on have been accurately stated, and whether there
         has been a manifest error in the appraisal of those facts or a misuse of powers (see Case C‑351/Ikea Wholesale [2007] ECR I‑7723, paragraph 41). That is particularly the case as regards the determination of the factors injuring the
         Community industry in an anti-dumping investigation (see AGST Draht- und Biegetechnik, paragraph 34).
      
In determining injury, the institutions of the European Union are under an obligation to consider whether the injury on which
         they intend to base their conclusions does in fact derive from the dumped imports and must disregard any injury deriving from
         other factors, particularly from the conduct of Community producers themselves (see Extramet Industrie v Council, paragraph 16; AGST Draht- und Biegetechnik, paragraph 35; and CHEMK and KF v Council, paragraph 70).
      
In this regard, it is for the European Union institutions to ascertain whether the effects of those other factors were not
         such as to break the causal link between, on the one hand, the imports in question and, on the other, the injury suffered
         by the Community industry. It is also for them to verify that the injury attributable to those other factors is not taken
         into account in the determination of injury within the meaning of Article 3(7) of the basic regulation and, consequently,
         that the anti-dumping duty imposed does not go beyond what is necessary to offset the injury caused by the dumped imports
         (see, to that effect, Case C‑535/P Moser Baer India v Council [2009] ECR I‑7051, paragraph 88).
      
However, if the European Union institutions find that, despite such factors, the injury caused by the dumped imports is material
         under Article 3(1) of the basic regulation, the causal link between those imports and the injury suffered by the Community
         industry can consequently be established.
      
The General Court held that the investments and the lack of profitability of certain Community producers constituted other
         ‘known factors’ for the purposes of Article 3(7) of the basic regulation, since they were capable of contributing to the injury
         suffered by the Community industry.
      
In addition, the General Court found at paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal that the appellants had not put
         forward any argument capable of invalidating the entire analysis of the European Union institutions relating to the causal
         link and that the investments had not contributed significantly to the injury suffered by the Community industry in and
         during the investigation period. Furthermore, the General Court found in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that the
         lack of profitability in of five of the six Community producers could not be regarded as an external factor capable of
         calling into question the conclusion that the deficit experienced by certain Community producers could have been caused by
         the dumped imports.
      
As the Court has already held, it is for the parties pleading the illegality of the regulation at issue to adduce evidence
         to show that those factors could have had such an impact that the existence of injury caused to the Community industry and
         of the causal link between that injury and the dumped imports was no longer reliable in terms of the obligation of those institutions
         to disregard any injury resulting from other factors (see AGST Draht- und Biegetechnik, paragraph 51). The appellants, however, have not put forward any sufficient argument to that effect.
      
In those circumstances, it follows from the case-law cited in the preceding paragraph that the General Court acted correctly
         in law in finding that the institutions of the European Union had breached Article 3(7) of the basic regulation by failing
         to separate and distinguish the effects of these external factors from those of the dumped imports, but that that breach was
         not capable of calling into question the legality of the regulation at issue.
      
The first part of the first ground of appeal must therefore be rejected. 
      
 The second part of the first ground of appeal
–       Arguments of the parties
By the second part of their first ground of appeal, the appellants claim that the General Court erred in law in holding that
         it was for the appellants to prove that a non-attribution analysis would have led the institutions of the European Union to
         a different conclusion as regards the causal link. According to the appellants, it is clear from the basic regulation, in
         particular Article 3, and from Article of the Anti-Dumping Agreement of the World Trade Organisation (WTO) that the burden
         of proof for carrying out the non-attribution analysis of the other known factors rests on those institutions, and not on
         the appellants. If those institutions had breached Article 3(7) of the basic regulation by not carrying out a non-attribution
         analysis of the other known injury factors, the appellants could not be required to prove that, had it not been for that breach,
         the administrative investigation might have arrived at a different conclusion.
      
Moreover, according to the appellants, the very structure of Article 3(7) of the basic regulation implies that it is for the
         institutions of the European Union to carry out the non-attribution analysis during the anti-dumping investigation. That interpretation,
         they submit, is borne out by the Court’s case-law (Extramet Industrie v Council; AGST Draht- und Biegetechnik; and Moser Baer India v Council), according to which those institutions are required to examine whether the injury actually derives from the dumped imports
         and to disregard any injury deriving from other factors.
      
In support of those arguments, the appellants cite the report of the Dispute Settlement Body of the WTO, entitled ‘United
         States – Anti-Dumping Measures on Certain Hot-Rolled Steel Products from Japan’ (WT/DS184/AB/R, paragraph 228), according
         to which, if the injurious effects of the dumped imports and the other known factors remain lumped together and indistinguishable,
         there is simply no means of knowing whether injury ascribed to dumped imports was, in reality, caused by other factors. According
         to that report, Article 3.of the WTO Anti-Dumping Agreement requires the investigating authority to make an appropriate
         assessment of the injury caused to the domestic industry and to separate and distinguish the injurious effects of other known
         factors.
      
According to the appellants, the General Court’s reasoning reverses the burden of proof and is also contrary to Article 3(2)
         and (6) of the basic regulation, which requires that the determination of injury be based on positive evidence. The appellants
         consider that, by asking them to produce negative evidence, the General Court placed them in a situation in which it was impossible
         to adduce any evidence. Furthermore, even if the test resulting from Foshan Shunde Yongjian Housewares & Hardware v Council were applied to a situation in which the institutions of the European Union did not carry out a non-attribution analysis,
         it would be incumbent on the appellants to prove, not that, in the absence of irregularities, the conclusions would have been
         different, but simply that such an eventuality could not be excluded.
      
The institutions of the European Union contend that those arguments are unfounded and that they should be rejected.
      
–       Findings of the Court
In paragraphs and to of the judgment under appeal, the General Court examined the data submitted by the appellants
         relating to the Council’s rejection of the arguments that the investments in question were capable of contributing to the
         injury caused to the Community industry, which was already not profitable before any dumping took place. The General Court
         found in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that those investments related to production machinery which had been
         depreciated over many years and ‘accounted for 4.7%, at most, of the Community industry’s loss of profitability in 2005’.
      
With regard to the lack of profitability of the Community industry, the General Court found, in paragraph of the judgment
         under appeal, ‘that it [was] possible to interpret the figures for in a different way’. In particular, the General Court
         found that ‘three Community producers, together representing 24% to 28% of total Community production, were incurring losses
         in 2003, and five producers made losses in 2004. However, [it stated] that … despite the increase in consumption, the year
         [was] characterised by a loss of market share for the Community industry, a 2% decrease in its sales as compared with
         2003, an increase in the dumped imports and in their market share and a decrease in their prices, which [could] mean that
         some Community producers were already negatively affected by the dumped imports in 2004, even though, overall, the Community
         industry [had been] able to increase its profits.’
      
According to the appellants, in this case, although the institutions of the European Union breached Article 3(7) of the basic
         regulation by not carrying out a non-attribution analysis of other known injury factors, the appellants could not be required
         to prove that, had it not been for that infringement, the administrative investigation might have had a different outcome.
      
In this regard, it should be noted that the objective of Article 3(7) of the basic regulation is to prevent the Community
         industry from being granted protection beyond that which is necessary by requiring reasoning that is adequate and open to
         judicial review, so that the injurious effects of other external factors are not taken into account when the injury attributed
         to dumped imports is being determined. However, according to the case-law cited in paragraph of the present judgment, it
         is for the appellants, who dispute the consequences of the breaches established in this case by the General Court, to show
         that those breaches cast doubt on the reliability of the determination of injury.
      
In this case, the appellants, by attempting to show that the General Court could not reasonably have concluded that it was
         for them to prove that a non-attribution analysis would have led the institutions of the European Union to a different conclusion,
         are in fact seeking, by their arguments, to call into question the findings of fact made by the General Court and, in particular,
         to contest the probative value which that Court attached to those facts.
      
It should be pointed out in this regard that it is settled case-law that the Court of Justice has no jurisdiction to find
         the facts or, as a rule, to examine the evidence which the General Court accepted in support of those facts. Provided that
         the evidence has been properly obtained and the general principles of law and the rules of procedure in relation to the burden
         of proof and the taking of evidence have been observed, it is for the General Court alone to assess the value which should
         be attached to the evidence produced before it. That assessment does not therefore constitute, save where the clear sense
         of that evidence has been distorted, a point of law which, as such, is subject to review by the Court of Justice.
      
Accordingly, the second part of the first ground of appeal must be rejected as inadmissible.
      
 Second ground of appeal: failure to carry out a collective analysis of the injury factors
 Arguments of the parties
By their second ground of appeal, the applicants claim that the General Court erred in law in finding that it was possible
         for the institutions of the European Union, without committing a manifest error of assessment, not to carry out a collective
         analysis of the injury factors other than the dumped imports. They submit that the General Court upheld the Council’s interpretation
         of Article 3(6) and (7) of the basic regulation, according to which the known factors had to be examined individually and
         a collective analysis of those factors was necessary only under certain conditions. However, according to the appellants,
         the General Court wrongly decided that they had not adduced evidence that the investments in question had contributed to the
         injury suffered by the European Union industry. The General Court misread the evidence and did not state the reasons for rejecting
         the appellants’ plea.
      
Furthermore, the General Court misapplied the criterion, set out in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that a collective
         analysis of the known injury factors is necessary only where the other known factors have had a negative impact on the situation
         of the European Union industry, without such impact being considered material. The appellants claim that, once the General
         Court had found that imports from Iceland and Venezuela, the investments made by the European Union industry and the pre-existing
         lack of competitiveness had contributed to the injury caused to the European Union industry, the conditions for carrying out
         a collective analysis of the known injury factors were satisfied.
      
The appellants take the view that the case-law of the WTO supports their approach. According to the relevant report of the
         WTO Appellate Report Body, entitled ‘EC – Pipe fittings’ (WT/DS219/AB/R), the investigating authority was not required to
         undertake a collective analysis of the various injury factors on condition that, in view of the specific factual circumstances
         of the case, it fulfils its obligation not to attribute to the dumped imports the injuries caused by the other causal factors.
      
According to the appellants, that obligation required that the distinction between the nature and extent of the injurious
         effects of the other factors and the nature and extent of the effects of the dumped imports should be sufficiently justified.
         Following the example of that case-law, the appellants claim that the institutions of the European Union did not properly
         separate or distinguish the injurious effects of those imports from the injurious effects of other known factors. The General
         Court, they argue, wrongly concluded that those institutions were not required to carry out a collective analysis of all other
         known factors.
      
The institutions of the European Union contend that those arguments are unfounded and that they should be rejected.
      
 Findings of the Court
Article 3(5) of the basic regulation provides that the examination of the impact of the dumped imports on the Community industry
         concerned must include an evaluation of all economic factors and indices having a bearing on the state of that industry.
      
Article 3(6) of the basic regulation states that the institutions of the European Union are required, using all the relevant
         evidence relating to the situation of the European Union industry, to establish the existence of injury to that industry.
         In particular, that article provides that such proof must entail a demonstration that the volume and/or price levels identified
         pursuant to paragraph are responsible for an impact on the European Union industry as provided for in paragraph 5, and that
         this impact exists to a degree which enables it to be classified as material. 
      
Thus, the term ‘Community industry’, for the purposes of Article 4(1) of the basic regulation, refers to ‘the Community producers
         as a whole of the like products or to those of them whose collective output of the products constitutes a major proportion,
         as defined in Article 5(4), of the total Community production of those products’.
      
It therefore follows from those provisions that the determination of injury must be conducted at the level of the Community
         industry as a whole.
      
In that regard, the General Court stated in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal that, in accordance with the
         objective laid down in Article 3(6) and (7) of the basic regulation of ensuring that the injurious effects of the dumped imports
         are separated and distinguished from the injurious effects of the other factors, so that the injury caused by those other
         factors is not attributed to the dumped imports, it was necessary in certain circumstances to carry out a collective analysis
         of such external factors. Where the institutions take the view that a wide range of injury factors, other than the dumped
         imports, may have contributed to the injury, but that their impact cannot individually be regarded as significant, such a
         collective analysis must be carried out.
      
The General Court found, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the individual analysis of the injury factors
         was not flawed by a manifest error, with the exception, however, of two factors which the European Union institutions had
         failed to analyse, but which the appellants had failed to prove would, in the circumstances, have contributed to the injury
         suffered by the Community industry. The General Court concluded that it was possible for those institutions, without committing
         a manifest error of assessment, not to carry out a collective analysis of the injury factors other than the dumped imports.
      
In accordance with settled case-law, the provisions of the basic regulation must, so far as is possible, be interpreted in
         the light of the corresponding provisions of the WTO Anti‑Dumping Agreement. In this case, the General Court’s decision is
         supported by the interpretation of the Dispute Settlement Body of the WTO in the EC – Pipe fittings report, referred to above,
         in that the requirement under Article 3.of that anti-dumping agreement to carry out a non-attribution analysis, in due and
         proper form, which must separate or distinguish the injury caused by the other known factors from the injury caused by the
         dumped imports, does not automatically require a collective analysis of the external injury factors, provided that, under
         the specific factual circumstances of each case, the institutions of the European Union fulfil their obligation not to attribute
         to the dumped imports the harm caused by the other known factors.
      
This is in particular the case where those institutions are able reasonably to conclude, without carrying out an in-depth
         collective analysis of the other known injury factors, that the injury attributed to the dumped imports is in fact caused
         by those imports, rather than by the other external factors.
      
In that regard, the appellants have not adduced any evidence capable of invalidating the General Court’s conclusion that a
         collective analysis of the injury factors, other than the dumped imports, was not necessary for the European Union institutions
         to fulfil their obligation not to attribute to the dumped imports the harm caused by the other known factors.
      
In those circumstances, the second ground of appeal must be rejected. 
      
 Third ground of appeal: costs
 Arguments of the parties
The appellants rely on Article 87(3) of the Rules of Procedure of the General Court in seeking to have set aside the General
         Court’s decision on costs, which orders them also to pay the Council’s costs. The appellants claim that in this case the number
         of errors committed by the institutions of the European Union at the time when the regulation at issue was adopted constitutes
         exceptional circumstances, within the meaning of Article 87(3) of those Rules of Procedure, which justify an order that each
         party should bear its own costs.
      
The Council and Euroalliages contend that this ground of appeal should be rejected. The Commission did not lodge observations
         on this ground of appeal.
      
 Findings of the Court
It is clear from the judgment under appeal that the infringements established by the General Court were not such as to induce
         the appellants to appeal to the Court of Justice to have that judgment set aside, since those infringements were not capable
         of affecting the legality of the regulation at issue.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the appellants’ claim that the number of errors committed by the institutions of the European
         Union at the time when the regulation at issue was adopted constitutes exceptional circumstances, within the meaning of Article
         87(3) of the Rules of Procedure of the General Court, which justify an order that each party should bear its own costs is,
         in any event, unfounded having regard to the rejection of their other grounds of appeal.
      
This ground of appeal must therefore be rejected as being unfounded.
      
 Costs
Under Article 138(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, which applies to appeal proceedings by virtue of Article
         184(1) thereof, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s
         pleadings. Since Transnational Company ‘Kazchrome’ AO and ENRC Marketing AG have been unsuccessful, and since the Council
         has applied for costs to be awarded against them, the appellants must be ordered to pay the costs of the appeal. In accordance
         with Article 140(1) of the Rules of Procedure, which also applies to appeal proceedings pursuant to Article 184(1) thereof,
         the Commission and Euroalliages are to be ordered to bear their own respective costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
1.      Dismisses the appeal;
2.      Orders Transnational Company ‘Kazchrome’ AO and ENRC Marketing AG to pay the costs of the present proceedings;
3.      Orders the European Commission to bear its own costs;
4.      Orders Euroalliages to bear its own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 