
Case C-290/FKP Scorpio Konzertproduktionen GmbH
v
Finanzamt Hamburg-Eimsbüttel
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Bundesfinanzhof)
(Article of the EEC Treaty (later Article of the EC Treaty, now, after amendment, Article EC) and Article of the
         EEC Treaty (later Article of the EC Treaty, now Article EC) – Tax legislation – Income tax – Provision of services by a non-resident in the context of artistic performances – Principle of retention of tax at source – Provider of services not possessing the nationality of a Member State)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Freedom to provide services – Restrictions – Tax legislation
(Article of the EEC Treaty (later Article of the EC Treaty, now, after amendment, Article EC) and Article of the
            EEC Treaty (later Article of the EC Treaty, now Article EC))
2.        Freedom to provide services – Restrictions – Tax legislation 
(Article of the EEC Treaty (later Article of the EC Treaty, now, after amendment, Article EC) and Article of the
            EEC Treaty (later Article of the EC Treaty, now Article EC))
3.        Freedom to provide services – Restrictions – Tax legislation 
(Article of the EEC Treaty (later Article of the EC Treaty, now, after amendment, Article EC) and Article of the
            EEC Treaty (later Article of the EC Treaty, now Article EC))
4.        Freedom to provide services – Provisions of the Treaty – Scope ratione personae 
(Article of the EEC Treaty (later Article of the EC Treaty, now, after amendment, Article EC))
1.        Article of the EEC Treaty (later Article of the EC Treaty, now, after amendment, Article EC) and Article of the
         EEC Treaty (later Article of the EC Treaty, now Article EC) are to be interpreted as not precluding national legislation
         under which a procedure of retention of tax at source is applied to payments made to providers of services not resident in
         the Member State in which the services are provided, while payments made to providers of services resident in that Member
         State are not subject to such a retention, and which imposes liability on a recipient of services who has failed to make the
         retention at source that he was required to make.
      
It is true that such legislation is likely to deter recipients of services from using providers resident in other Member States
         and thus constitutes an obstacle to the freedom to provide services, prohibited in principle by Articles and of the
         EEC Treaty.
      
It is, however, justified by the need to ensure the effective collection of income tax. In the absence of a Community directive
         or other instrument governing mutual administrative assistance for the recovery of tax debts, the procedure of retention at
         source and the liability rules supporting it constitute a legitimate and appropriate means of ensuring the tax treatment of
         the income of a person established outside the State of taxation and ensuring that the income concerned does not escape taxation
         in the State of residence and the State where the services are provided. Moreover, the use of retention at source, and its
         corollary of the potential liability of the recipient of services who is required to make such a retention, enabling the absence
         of retention at source to be penalised if necessary, represent proportionate means of ensuring the recovery of the tax debts
         of the State of taxation.
      
(see paras 33-39, operative part 1)
2.        Article of the EEC Treaty (later Article of the EC Treaty, now, after amendment, Article EC) and Article of the
         EEC Treaty (later Article of the EC Treaty, now Article EC) are to be interpreted as precluding national legislation
         which does not allow a recipient of services who is the debtor of the payment made to a non-resident provider of services
         to deduct, when making the retention of tax at source, the business expenses which that service provider has reported to him
         and which are directly linked to his activity in the Member State in which the services are provided, whereas a provider of
         services residing in that State is taxable only on his net income, that is, the income received after deduction of business
         expenses.
      
The existence of a refund procedure in which the business expenses of a non-resident provider of services can be taken into
         account subsequently is irrelevant in that respect. To the extent that commencing such a procedure involves additional administrative
         and economic burdens, and is inevitably necessary for the provider of services, the tax legislation in question constitutes
         an obstacle to the freedom to provide services, prohibited by Articles and of the EEC Treaty.
      
By contrast, those provisions do not preclude national legislation whereby, on the occasion when the retention at source procedure
         is used, the only business expenses deducted are those directly linked to the activity that generated the taxable income in
         the Member State in which the service is provided, which the service provider established in another Member State has reported
         to the payment debtor, expenses not directly linked to that economic activity being taken into account if appropriate in a
         subsequent refund procedure.
      
(see paras 46-47, 49, 52, operative part 2)
3.        Article of the EEC Treaty (later Article of the EC Treaty, now, after amendment, Article EC) and Article of the
         EEC Treaty (later Article of the EC Treaty, now Article EC) do not preclude a rule that the tax exemption granted under
         the Convention between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Kingdom of the Netherlands for the avoidance of double taxation
         to a non-resident provider of services who has carried on activity in Germany can be taken into account by the payment debtor
         in the procedure for retention of tax at source, or in a subsequent procedure for exemption or refund, or in proceedings for
         liability brought against him, only if a certificate of exemption stating that the conditions laid down to that end by that
         convention are satisfied is issued by the competent tax authority.
      
Whilst such a measure constitutes an obstacle to the freedom to provide services guaranteed under Articles and of the
         EEC Treaty, it is, however, justified in order to ensure the proper functioning of the procedure for taxation at source. It
         appears to be important that the payment debtor can refrain from retaining tax at source only if he is certain that the provider
         of services satisfies the conditions for an exemption. The payment debtor cannot be required himself to clarify whether or
         not, in each individual case, the income in question is exempt under a convention for the avoidance of double taxation. Finally,
         authorising the payment debtor unilaterally to refrain from retaining the tax at source could, in the event of an error on
         his part, have the effect of compromising the collection of the tax from the payment creditor.
      
(see paras 58-61, operative part 2)
4.        Article of the EEC Treaty (later Article of the EC Treaty, now, after amendment, Article EC) must be interpreted
         as not being applicable in favour of a provider of services who is a national of a non-member country.
      
On this point, the EEC Treaty states that, since the Council has not made use of the possibility provided for in the second
         paragraph of Article thereof, the provisions governing the freedom to provide services apply if the following conditions
         are satisfied: the service must be provided within the Community, and the provider of services must be a national of a Member
         State and established in a State of the Community. It follows that the EEC Treaty does not extend the benefit of those provisions
         to providers of services who are nationals of non-member countries, even if they are established within the Community and
         an intra-Community provision of services is concerned.
      
(see paras 67-69, operative part 3)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Article of the EEC Treaty (later Article of the EC Treaty, now, after amendment, Article EC) and Article of the
         EEC Treaty (later Article of the EC Treaty, now Article EC) – Tax legislation – Income tax – Provision of services by a non-resident in the context of artistic performances – Principle of retention of tax at source – Provider of services not possessing the nationality of a Member State)
      
In Case C‑290/04,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC by the Bundesfinanzhof (Germany), made by decision of April 2004,
         received at the Court on July 2004, in the proceedings
      
FKP Scorpio Konzertproduktionen GmbH
v
Finanzamt Hamburg-Eimsbüttel,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Rosas and J. Makarczyk, Presidents of Chambers, J.‑P. Puissochet,
         R. Schintgen, P. Kūris, U. Lõhmus, E. Levits (Rapporteur) and A. Ó Caoimh, Judges,
      
Advocate General: P. Léger,
Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on July 2005,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        FKP Scorpio Konzertproduktionen GmbH, by A. Cordewener and H. Grams, Rechtsanwälte, and D. Molenaar, belastingadviseur,
–        the German Government, by M. Lumma, U. Forsthoff and A. Tiemann, acting as Agents,
–        the Belgian Government, by E. Dominkovits, acting as Agent,
–        the Spanish Government, by F. Díez Moreno, acting as Agent,
–        the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, assisted by G. de Bellis, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the United Kingdom Government, by C. Jackson, acting as Agent, and G. Barling QC and J. Stratford, barrister,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by R. Lyal and B. Eggers, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on May 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling relates to the interpretation of Article of the EEC Treaty (later Article of
         the EC Treaty, now, after amendment, Article EC) and Article of the EEC Treaty (later Article of the EC Treaty, now
         Article EC).
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings between FKP Scorpio Konzertproduktionen GmbH (‘Scorpio’) and the Finanzamt
         (Tax Office) Hamburg-Eimsbüttel concerning income tax to which that company was assessed in Germany for the year 1993.
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
Article of the EEC Treaty (subsequently Article of the EC Treaty, which in turn became Article EC) provides:
      
‘Companies or firms formed in accordance with the law of a Member State and having their registered office, central administration
         or principal place of business within the Community shall, for the purposes of this Chapter, be treated in the same way as
         natural persons who are nationals of Member States.
      
…’
Article of the EEC Treaty provides:
      
‘Within the framework of the provisions set out below, restrictions on freedom to provide services within the Community shall
         be progressively abolished during the transitional period in respect of nationals of Member States who are established in
         a State of the Community other than that of the person for whom the services are intended.
      
The Council may, acting by a qualified majority on a proposal from the Commission, extend the provisions of the Chapter to
         nationals of a third country who provide services and who are established within the Community.’
      
Under Article of the EEC Treaty:
      
‘Services shall be considered to be “services” within the meaning of this Treaty where they are normally provided for remuneration,
         in so far as they are not governed by the provisions relating to freedom of movement for goods, capital and persons.
      
“Services” shall in particular include:
(a) activities of an industrial character;
(b) activities of a commercial character;
(c) activities of craftsmen;
(d) activities of the professions.
Without prejudice to the provisions of the Chapter relating to the right of establishment, the person providing a service
         may, in order to do so, temporarily pursue his activity in the State where the service is provided, under the same conditions
         as are imposed by that State on its own nationals.’
      
Article of the EEC (subsequently Article of the EC Treaty, which in turn became Article EC) Treaty reads:
      
‘The provisions of Articles to shall apply to the matters covered by this Chapter.’
 National legislation
The German Law on Income Tax (Einkommensteuergesetz, ‘the EStG’), in the version of the Tax Amendment Law (Steueränderungsgesetz)
         of February (BGBl. I, p. 297), in force at the material time, provides in Paragraph 1(4) that natural persons
         who are neither permanently nor ordinarily resident in Germany – apart from exceptions not arising in the case in the main
         proceedings – have partial liability to income tax where they receive income in that Member State within the meaning of Paragraph
         of the EStG. Under Paragraph 49(1)(2)(d) of the EStG, such income covers income from cultural, artistic or similar performances
         in Germany, irrespective of the person receiving the earnings.
      
Paragraph 50a(4), first sentence, (1) of the EStG provides that, in the case of persons with partial liability to tax, the
         tax on income of that kind is levied by means of retention at source. The retention amounts to 15% of the total receipts.
         Under Paragraph 50a(4), third, fifth and sixth sentences, of the EStG, business expenses are not deductible. The value added
         tax on the services provided in Germany by the person with partial tax liability also forms part of the income.
      
The income tax is payable when the payment is made to the creditor. At that time the payment debtor must, in accordance with
         Paragraph 50a(5), first and second sentences, of the EStG, make the retention of tax at source for the account of the payment
         creditor with partial liability to tax, the latter being the taxable person (tax debtor).
      
The payment debtor must pay to the competent Finanzamt the tax retained during the past quarter, and that payment must take
         place at the latest by the tenth day of the month following that quarter. In accordance with Paragraph 50a(5), third and fifth
         sentences, of the EStG, that debtor is responsible for retaining and paying the tax. Apart from exceptions which do not apply
         in this case, the income tax of partially taxable persons is deemed, in view of the discharging effect of the retention at
         source laid down by Paragraph 50(5) of the EStG, to have been paid once it is retained at source.
      
Paragraph 50d of the EStG lays down certain special rules for the case in which a convention for the avoidance of double taxation
         applies.
      
Thus Paragraph 50d(1), first sentence, of the EStG provides that, where income subject to retention at source under Article
         50a of the EStG cannot be taxed because of such a convention, the provisions relating to retention of tax at source by the
         payment debtor must none the less be applied without prejudice to the convention. Only if the Bundesamt für Finanzen (Federal
         Finance Office) certifies on application that the conditions laid down to that end by the convention for the avoidance of
         double taxation are satisfied is the payment debtor, in accordance with the exemption procedure laid down in Paragraph 50d(3),
         first sentence, of the EStG, not obliged to make the retention at source. In the absence of a certificate of exemption issued
         by the Bundesamt für Finanzen, the payment debtor is required to make the retention.
      
Under Paragraph 50d(1), first sentence, of the EStG, the payment creditor does not, however, lose the rights to exemption
         from tax granted him by the convention for the avoidance of double taxation. On the contrary, under Paragraph 50d(1), second
         sentence, of the EStG, the tax retained and paid must be reimbursed to him, on application, to the extent provided for by
         the convention.
      
Under Paragraph 50d(1), last sentence, of the EStG, where an action for liability is brought against the debtor for failing
         to retain the tax at source, he cannot rely in those proceedings on the rights conferred on the payment creditor by a convention
         for the avoidance of double taxation.
      
According to the information provided by the referring court, the income derived from the artistic performances at issue in
         the main proceedings was not taxable in Germany but only in the Netherlands, by virtue of the Convention of June between
         the Federal Republic of Germany and the Kingdom of the Netherlands for the avoidance of double taxation in the area of income,
         capital, and various other taxes and for regulating other tax matters (BGBl. II, p. 1782, ‘the Germany-Netherlands Convention’).
      
Finally, by way of comparison, the situation should be described of a provider of services who is permanently or ordinarily
         resident in Germany and consequently is wholly liable to income tax in that Member State.
      
That provider of services is subject to the general obligation to make a declaration of income as part of the procedure for
         assessing income tax. Since the debtor of the payment made to that service provider is not obliged to make a retention at
         source, it is not possible for him to incur liability by reason of not having made such a retention. Nor can the payment debtor
         be held liable for the income tax due from the payment creditor.
      
 The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Scorpio, whose registered office is in Germany, is a company which organises concerts. In it concluded a contract with
         a natural person trading under the name of Europop, who made a music group available to it. Europop was at that time established
         in the Netherlands and was not permanently or ordinarily resident or established in Germany. The national court states that
         it does not know Europop’s nationality.
      
In the first and third quarters of 1993, Scorpio paid Europop a total of DEM for the services provided by Europop.
         From that sum Scorpio did not make the retention of tax at source laid down in Paragraph 50a(4)(1), first sentence, of the
         EStG, even though Europop had not presented to it the certificate of exemption mentioned in Paragraph 50d(3), first sentence,
         of the EStG.
      
After learning of those facts, the competent tax authority called on Scorpio’s liability and, by a notice of assessment of
         March 1997, demanded payment of the sum of DEM 395.representing the amount of tax which Scorpio should have retained
         at source from the payment made to Europop, namely 15% of the gross amount of that payment.
      
Scorpio’s objection to the Finanzamt Hamburg-Eimsbüttel against that assessment notice was rejected. The Finanzgericht Hamburg
         (Hamburg Finance Court), to which Scorpio then turned, also dismissed its application, since Scorpio had not presented the
         certificate of exemption required by Paragraph 50d(3), first sentence, of the EStG.
      
Scorpio appealed on a point of law to the Bundesfinanzhof (Federal Finance Court), seeking to have the decision of the Finanzgericht
         set aside and the contested notice of assessment annulled.
      
In support of its appeal, Scorpio argues, first, that Paragraph 50a(4), sixth sentence, of the EStG is contrary to Articles
         and of the EC Treaty in that it excludes the deduction of business expenses from the amount to be retained at source.
         That, it says, follows from the judgment in Case C‑234/Gerritse [2003] ECR I‑5933.
      
It argues, second, that the fact that it is prohibited by Paragraph 50d(1), fourth sentence, of the EStG from relying, as
         the party whose liability may be incurred in accordance with Paragraph 50a(5), fifth sentence, of the EStG, on the tax exemption
         to which the payment creditor – in this case Europop – is entitled under the Germany-Netherlands Convention is also contrary
         to the EC Treaty.
      
The Bundesfinanzhof is uncertain as to how Articles and of the EC Treaty are to be interpreted with respect to the principle
         of the retention of tax at source, and as to the extent of the action for liability brought by the Finanzamt on that basis.
         It states that the outcome of the main proceedings depends inter alia on whether the interpretation of those articles would
         be the same if Europop had not been a national of a Member State when he provided his services.
      
In those circumstances the Bundesfinanzhof decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following questions to the Court
         for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Must Articles and of the EC Treaty be interpreted as meaning that they are infringed if a payment debtor established
         in Germany of a payment creditor established in another State of the European Union (in this case: in the Netherlands), who
         holds the nationality of a Member State, can be held liable under Paragraph 50a(5), fifth sentence, of the [EStG] in
         the version in force in 1993, because he has failed to retain tax at source pursuant to Paragraph 50a(4) of the EStG, whereas
         payments to a payment creditor who is wholly liable to income tax in Germany (a German) are not subject to any retention of
         tax at source pursuant to Paragraph 50a(4) of the EStG and therefore no liability of the payment debtor for not making a retention
         or not making a sufficient retention of tax at source can arise?
      
2.      Is the answer to Question different if, at the time of providing his service, the payment creditor established in another
         State of the European Union is not a national of a Member State?
      
3.      If the answer to Question is in the negative:
(a)      Are Articles and of the EC Treaty to be interpreted as meaning that business expenses incurred by a payment creditor
         established in another State of the European Union and economically connected with his activities in Germany giving rise to
         the payments must be taken into account in reduction of tax by the payment debtor at the time of retaining tax at source pursuant
         to Paragraph 50a(4) of the EStG, because Germans too are subject to income tax only on the net income remaining after deduction
         of business expenses?
      
(b)      Is it sufficient for the purpose of avoiding an infringement of Articles and of the EC Treaty if, in retaining tax at
         source pursuant to Paragraph 50a(4) of the EStG, only the business expenses economically connected with the activity in Germany
         giving rise to the claim for payment and which the payment creditor established in another State of the European Union has
         reported to the payment debtor are taken into account in reduction of tax, and any further business expenses can be taken
         into account in a subsequent refund procedure?
      
(c)      Are Articles and of the EC Treaty to be interpreted as meaning that they are infringed if the tax exemption to which
         a payment creditor established in the Netherlands is entitled in Germany under the [Germany-Netherlands Convention] is initially
         disregarded in the retention of tax at source pursuant to Paragraph 50a(4) in conjunction with Paragraph 50d(1) of the EStG
         and only allowed in a subsequent procedure for exemption or refund and the payment debtor is likewise not entitled to rely
         on the tax exemption in proceedings concerning liability, whereas Germans’ tax-free income is not subject to any retention
         of tax and therefore no liability for non-retention or insufficient retention of tax at source can arise either?
      
(d)      Are the answers to Questions 3(a) to (c) different if the payment creditor established in another State of the European Union
         is not a national of a Member State at the time of providing his service?’
      
 The questions
It should be noted at the outset that, as the facts at issue in the main proceedings took place before November 1993, in
         other words at a date before that of the entry into force of the Treaty on European Union signed at Maastricht on February
         1992, the interpretation asked for by the national court relates to Articles and of the EEC Treaty.
      
 Question By its first question the national court asks essentially whether Articles and of the EEC Treaty must be interpreted
         as precluding national legislation under which a procedure of retention of tax at source is applied to payments made to providers
         of services not resident in the Member State in which the services are provided, while payments made to providers of services
         resident in that Member State are not subject to such a retention. The national court asks the Court to rule also on the corollary
         of such legislation, namely the liability incurred by a recipient of services who has failed to make the retention at source
         that he was required to make.
      
The legislation at issue in the main proceedings establishes a different tax system depending on whether the provider of services
         is established in Germany or in another Member State.
      
It must be stated, first, that although direct taxation does not as such fall within the purview of the Community, the powers
         retained by the Member States must nevertheless be exercised consistently with Community law (see, inter alia, Case C‑279/Schumacker [1995] ECR I‑225, paragraph 21).
      
It should be recalled, next, that according to the Court’s case-law Article of the EEC Treaty requires the abolition of
         any restriction on the freedom to provide services imposed on the ground that the person providing a service is established
         in a Member State other than the one in which the service is provided (Case 205/Commission v Germany [1986] ECR 3755, paragraph 25, and Case C‑180/Commission v Italy [1991] ECR I‑709, paragraph 15).
      
Finally, it is settled case-law that Article of the EEC Treaty confers rights not only on the provider of services but
         also on the recipient (see, in particular, Joined Cases 286/and 26/Luisi and Carbone [1984] ECR 377; Case C‑204/Bachmann [1992] ECR I‑249; Case C‑158/Kohll [1998] ECR I‑1931; Case C‑224/Ciola [1999] ECR I‑2517; and Case C‑294/Eurowings Luftverkehr [1999] ECR I‑7447).
      
In the present case, as the referring court points out, the obligation on the recipient of services to make a retention at
         source of the tax on the payment made to a provider of services residing in another Member State and the fact that that recipient
         may in certain cases incur liability are liable to deter companies such as Scorpio from calling on providers of services residing
         in other Member States.
      
It follows that legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings constitutes an obstacle to the freedom to provide
         services, prohibited in principle by Articles and of the EEC Treaty.
      
As the governments which have submitted observations and the Commission rightly submit, and as the Advocate General states
         in his Opinion, such legislation is nevertheless justified by the need to ensure the effective collection of income tax.
      
The procedure of retention at source and the liability rules supporting it constitute a legitimate and appropriate means of
         ensuring the tax treatment of the income of a person established outside the State of taxation and ensuring that the income
         concerned does not escape taxation in the State of residence and the State where the services are provided. It should be recalled
         that at the material time, in 1993, no Community directive or any other instrument referred to in the case-file governed mutual
         administrative assistance concerning the recovery of tax debts between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Federal Republic
         of Germany.
      
Moreover, the use of retention at source represented a proportionate means of ensuring the recovery of the tax debts of the
         State of taxation.
      
The same is true of the potential liability of the recipient of services who is required to make such a retention, as that
         enables the absence of retention at source to be penalised if necessary. Since that liability constitutes the corollary of
         that method of collecting income tax, it too contributes in a proportionate manner to ensuring the effectiveness of collecting
         the tax.
      
It follows that Articles and of the EEC Treaty must be interpreted as not precluding:
      
–        national legislation under which a procedure of retention of tax at source is applied to payments made to providers of services
         not resident in the Member State in which the services are provided, whereas payments made to providers of services resident
         in that Member State are not subject to such a retention;
      
–        national legislation under which liability is incurred by a recipient of services who has failed to make the retention at
         source that he was required to make.
      
 Question Since this question is based on the same premiss as Question 3(d), namely that the payment creditor is a national of a non-member
         country, it will be examined together with that question.
      
 Question 3(a)
The Bundesfinanzhof asks the Court whether Articles and of the EEC Treaty must be interpreted as precluding national
         legislation which does not allow a recipient of services who is the debtor of the payment made to a non-resident provider
         of services to deduct, when making the retention of tax at source, the business expenses of that service provider which are
         economically connected with his activities in the Member State in which the services are provided, whereas a provider of services
         residing in that State is taxable only on his net income, that is, the income received after deduction of business expenses.
      
The Court has already had occasion to rule on whether Articles and of the EC Treaty preclude national tax legislation
         which as a general rule takes into account gross income when taxing non-residents, without deducting business expenses, whereas
         residents are taxed on their net income, after deduction of those expenses (Gerritse, paragraph 55).
      
In Gerritse the Court first found that the business expenses in question in that case were directly linked to the activity that had generated
         the taxable income, so that residents and non-residents were placed in a comparable situation in that respect. It then answered
         in the affirmative the question referred to it for a preliminary ruling, holding that a national provision which, in matters
         of taxation, refuses to allow non-residents to deduct business expenses, whereas residents are allowed to do so, constitutes
         indirect discrimination on grounds of nationality, contrary in principle to Articles and of the EC Treaty. It did not,
         however, rule on the question of the stage of the taxation procedure at which the business expenses incurred by a provider
         of services must be deducted, in a case where several different stages are possible.
      
In order to provide the referring court with a useful answer, the concept of ‘economically connected business expenses’ must
         therefore be understood as referring to expenses that are directly linked, within the meaning of the line of case-law starting
         with Gerritse, to the economic activity that generated the taxable income.
      
The Bundesfinanzhof thus wishes to know whether Articles and of the EEC Treaty likewise preclude national tax legislation
         which does not allow business expenses to be deducted from taxable income at the time when the payment debtor makes the retention
         at source of the tax, but gives a non-resident the possibility of being taxed on the basis of his net income in Germany in
         a procedure following, at his request, the procedure of retention at source, and of thus obtaining a refund of any difference
         between that amount and that of the retention at source.
      
Starting from the Bundesfinanzhof’s premiss, namely the existence at the material time of a refund procedure in which the
         business expenses of a non-resident provider of services could be taken into account subsequently, it should be recalled that,
         according to settled case-law of the Court, the application of the host Member State’s national rules to providers of services
         is liable to prohibit, impede or render less attractive the provision of services to the extent that it involves expense and
         additional administrative and economic burdens (see Case C‑165/Mazzoleni and ISA [2001] ECR I‑2189, paragraph 24, and Joined Cases C‑49/98, C‑50/98, C‑52/to C‑54/and C‑68/to C‑71/Finalarte and Others [2001] ECR I‑7831, paragraph 30).
      
In the case at issue in the main proceedings, the obligation, even where the non-resident provider of services has informed
         his payment debtor of the amount of his business expenses directly linked to his activity, to commence a procedure for the
         subsequent refund of those expenses is liable to impede the provision of services. In that commencing such a procedure involves
         additional administrative and economic burdens, and to the extent that the procedure is inevitably necessary for the provider
         of services, the tax legislation in question constitutes an obstacle to the freedom to provide services, prohibited in principle
         by Articles and of the EEC Treaty.
      
No argument has been advanced to justify the national legislation at issue in the main proceedings, in so far as it does not
         allow a recipient of services who is the debtor of the payment made to a non-resident provider of services to deduct, when
         making the retention of tax at source, the business expenses directly linked to the activity of the non-resident provider
         of services in the Member State in which the services are provided, if the provider of services has reported them to him.
      
The answer to Question 3(a) must therefore be that Articles and of the EEC Treaty must be interpreted as precluding
         national legislation which does not allow a recipient of services who is the debtor of the payment made to a non-resident
         provider of services to deduct, when making the retention of tax at source, the business expenses which that service provider
         has reported to him and which are directly linked to his activity in the Member State in which the services are provided,
         whereas a provider of services residing in that State is taxable only on his net income, that is, the income received after
         deduction of business expenses.
      
 Question 3(b)
By this question, which is linked to the preceding one, the Bundesfinanzhof essentially asks whether Articles and of
         the EEC Treaty must be interpreted as not precluding national legislation under which only the business expenses directly
         linked to activities in the Member State in which the service is provided, which the service provider established in another
         Member State has reported to the payment debtor, are deducted in the procedure for retention at source, and any further business
         expenses can be taken into account in a subsequent refund procedure.
      
This question must be answered in the light of the considerations on the previous question and bearing in mind the fact that
         the Court does not have the material to make a comparison between the situations of resident and non-resident providers of
         services. While the expenses which the provider of services has reported to his debtor must be deducted in the procedure for
         the retention of tax at source, Articles and of the EEC Treaty do not preclude the taking into account if appropriate
         of expenses that are not directly linked, within the meaning of the Gerritse line of case-law, to the economic activity that generated the taxable income, in a subsequent refund procedure.
      
The answer to Question 3(b) must therefore be that Articles and of the EEC Treaty must be interpreted as not precluding
         national legislation under which only the business expenses directly linked to the activity that generated the taxable income
         in the Member State in which the service is provided, which the service provider established in another Member State has reported
         to the payment debtor, are deducted in the procedure for retention at source, and expenses that are not directly linked to
         that economic activity can be taken into account if appropriate in a subsequent refund procedure.
      
 Question 3(c)
By this question the Bundesfinanzhof asks the Court whether Articles and of the EEC Treaty must be interpreted as precluding
         a rule that the tax exemption granted under the Germany-Netherlands Convention to a non-resident provider of services who
         has carried on activity in Germany can be taken into account by the payment debtor in the procedure for retention of tax at
         source, or in a subsequent procedure for exemption or refund, or, in the circumstances referred to in paragraph above,
         in proceedings for liability brought against him, only if a certificate of exemption stating that the conditions laid down
         to that end by that convention are satisfied is issued by the competent tax authority.
      
It should be recalled, first, that, according to settled case-law, in the absence of unifying or harmonising measures adopted
         by the Community, the Member States remain competent to determine the criteria for taxation of income and wealth with a view
         to eliminating double taxation by means inter alia of international agreements (see Case C‑307/Saint-Gobain [1999] ECR I‑6161, paragraph 57).
      
However, as far as the exercise of the power of taxation so allocated is concerned, the Member States are obliged to comply
         with Community rules (see, to that effect, Saint-Gobain, paragraph 58; Case C‑385/De Groot [2002] ECR I‑11819, paragraph 94; and Case C‑265/Bouanich [2006] ECR I‑923, paragraph 50).
      
Although, as indicated in paragraph above, the income derived from the artistic services at issue in the main proceedings
         was taxable not in Germany but only in the Netherlands under the Germany-Netherlands Convention, it must be stated, as the
         Advocate General observes in point of his Opinion, that the obligation imposed on a provider of services residing in the
         Netherlands to request the competent German tax authority to issue a certificate of exemption in order to escape additional
         tax on his income in Germany constitutes, as pointed out in paragraph above, a restriction on the freedom to provide services,
         because of the administrative steps that it requires the service provider to take.
      
Similarly, the obligation imposed on the recipient of services to produce that certificate of exemption in proceedings for
         liability brought against him is liable to deter him from calling on a provider of services established in another Member
         State. As Scorpio submits, the payment debtor has to make sure that his contracting partner has either personally initiated
         the procedure for exemption or refund (and, in the latter case, pays him the amount of the refund) or else given him authorisation
         to start that procedure on his behalf. There is a risk that a provider of services established in another Member State will
         not be interested in taking those steps or will no longer be available once the contractual relationship has come to an end.
      
Consequently, the fact that the tax exemption in question can be taken into account, at the various stages of the taxation
         procedure mentioned by the Bundesfinanzhof, only on production of a certificate issued by the competent tax authority stating
         that the conditions laid down to that end by the Germany-Netherlands Convention are satisfied constitutes an obstacle to the
         freedom to provide services guaranteed by Articles and of the EEC Treaty.
      
That obstacle is, however, justified in order to ensure the proper functioning of the procedure for taxation at source.
      
As the Belgian Government inter alia argues and as the Advocate General states in point of his Opinion, it appears to be
         important that the payment debtor can refrain from retaining tax at source only if he is certain that the provider of services
         satisfies the conditions for an exemption. The payment debtor cannot be required himself to clarify whether or not, in each
         individual case, the income in question is exempt under a convention for the avoidance of double taxation. Finally, authorising
         the payment debtor unilaterally to refrain from retaining the tax at source could, in the event of an error on his part, have
         the effect of compromising the collection of the tax from the payment creditor.
      
In the light of the above considerations, the answer to Question 3(c) must be that Articles and of the EEC Treaty must
         be interpreted as not precluding a rule that the tax exemption granted under the Germany-Netherlands Convention to a non-resident
         provider of services who has carried on activity in Germany can be taken into account by the payment debtor in the procedure
         for retention of tax at source, or in a subsequent procedure for exemption or refund, or in proceedings for liability brought
         against him, only if a certificate of exemption stating that the conditions laid down to that end by that convention are satisfied
         is issued by the competent tax authority.
      
 Question and Question 3(d)
By these questions the Bundesfinanzhof essentially asks whether Article of the EEC Treaty must be interpreted as being
         applicable if the recipient of services, who relies on that article in order to benefit from the freedom to provide services
         within the Community, is a national of a Member State and established within the Community, and his contracting partner, the
         provider of services, is established in another State of the Community but is a national of a non-member country.
      
It should be recalled that, as stated in paragraph above and in accordance with settled case-law, Article of the EEC
         Treaty confers rights not only on the provider of services but also on the recipient.
      
While those rights include the freedom for recipients of services to go to another Member State in order to receive a service
         there without being obstructed by restrictions (Ciola, paragraph 11, and Case C‑55/Vestergaard [1999] ECR I‑7641, paragraph 20), it is also apparent from settled case-law of the Court that the recipient of services may
         rely on those rights even if neither he nor the service provider moves within the Community (see, to that effect, Eurowings Luftverkehr, paragraph 34; Case C‑243/Gambelli and Others [2003] ECR I‑13031, paragraphs and 57; and Case C‑36/Omega [2004] ECR I‑9609, paragraph 25).
      
That is the case in the main proceedings. The United Kingdom Government’s argument that Scorpio, as the recipient of services,
         cannot benefit from the freedoms guaranteed in Article of the EEC Treaty since it did not go or seek to go to another Member
         State to be provided with the service at issue in the main proceedings cannot therefore be accepted.
      
While it follows from the above considerations that Scorpio, which, as a company or firm within the meaning of the first paragraph
         of Article of the EEC Treaty, is treated in the same way as a natural person who is a national of a Member State, should
         in principle be able, pursuant to Article of the EEC Treaty, to rely on the rights conferred on it by Article of the
         EEC Treaty, it must be examined whether the fact that Europop, as a provider of services established in another Member State,
         is a national of a non-member country precludes Scorpio from relying on those rights.
      
On this point, the EEC Treaty states, since the Council has not made use of the possibility provided for in the second paragraph
         of Article thereof, that the provisions governing the freedom to provide services apply if the following conditions are
         satisfied:
      
–        the service must be provided within the Community;
–        the provider of services must be a national of a Member State and established in a State of the Community.
It follows that the EEC Treaty does not extend the benefit of those provisions to providers of services who are nationals
         of non-member countries, even if they are established within the Community and an intra-Community provision of services is
         concerned.
      
Consequently, the answer to Question and Question 3(d) must be that Article of the EEC Treaty must be interpreted as
         not being applicable in favour of a provider of services who is a national of a non-member country.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Articles and of the EEC Treaty must be interpreted as not precluding
–        national legislation under which a procedure of retention of tax at source is applied to payments made to providers of services
            not resident in the Member State in which the services are provided, whereas payments made to providers of services resident
            in that Member State are not subject to such a retention;
–        national legislation under which liability is incurred by a recipient of services who has failed to make the retention at
            source that he was required to make.
2.      Articles and of the EEC Treaty must be interpreted as
–        precluding national legislation which does not allow a recipient of services who is the debtor of the payment made to a non-resident
            provider of services to deduct, when making the retention of tax at source, the business expenses which that service provider
            has reported to him and which are directly linked to his activity in the Member State in which the services are provided,
            whereas a provider of services residing in that State is taxable only on his net income, that is, the income received after
            deduction of business expense;
–        not precluding national legislation under which only the business expenses directly linked to the activity that generated
            the taxable income in the Member State in which the service is provided, which the service provider established in another
            Member State has reported to the payment debtor, are deducted in the procedure for retention at source, and expenses that
            are not directly linked to that economic activity can be taken into account if appropriate in a subsequent refund procedure;
–        not precluding a rule that the tax exemption granted under the Convention of June between the Federal Republic of
            Germany and the Kingdom of the Netherlands for the avoidance of double taxation in the area of income, capital, and various
            other taxes and for regulating other tax matters, to a non-resident provider of services who has carried on activity in Germany
            can be taken into account by the payment debtor in the procedure for retention of tax at source, or in a subsequent procedure
            for exemption or refund, or in proceedings for liability brought against him, only if a certificate of exemption stating that
            the conditions laid down to that end by that convention are satisfied is issued by the competent tax authority.
3.      Article of the EEC Treaty must be interpreted as not being applicable in favour of a provider of services who is a national
            of a non-member country.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 