
Joined Cases C-256/and C-261/David Barcenilla Fernández
and
Pedro Antonio Macedo Lozano
v
Gerardo García SL
(References for a preliminary ruling from the Tribunal Superior de Justicia de Castilla y León)
(Directive 2003/10/EC – Exposure values – Noise – Hearing protection – Effectiveness)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Social policy – Protection of the safety and health of workers – Directive 2003/on the minimum health and safety requirements
            regarding the exposure of workers to the risks arising from physical agents (noise)
(European Parliament and Council Directive 2003/10, Arts and to 7)
2.        Social policy – Protection of the safety and health of workers – Directive 2003/on the minimum health and safety requirements
            regarding the exposure of workers to the risks arising from physical agents (noise)
(European parliament and Council Directive 2003/10, Art. 5)
1.        Directive 2003/on the minimum health and safety requirements regarding the exposure of workers to the risks arising from
         physical agents (noise), as amended by Directive 2007/30, must be interpreted as meaning that an employer in a company in
         which the workers’ daily noise exposure level is above dB(A), measured without taking account of the effect of individual
         hearing protectors, fails to fulfil the obligations resulting from that directive by simply providing the workers with such
         hearing protectors so that the daily noise exposure level is reduced to less than dB(A), that employer being obliged to
         put in hand a programme of technical or organisational measures intended to reduce such noise exposure to a level of less
         than dB(A), measured without taking into account the effect of the individual hearing protectors.
      
(see para. 34, operative part 1)
2.        Directive 2003/on the minimum health and safety requirements regarding the exposure of workers to the risks arising from
         physical agents (noise), as amended by Directive 2007/30, must be interpreted as meaning that it does not require an employer
         to make an extra payment to workers who are exposed to a noise level above dB(A), measured without taking into account
         the effect of the individual hearing protectors on the sole ground that it has not put in hand a programme of technical or
         organisational measures intended to reduce the daily noise exposure level. However, national law must provide appropriate
         mechanisms to ensure that a worker who is exposed to a noise level above dB(A), measured without taking into account the
         effect of the individual hearing protectors, can require the employer to fulfil the preventive obligations set out in Article
         5(2) of that directive. 
      
(see para. 43, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Seventh Chamber)
May (*)
      
(Directive 2003/10/EC – Exposure values – Noise – Hearing protection – Effectiveness)
In Joined Cases C‑256/and C‑261/10,
REFERENCES for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU, from the Tribunal Superior de Justicia de Castilla y León (Spain),
         made by decisions of April 2010, received at the Court on May 2010, in the proceedings 
      
David Barcenilla Fernández (C-256/10),
      
Pedro Antonio Macedo Lozano (C-261/10)
      
v
Gerardo García SL,
      
THE COURT (Seventh Chamber),
composed of D. Šváby, President of the Chamber, E. Juhász and T. von Danwitz (Rapporteur), Judges, 
Advocate General: Y. Bot,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        the Spanish Government, by B. Plaza Cruz, acting as Agent,
–        the Belgian Government, by T. Materne and M. Jacobs, acting as Agents,
–        the Italian Government, by M. Russo, acting as Agent,
–        the European Commission, by G. Rozet and G. Valero Jordana, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
These references for a preliminary hearing concern the interpretation of Articles 3, 5, and of Directive 2003/10/EC of
         the European Parliament and of the Council of February on the minimum health and safety requirements regarding the
         exposure of workers to the risks arising from physical agents (noise) (Seventeenth individual Directive within the meaning
         of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC) (OJ L 42, p. 38), as amended by Directive 2007/30/EC of the European Parliament
         and of the Council of June (OJ L 165, p. 21, ‘Directive 2003/10’).
      
The references have been made in the course of two sets of proceedings brought by Mr Barcenilla Fernández (C-256/10) and by
         Mr Macedo Lozano (C-261/10) against Gerardo García SL (‘Gerardo’) concerning the obligation of the latter to make an extra
         payment under a provision of national law providing for such an extra payment where the conditions of the work station are
         particularly arduous.
      
 Legal context
 European Union law 
According to recital in the preamble to Directive 2003/10: 
      
‘The level of exposure to noise can be more effectively reduced by incorporating preventive measures into the design of work
         stations and places of work and by selecting work equipment, procedures and methods so as to give priority to reducing the
         risks at source. Provisions relating to work equipment and methods thus contribute to the protection of the workers involved.
         In accordance with the general principles of prevention as laid down in Article 6(2) of Council Directive 89/391/EEC of June on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health of workers at work (OJ L
         183, p. 1), collective protection measures have priority over individual protection measures.’ 
      
According to recital in the preamble to Directive 2003/10: 
      
‘… The assessed or objectively measured values should be decisive for initiating the actions envisaged at the lower and upper
         exposure action values. Exposure limit values are needed to avoid irreversible damage to workers’ hearing; the noise reaching
         the ear should be kept below the exposure limit values.’  
      
Article of that directive, entitled ‘Exposure limit values and exposure action values’, provides:
      
‘1.       For the purposes of this Directive the exposure limit values and exposure action values in respect of the daily noise exposure
         levels and peak sound pressure are fixed at:
      
(a)      exposure limit values: LEX, 8h = dB(A) and Ppeak = Pa ... respectively;
      
(b)      upper exposure action values: LEX, 8h = dB(A) and Ppeak = Pa ... respectively;
      
(c)      lower exposure action values: LEX, 8h = dB(A) and Ppeak = Pa ... respectively.
      
2.      When applying the exposure limit values, the determination of the worker’s effective exposure shall take account of the attenuation
         provided by the individual hearing protectors worn by the worker. The exposure action values shall not take account of the
         effect of any such protectors.
      
...’
Article of that directive, entitled ‘Provisions aimed at avoiding or reducing exposure’, provides:
      
‘1.      Taking account of technical progress and of the availability of measures to control the risk at source, the risks arising
         from exposure to noise shall be eliminated at their source or reduced to a minimum. 
      
The reduction of such risks shall be based on the general principles of prevention set out in Article 6(2) of Directive 89/391/EEC,
         and take into account in particular:
      
(a)      other working methods that require less exposure to noise;
(b)      the choice of appropriate work equipment, taking account of the work to be done, emitting the least possible noise, including
         the possibility of making available to workers work equipment subject to Community provisions with the aim or effect of limiting
         exposure to noise;
      
(c)      the design and layout of workplaces and work stations;
(d)      adequate information and training to instruct workers to use work equipment correctly in order to reduce their exposure to
         noise to a minimum;
      
(e)      noise reduction by technical means:
i)      reducing airborne noise, e.g. by shields, enclosures, sound-absorbent coverings, 
ii)      reducing structure-borne noise, e.g. by damping or isolation;
(f)      appropriate maintenance programmes for work equipment, the workplace and workplace systems;
(g)      organisation of work to reduce noise:
i)      limitation of the duration and intensity of the exposure;
ii)      appropriate work schedules with adequate rest periods.
2.      On the basis of the risk assessment referred to in Article 4, if the upper exposure action values are exceeded, the employer
         shall establish and implement a programme of technical and/or organisational measures intended to reduce the exposure to noise,
         taking into account in particular the measures referred to in paragraph 1.
      
...’
Article of Directive 2003/10, entitled ‘Personal protection’, states:
      
‘1.      If the risks arising from exposure to noise cannot be prevented by other means, appropriate, properly fitting individual hearing
         protectors shall be made available to workers and used by them in accordance with the provisions of Council Directive 89/656/EEC
         of November on the minimum health and safety requirements for the use by workers of personal protective equipment
         at the workplace (third individual Directive within the meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC)(OJ L 393, p. 18)
         and Article 13(2) of Directive 89/391/EEC and under the conditions set out below:
      
(a)      where noise exposure exceeds the lower exposure action values, the employer shall make individual hearing protectors available
         to workers;
      
(b)      where noise exposure matches or exceeds the upper exposure action values, individual hearing protectors shall be used;
...’
Article of Directive 2003/10, entitled ‘Limitation of exposure’, provides:
      
‘1.      Under no circumstances shall the exposure of the worker as determined in accordance with Article 3(2) exceed the exposure
         limit values.
      
2.      If, despite the measures taken to implement this Directive, exposures above the exposure limit values are detected, the employer
         shall:
      
(a)      take immediate action to reduce the exposure to below the exposure limit values,
(b)      identify the reasons why overexposure has occurred; and 
(c)      amend the protection and prevention measures in order to avoid any recurrence.’
 National law
Directive 2003/was transposed by Royal Decree 286/on the protection of the health and safety of workers against risks
         connected with noise exposure (Real Decreto 286/sobre la protección de la salud y la seguridad de los trabajadores contra
         los riesgos relacionados con la exposición al ruido) of March (BOE No 60, 11.3.06, p. 9842).
      
Article 5(1) of Royal Decree 286/distinguishes between action values and limit values which must not be exceeded under
         any circumstances. The limit value which must not be exceeded, under Article of that decree, is an average daily level of
         dB(A).
      
Article 5(2) of Royal Decree 286/states that ‘when applying the exposure limit values, the determination of the worker’s
         actual noise exposure shall take account of the attenuation provided by the individual hearing protectors worn by the worker.’
      
Article of Collective Agreement 2007-for the building and public works sector of the province of Palencia (‘the Collective
         Agreement’) provides: 
      
‘1.      Persons who work in conditions that are particularly arduous, toxic or dangerous are entitled to receive an extra payment
         corresponding to 20% of their basic salary. If they work for half of the working day or less, this extra payment shall be
         10% of that salary. 
      
...
3.      Where, for any reason, the conditions of particular arduousness, toxicity or dangerousness no longer exist, the extra payments
         shall no longer be made.
      
...’
 The actions in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Gerardo, the employer of the applicants in the main proceedings, is a company which produces stone materials from natural
         stone. The applicants in the main proceedings usually work on an automatic cutting machine. 
      
During their working day, the noise level at their place or work exceeds a daily average of dB(A). To remedy that situation,
         Gerardo provided them with individual hearing protection equipment. With the level of attenuation provided by that equipment,
         the daily noise exposure level of the applicants in the main proceedings was reduced to a level of less than dB(A).
      
The applicants in the main proceedings claimed an extra payment under Article of the Collective Agreement, in respect of
         the arduous conditions of their work station due to the fact that they are exposed to a noise level exceeding a daily average
         of dB(A). Their claims were dismissed by the Juzgado de lo Social, which held that Gerardo complied with Royal Decree 286/2006,
         which transposes Directive 2003/10. According to that court, the noise-attenuating effect of the individual hearing protection
         equipment must be taken into account when determining whether the conditions of the work station are to be considered arduous.
         
      
The applicants in the main proceedings brought an appeal before the referring court. 
      
That court states that the dismissal by the Juzgado de lo Social of the claims of the applicants in the main proceedings is
         consistent with the recent case-law of the Tribunal Supremo, according to which the noise-attenuating effect of the individual
         hearing protection equipment must be taken into account when determining whether the worker is exposed to arduous conditions
         at his work station. According to the national court, that case-law, interpreting the concept of ‘arduousness’ in the light
         of Directive 2003/and of the national law transposing it, infers from them that they are intended to protect the worker
         against health risks connected with actual exposure to noise. It follows that there is no arduousness where individual hearing
         protection equipment allows reduction of the noise reaching the ear to a level of under dB(A). 
      
The national court expresses doubts with regard to the compatibility of that case-law of the Tribunal Supremo with Directive
         2003/10. In that regard, the national court, while accepting that the disputes in the main proceedings concern an extra payment
         that, as such, is not governed by that directive, considers that the directive must first be interpreted in order to determine
         whether or not the applicants in the main proceedings are entitled to that payment.
      
It considers that the obligation set out in Article of the Collective Agreement, to make an extra payment in respect of
         arduous working conditions, depends on compliance by the employer with the obligations arising from Directive 2003/and
         Royal Decree No 286/2006. It would undermine the effectiveness of that directive if an employer could escape from the obligation
         to make such an extra payment simply by making hearing protection available to its employees, even if it has not complied
         with the requirements of that directive regarding the preventive obligations established under it.
      
In those circumstances, the Tribunal Superior de Justicia de Castilla y Léon decided to stay the proceedings and to refer
         the following questions, worded identically in each case, to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Are Articles 3, 5(2), and of Directive 2003/… to be interpreted as meaning that a company in which the workers’ daily
         noise exposure level is above dB(A) (measured without taking account of the effect of hearing protectors) fulfils the obligations
         to take preventive measures laid down in that Directive in respect of physical working conditions by providing those workers
         with hearing protectors so that, with the level of attenuation provided by those protectors, the workers’ daily noise exposure
         level is reduced to less than dB(A)?  
      
(2)      Is Article 5(2) of Directive 2003/… to be interpreted as meaning that the programme of technical and/or organisational
         measures which must be adopted by a company in which the workers’ daily noise exposure level is above dB(A) (measured without
         taking account of the effect of hearing protectors) is intended to reduce the noise exposure level to below dB(A)?
      
(3)      If question is answered in the negative, does Directive 2003/… preclude a national rule or judicial approach which exempts
         a company from making a monetary payment, which in principle it must pay to workers affected by daily noise exposure levels
         of over dB(A), because the company has provided those workers with hearing protectors whose attenuating effect causes daily
         exposure to remain under dB(A)?’
      
 Consideration of the questions referred 
 The first and second questions
By its first two questions, which should be considered together, the national court asks, in essence, whether Directive 2003/is to be interpreted as meaning that an employer in a company in which the workers’ daily noise exposure level is above dB(A), measured without taking account of the effect of individual hearing protectors, fulfils the obligations resulting from
         that directive by simply providing the workers with such hearing protectors, so that the daily noise exposure level is reduced
         to less than dB(A), and whether Article 5(2) of that Directive is to be interpreted as meaning that it is intended to reduce
         the daily noise exposure level to below dB(A), measured without taking account of the effect of the individual hearing
         protectors. 
      
To answer those questions, reference should be made to the legal framework established by Directive 2003/10. 
      
First, under Article 5(1), first subparagraph, of that directive, the risks arising from exposure to noise are to be eliminated
         at their source or reduced to a minimum, taking account of technical progress and of the availability of measures to control
         the risk at source.
      
To that end, the second subparagraph of Article 5(1) provides that the reduction of those risks is to be based on the general
         principles of prevention and details the measures to promote that objective.
      
Under Article 5(2) of Directive 2003/10, the employer is to establish and implement a programme of measures intended to reduce
         the exposure to noise if the upper exposure action values are exceeded. To that end, if follows from Article 3(1)(b) and Article
         3(2), second sentence, of that directive that that exposure value is fixed at dB(A), which is to be measured without taking
         into account the effect of the individual hearing protectors.
      
Then, under Article of that directive, individual hearing protectors are to be made available to workers where the noise
         exposure exceeds the exposure action values, ‘if the risks arising from exposure to noise cannot be prevented by other means’.
         
      
Finally, under Article 7(1) of Directive 2003/10, the exposure of the worker is under no circumstances to exceed the exposure
         limit values, that is, according to Article 3(1)(a) and Article 3(2), first sentence, of that directive, a level of dB(A),
         measured taking account of the effect of the individual hearing protectors.
      
Thus, Directive 2003/establishes a hierarchy between the obligations of the employer. 
      
First, the employer is obliged, under Article 5(2) of that directive, to implement a programme intended to reduce the noise
         exposure where the workers are exposed to a noise level exceeding dB(A), measured without taking into account the effect
         of the individual hearing protectors.
      
It is only in the event that that programme does not allow such noise exposure to be reduced that Article of Directive 2003/sets out, secondly, the additional obligation to make individual hearing protectors available to workers.
      
Thirdly and finally, Article of that directive provides specific obligations for the case where use of individual hearing
         protectors does not prevent exposure limit values being exceeded.
      
It therefore follows from the clear wording and arrangement of these provisions that an employer cannot fulfil its obligations
         under Article 5(2) of Directive 2003/by simply providing the workers with individual hearing protectors, but that it must
         implement a programme intended to reduce exposure to noise where workers are exposed to a noise level exceeding dB(A),
         measured without taking into account the effect of the use of individual hearing protectors. 
      
That reading of Directive 2003/is supported by recital in the preamble, according to which that directive is based on
         the concept of prevention, so that priority is given to reducing the risks at source and collective protection measures have
         priority over individual protection measures.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the first two questions must be that Directive 2003/is to be interpreted as
         meaning that an employer in a company in which the workers’ daily noise exposure level is above dB(A), measured without
         taking account of the effect of individual hearing protectors, fails to fulfil the obligations resulting from that directive
         by simply providing the workers with such hearing protectors, so that the daily noise exposure level is reduced to less than
         dB(A), as that employer is obliged to implement a programme of technical or organisational measures intended to reduce
         such noise exposure to a level of less than dB(A), measured without taking into account the effect of the individual hearing
         protectors.
      
 The third question
By its third question, the national court asks, in essence, if Directive 2003/is to be interpreted as meaning that it requires
         an employer, who has not implemented a programme of technical or organisational measures intended to reduce the daily noise
         exposure level, to make an extra payment to workers who are exposed to a noise level above dB(A), measured without taking
         into account the effect of the individual hearing protectors, even where it has made such hearing protectors available to
         those workers, the effect of which is to reduce the daily noise exposure level to below dB(A).
      
With regard to that question, it should be recalled that, according to the Collective Agreement, an extra payment is due to
         persons who work in particularly arduous conditions, and such arduousness may result from exposure to noise.
      
In this regard, the national court states that, according to the recent case-law of the Tribunal Supremo, such arduousness
         is absent where the individual hearing protectors have the effect of reducing the noise reaching the ear to a level of less
         than dB(A). According to the national court, that case-law is based on an interpretation of Directive 2003/according
         to which its objective is to protect the worker against the health risks connected with actual exposure to noise. Such a restrictive
         interpretation would undermine the effectiveness of that directive. An employer could thus escape from the obligation to make
         such an extra payment simply by making individual hearing protectors available to its workers, even if it has not complied
         with the requirements of that directive regarding the preventive obligations established under it.
      
In this regard, it is important to point out that, as the European Commission has observed, Directive 2003/does not govern,
         as such, either the making of an extra payment in respect of the arduousness of a work station due to noise exposure or the
         issue of whether the effect of individual hearing protection can or must be taken into account to determine the noise exposure
         threshold that gives rise to the obligation to make such an extra payment.
      
Accordingly, Directive 2003/does not require that failure by the employer to comply with the preventive obligations established
         under that directive should be penalised by the obligation to make an extra payment.
      
However, with regard to the questions of the national court, it should be pointed out that those preventive obligations intended
         to reduce, as far as possible, the noise exposure at source by implementing a programme of technical or organisational measures,
         fall within the objective of Directive 2003/of protecting the health of workers.
      
Further, according to established case-law, the freedom to choose the ways and means of ensuring that a directive is implemented
         does not affect the obligation imposed on all Member States to which the directive is addressed to adopt all the measures
         necessary to ensure that the directive concerned is fully effective in accordance with the objective which it pursues (Case
         C-268/Impact [2008] ECR I-2483, paragraph and case-law cited) and to ensure, where the directive is intended to create rights for individuals,
         that they can, where appropriate, rely on them before the national courts (Case C-361/Commission v Germany [1991] ECR  I‑2567, paragraph 15).
      
It follows that national law must be interpreted so as to enable workers to effectively require their employer to comply with
         the preventive obligations established under Directive 2003/which, as is clear from recital 10, is specifically intended
         to contribute to the protection of workers. 
      
In the light of the above, the answer to the third question must be that Directive 2003/must be interpreted as meaning
         that it does not require an employer to make an extra payment to workers who are exposed to a noise level above dB(A),
         measured without taking into account the effect of individual hearing protectors, on the sole ground that it has not implemented
         a programme of technical or organisational measures intended to reduce the daily noise exposure level. However, national law
         must provide appropriate mechanisms to ensure that a worker who is exposed to a noise level exceeding dB(A), measured without
         taking into account the effect of individual hearing protectors, can require the employer to comply with the preventive obligations
         set out in Article 5(2) of that directive.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Seventh Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Directive 2003/10/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of February on the minimum health and safety requirements
            regarding the exposure of workers to the risks arising from physical agents (noise) (Seventeenth individual Directive within
            the meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC), as amended by Directive 2007/30/EC of the European Parliament and of
            the Council of June 2007, must be interpreted as meaning that an employer in a company in which the workers’ daily noise
            exposure level is above dB(A), measured without taking account of the effect of individual hearing protectors, fails to
            fulfil the obligations resulting from that Directive by simply providing the workers with such hearing protectors so that
            the daily noise exposure level is reduced to less than dB(A), as that employer is obliged to implement a programme of technical
            or organisational measures intended to reduce such noise exposure to a level of less than dB(A), measured without taking
            into account the effect of the individual hearing protectors.
2.      Directive 2003/10, as amended by Directive 2007/30, must be interpreted as meaning that it does not require an employer to
            make an extra payment to workers who are exposed to a noise level above dB(A), measured without taking into account the
            effect of the individual hearing protectors on the sole ground that it has not implemented a programme of technical or organisational
            measures intended to reduce the daily noise exposure level. However, national law must provide appropriate mechanisms to ensure
            that a worker who is exposed to a noise level above dB(A), measured without taking into account the effect of the individual
            hearing protectors, can require the employer to comply with the preventive obligations set out in Article 5(2) of that directive.
            
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Spanish. 
      
Top  
 