
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-207/Altair Chimica SpAvENEL Distribuzione SpA(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Corte d'appello di Firenze)
         
«(Competition – Dominant position – Supply of electricity – Imposition of a sovrapprezzo)»
Opinion of Advocate General Jacobs delivered on March Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber), September Summary of the Judgment
1..
Preliminary rulings – Admissibility of references – Need to provide the Court with sufficient details of the factual and legal context   (Art. EC; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 23) 
2..
Competition – Community rules – Scope ratione materiae – Anti-competitive conduct – Meaning – Conduct of an undertaking required by national law and limited to recovery procedures on behalf of the State of surcharges
                     constituting tax measures – Excluded  
                  (Arts and EC) 
3..
Acts of the institutions – Recommendations – Direct effect – Excluded – Consideration by the national court – Obligation – Scope  (Art. 249, fifth subpara., EC) 
4..
Industry – Tariff structures for electricity – Recommendation 81/– Scope ratione materiae – Surcharges on the supply of electricity – Excluded  (Council Recommendation 81/924) 
1.
 The need to provide an interpretation of Community law which will be of use to the national court makes it necessary that
         the national court define the factual and legal context of the questions it is asking or, at the very least, explain the factual
         circumstances on which those questions are based. The information provided in orders for reference must not only be such as
         to enable the Court to reply usefully but must also enable the governments of the Member States and other interested parties
         to submit observations pursuant to Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice. It is the Court's duty to ensure that
         the possibility to submit observations is safeguarded, bearing in mind that, by virtue of the abovementioned provision, only
         the orders for reference are notified to the interested parties.  see paras 24-2.
 Articles and EC apply only to anti-competitive conduct engaged in by undertakings on their own initiative, they do not
         apply if anti-competitive conduct is required of undertakings by national legislation or if the latter creates a legal framework
         which itself eliminates any possibility of competitive activity on their part. In such a situation the restriction of competition
         is not attributable, as those provisions implicitly require, to the autonomous conduct of the undertakings. Articles and
         EC may apply, however, if it is found that the national legislation does not preclude undertakings from engaging in autonomous
         conduct which prevents, restricts or distorts competition.  Therefore, when an undertaking must be considered to be acting as a tax collector that does not constitute anti-competitive
         conduct. That is the case where the undertaking is not acting as an economic operator and does not have any margin of discretion,
         but merely collects, on behalf of the State, those surcharges constituting tax measures which fall exclusively within the
          competence of the State, such as the surcharge for nuclear charges and the surcharge for new plants using renewable energy
         and other similar sources imposed on the supply of electricity by Italian law.  see paras 30-3.
 Even if recommendations are not intended to produce binding effects and are not capable of creating rights that individuals
         can rely on before a national court they are not without any legal effect. The national courts are bound to take recommendations
         into consideration in order to decide disputes submitted to them, in particular where they cast light on the interpretation
         of national measures adopted in order to implement them or where they are designed to supplement binding Community provisions.
          see para. 4.
 It is clear, both from its title and from the principles that it lays down, that Recommendation 81/on electricity tariff
         structures in the Community applies only to the structure of the electricity tariff. It seeks to harmonise the principles
         forming the basis of the tariff structures in the different Member States and to improve transparency and public knowledge
         of electricity prices. Whilst the recommendation gives indications as to the different costs that the prices may include there
         is nothing in it to suggest that it can be interpreted as applying to the introduction of a tax on electricity consumption.
         Therefore, that recommendation does not prevent a Member State from levying surcharges on the supply of electricity.  see paras 42-JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)September (1)
((Competition – Dominant position – Supply of electricity – Imposition of a sovrapprezzo))
 In Case C-207/01, 
             REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Corte d'appello di Firenze (Italy) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings
            pending before that court between
            
Altair Chimica SpA
and
ENEL Distribuzione SpA,
 on the interpretation of Articles 81, and EC, Council Directive 92/12/EEC of February on the general arrangements
            for products subject to excise duty and on the holding, movement and monitoring of such products (OJ L 76, p. 1), as
            amended by Council Directive 96/99/EC of December (OJ L 8, p. 12), and Council Recommendation 81/924/EEC of October on electricity tariff structures in the Community (OJ L 337, p. 12),
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
 composed of: J.-P. Puissochet, President of the Chamber, R. Schintgen (Rapporteur), V. Skouris, F. Macken and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: F.G. Jacobs, Registrar: M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
 Altair Chimica SpA, by F. Lorenzoni, avvocato, 
               
─
 the Italian Government, by U. Leanza, acting as Agent, and G. De Bellis, Avvocato dello Stato, 
               
─
 the Commission of the European Communities, by E. Traversa, acting as Agent, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of Altair Chimica SpA, represented by F. Lorenzoni; of ENEL Distribuzione SpA, represented
               by G.M. Roberti and A. Franchi, avvocati; of the Italian Government, represented by G. de Bellis; and of the Commission, represented
               by E. Traversa, at the hearing on January 2003,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By order of January 2001, received at the Court on May 2001, the Corte d'appello di Firenze (Court of Appeal, Florence)
         referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC a question on the interpretation of Articles 81, and
         EC, Council Directive 92/12/EEC of February on the general arrangements for products subject to excise duty and
         on the holding, movement and monitoring of such products (OJ L 76, p. 1), as amended by Council Directive 96/99/EC of
         December (OJ L 8, p. 12) (
         Directive 92/12), and Council Recommendation 81/924/EEC of October on electricity tariff structures in the Community (OJ L 337,
         p. 12). 
         
            
 That question was raised in proceedings between Altair Chimica SpA (
         Altair) and ENEL Distribuzione SpA (
         ENEL) regarding the imposition of surcharges on the supply of electricity. 
         
Legal background
 Community legislation
         
            
 The third recital in the preamble to Directive 92/is worded as follows: ... the concept of products subject to excise duty should be defined; ... only goods which are treated as such in all the
         Member States may be the subject of Community provisions; ... such products may be subject to other indirect taxes for specific
         purposes; ... the maintenance or introduction of other indirect taxes must not give rise to border-crossing formalities.
         
            
 Article of Directive 92/provides: 
         
1.
 This Directive shall apply at Community level to the following products as defined in the relevant Directives:
         
─
 mineral oils, 
          mineral oils, 
         
─
 alcohol and alcoholic beverages, 
          alcohol and alcoholic beverages, 
         
─
 manufactured tobacco. 
          manufactured tobacco. 
         
2.
 The products listed in paragraph may be subject to other indirect taxes for specific purposes, provided that those taxes
         comply with the tax rules applicable for excise duty and VAT purposes as far as determination of the tax base, calculation
         of the tax, chargeability and monitoring of the tax are concerned.
         
3.
 Member States shall retain the right to introduce or maintain taxes which are levied on products other than those listed in
         paragraph provided, however, that those taxes do not give rise to border-crossing formalities in trade between Member States.
          Subject to the same proviso, Member States shall also retain the right to levy taxes on the supply of services which cannot
         be characterised as turnover taxes, including those relating to products subject to excise duty.
         
            
 Council Directive 92/81/EEC of October on the harmonisation of the structures of excise duties on mineral oils (OJ
         L 316, p. 12), as amended by Council Directive 94/74/EC (OJ L 365, p. 46) (
         Directive 92/81), defines in greater detail the mineral oils subject to harmonised excise duties. 
         
            
 Article 2(1) of that Directive sets out a closed list of products to which it applies. Electricity does not feature among
         those products. 
         
            
 Article 2(2) and (3) of Directive 92/also provides: 
         
2.
 Mineral oils other than those for which a level of duty is specified in Directive 92/82/EEC shall be subject to excise duty
         if intended for use, offered for sale or used as heating fuel or motor fuel.  The rate of duty to be charged shall be fixed,
         according to use, at the rate for the equivalent heating fuel or motor fuel.
         
3.
 In addition to the taxable products listed in paragraph 1, any product intended for use, offered for sale or used as motor
         fuel, or as an additive or extender in motor fuels, shall be taxed as motor fuel.  Any other hydrocarbon, except for coal,
         lignite, peat or other similar solid hydrocarbons or natural gas, intended for use, offered for sale or used for heating purposes
         shall be taxed at the rate for the equivalent mineral oil.
          However, coal, lignite, peat or any other similar solid hydrocarbons or natural gas may be subject to taxation in accordance
         with Article 3(3) of Directive 92/12/EEC.
         
            
 The first paragraph of Article 4(3) is worded as follows: The consumption of mineral oils within the curtilage of an establishment producing mineral oils shall not be considered a
         chargeable event giving rise to excise duty as long as the consumption is for the purpose of such production.
         
            
 Council Directive 92/82/EEC of October on the approximation of the rates of excise duties on mineral oils (OJ L 316, p. 19), as amended by Directive 94/(
         Directive 92/82), contains in Article 2(1) an exhaustive list of mineral oils to which it applies.  Electricity is not included on the list.
         
         
            
 Recommendation 81/calls on the Member States to take steps to structure electricity tariffs so that they are based on
         the following common principles: 
         
1.
 Electricity tariff structures should be drawn up and adopted so as to allow the application of a rational price policy and
         to reflect the costs incurred in supplying the various categories of consumer; tariff structures should be designed with the
         rational use of energy in mind, should avoid encouraging unjustifiable consumption and should be as clear and simple as possible.
         
         
2.
 The two-part tariff system which, of the various tariff options available, best reflects the cost structure of providing electricity,
         should be generally used ... 
         
3.
 Promotional tariff structures which encourage unnecessary consumption and in which the price of electricity is artificially
         lowered as increasing amounts of electricity are used should be discontinued. 
         
4.
 Tariffs based on the use to which electricity is put should be eliminated, unless such tariffs conform with the general requirements
         of Point above and contribute to the achievement of long-term energy policy objectives. 
         
5.
 With the aim of transferring demand to off-peak periods or to allow load-shedding, provision should be made for multiple tariffs
         with differential rates and/or for the possibility of interruptible supplies. 
         
6.
 Tariffs should not be kept artificially low, for example on social grounds or for anti-inflationary policy reasons; in such
         cases, separate action, where warranted, should be taken. 
         
7.
 Tariffs should be formulated in such a way that it is possible to up-date prices at regular intervals; That research be pursued and developed, in close cooperation at Community level, into the characteristics of electricity demand
         for different categories of consumers and their evolution in the long term, with the objective of further improving tariff
         structures; That electricity prices on the market be characterised by the greatest possible degree of transparency, and that these prices
         and the cost to the consumer be made known to the public as far as possible.
         
 National legislation
         
            
 Legislative Decree No of October (GURI No 90, special series, of December 1944), provides in Article for the
         establishment of a Comitato Interministeriale dei Prezzi (Interministerial Price Committee,  
         CIP) to ensure coordination and regulation of prices. 
         
            
 Article of Legislative Decree No of September (GURI No of September 1947, p. 2789) empowered the CIP
         to set up compensation funds and to set the criteria for contributions for the unification or equalisation of prices.  The
         Cassa Conguaglio per il Settore Elettrico (Compensation Fund for the Electricity Sector,  
         the Fund) was constituted on the basis of that text.  It was financed,  
         inter alia, by the  
         sovrapprezzo termico, which was a surcharge on the price of electricity introduced to encourage energy saving and whose amount was periodically
         revised by the CIP. 
         
            
 In the Italian Republic decided by referendum to end the generation of electricity using nuclear power and to close nuclear
         power stations.  In order to meet the costs arising as a result of that decision the CIP, by a resolution of January (GURI No of February 1988, p. 27), decided to introduce a  
         maggiorazione straordinaria del sovrapprezzo termico (
         thermic surcharge special supplement) which was to be applied on a provisional basis. 
         
            
 Under Law No of January (GURI suppl. ord. No of January 1991, p. 3) that special surcharge was called a  
         sovrapprezzo per onere nucleare (surcharge for nuclear charges).  It also became permanent and the revenue that it generates is used,  
         inter alia, to reimburse ENEL and the companies which had constructed the nuclear power plants in question for the additional costs
         incurred by the decision to definitively abandon the construction of nuclear power stations. 
         
            
 Article of Law No 9/provides for the adoption of measures to encourage the generation of electricity from renewable
         and other similar sources of energy. 
         
            
 By resolution of April (GURI No of May 1992, p. 21) the CIP decided to introduce a  
         sovrapprezzo per nuovi impianti da fonti rinnovabili e assimilate (surcharge for new plants using renewable and other similar sources) intended to finance the aid granted to undertakings
         producing energy from renewable sources.  That surcharge consists of a levy on the supply of electricity with decreasing tariffs
         based on the amount of electricity consumed. 
         
            
 The  
         maggiorazione straordinaria del sovrapprezzo termico and the  
         sovrapprezzo per nuovi impianti da fonti rinnovabili e assimilate (
         the surcharges) are collected by ENEL, which then pays them into the Fund.  The Fund distributes the sums received between the different
         undertakings for which they are intended. 
         The main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 Altair is a company which produces caustic soda, caustic potash and potassium chloride using an electro-chemical process.
          According to the national court, that process constitutes a high-energy-consuming industrial process, for which electricity
         is used as  
         power for the industrial process and is a genuine raw material which forms part of the production process, to the extent that it is incorporated into the
         final product from which it cannot be distinguished. 
         
            
 According to the documents before the Court, Altair initially refused to pay the surcharges on its electricity consumption
         for the months of February and March 1997.  As a consequence, by application of June ENEL asked the President of the
         Tribunale (District Court) di Firenze to order Altair to pay the amounts in question. 
         
            
 Having been ordered to pay the disputed sums following several sets of proceedings, Altair brought an action before the Corte
         d'appello di Firenze.  Before that court it argued that the legislative provisions introducing the surcharges were incompatible
         with Community law and, in particular, with Articles 81, and EC, Directive 92/and Recommendation 81/924. 
         
            
 Taking the view that the resolution of the dispute before it required the interpretation of various provisions of Community
         law, the Corte d'appello di Firenze decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following question to the Court for a
         preliminary ruling: The Corte di Appello di Firenze hereby makes a reference to the Court of Justice of the European Communities for a ruling
         on the precise interpretation of Articles 81, and [EC], Directive 92/and Recommendation [81/924/EEC], in order to
         ascertain whether the provisions of national law laid down in Legislative Decrees No 347/and No 896/47, Presidential Decree
         No 373/94, Legislative Decree No 98/and Law No 9/are compatible with those provisions of Community law.
         
            
 In the order for reference the Corte d'appello takes the view that the surcharges constitute supplementary obligations, for
         the purposes of Article 81(1)(e) EC and 82(d) EC, and that raw materials cannot be subject to tax. 
         Admissibility
            
 The Italian Government has expressed doubts as to the admissibility of the present reference for a preliminary ruling.  It
         submits that the order for reference does not contain the essential minimum information as to either the legal or the factual
         context of the dispute in the main proceedings and therefore, it does not fulfil the conditions of admissibility set out in
         the case-law of the Court. 
         
            
 It must be recalled that according to settled case-law, the need to provide an interpretation of Community law which will
         be of use to the national court makes it necessary that the national court define the factual and legal context of the questions
         it is asking or, at the very least, explain the factual circumstances on which those questions are based (see, in particular,
         Joined Cases C-115/to C-117/Brentjens' [1999] ECR I-6025, paragraph 38). 
         
            
 The information provided in orders for reference must not only be such as to enable the Court to reply usefully but must also
         enable the governments of the Member States and other interested parties to submit observations pursuant to Article of
         the Statute of the Court of Justice.  It is the Court's duty to ensure that the possibility to submit observations is safeguarded,
         bearing in mind that, by virtue of the abovementioned provision, only the orders for reference are notified to the interested
         parties (see, in particular, the orders in Joined Cases C-128/and C-137/Testa and Modesti [1998] ECR I-2181, paragraph 6, and Case C-325/Anssens [1999] ECR I-2969, paragraph 8). 
         
            
 In the present case, it appears from the order for reference that the national court defined the factual and legal context
         of its request for an interpretation of Community law sufficiently and that it has provided the Court with all the information
         necessary to enable it to reply usefully to that request. 
         
            
 Moreover, it is clear from the observations submitted, in accordance with Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice,
         by the Italian Government and the Commission that the information contained in the order for reference enabled them to properly
         express their views on the question referred to the Court. 
         
            
 It follows that the reference is admissible. 
         The question referred
            
 By its question the national court asks, essentially, whether Articles 81, and EC, Directive 92/or Recommendation
         81/must be interpreted as meaning that they preclude a measure providing for the levy of surcharges on the price of electricity
         such as those at issue in the main proceedings when electricity is used in an electro-chemical process. 
         
            
 As regards, first, the interpretation of the articles of the Treaty, it must be recalled that Articles and EC apply
         only to anti-competitive conduct engaged in by undertakings on their own initiative.  If anti-competitive conduct is required
         of undertakings by national legislation or if the latter creates a legal framework which itself eliminates any possibility
         of competitive activity on their part, Articles and EC do not apply.  In such a situation the restriction of competition
         is not attributable, as those provisions implicitly require, to the autonomous conduct of the undertakings (Joined Cases C-359/P and C-379/P  
         Commission and France v  
         Ladbroke Racing [1997] ECR I-6265, paragraph 33). 
         
            
 Articles and EC may apply, however, if it is found that the national legislation does not preclude undertakings from
         engaging in autonomous conduct which prevents, restricts or distorts competition (
         Commission and France v  
         Ladbroke Racing, cited above, paragraph 34). 
         
            
 It must be observed that having regard to the source of the provisions governing the surcharges, the recipient of those surcharges,
         the use of the revenue that they generate and the sanctions and recovery procedures applicable if they are not paid, the surcharges
         constitute tax measures. 
         
            
 Moreover, that classification is in accordance with that accepted by the Court in Case 73/Commission v  
         Italy [1980] ECR 1533, paragraph 22, concerning a surcharge on the price of sugar also introduced by the CIP and paid to an equalisation
         fund for redistribution to the Italian sugar industry. 
         
            
 As such, and although they were invoiced and collected by ENEL, the surcharges therefore fall exclusively within the competence
         of the Italian State. 
         
            
 In so far as ENEL's involvement is limited to the collection on behalf of the State of those surcharges, it must be considered
         to be a tax collector.  Since in the exercise of that function ENEL does not act as an economic operator and does not have
         any margin of discretion, its involvement cannot be considered to constitute anti-competitive conduct for the purpose of the
         case-law cited in paragraphs and of the present judgment. 
         
            
 That finding cannot be challenged by the argument that the levy of surcharges such as those at issue in the main proceedings
         jeopardises the competitivity of economic operators who are subject to them as compared with economic operators established
         in other Member States who are not subject to such a surcharge. Articles and EC are intended to apply only to the anti-competitive
         conduct of undertakings and are not intended to eliminate differences which may exist between the tax regimes of the different
         Member States. 
         
            
 Having regard to those considerations, Articles 81, and EC do not preclude the levy of surcharges such as those at issue
         in the main proceedings. 
         
            
 As regards, second, the compatibility of the surcharges with Directive 92/12, it must be recalled that the Directive sets
         out in Article 3(1) the products to which it applies. 
         
            
 It is clear from a reading of that provision together with Article of Directive 92/and Article of Directive 92/that
         electricity does not fall within the scope  
         ratione materiae of Directive 92/12. 
         
            
 In those circumstances, and without there being any need to consider whether, as Altair submits, Directive 92/contains
         a principle that raw materials are not subject to tax, it must be held that the Directive cannot preclude the levy of surcharges
         such as those at issue in the main proceedings. 
         
            
 As regards, third, the interpretation of Recommendation 81/924, it must be recalled that, according to the case-law of the
         Court, even if recommendations are not intended to produce binding effects and are not capable of creating rights that individuals
         can rely on before a national court they are not without any legal effect. The national courts are bound to take recommendations
         into consideration in order to decide disputes submitted to them, in particular where they cast light on the interpretation
         of national measures adopted in order to implement them or where they are designed to supplement binding Community provisions
         (Case C-322/Grimaldi [1989] ECR 4407, paragraphs 7, and 18). 
         
            
 It is necessary to point out that it is clear, both from its title and from the principles that it lays down, that Recommendation
         81/applies only to the structure of the electricity tariff.  It seeks to harmonise the principles forming the basis of
         the tariff structures in the different Member States and to improve transparency and public knowledge of electricity prices.
          Whilst the recommendation gives indications as to the different costs that the prices may include there is nothing in it
         to suggest that it can be interpreted as applying to the introduction of a tax on electricity consumption. 
         
            
 In those circumstances it must be held that Recommendation 81/does not prevent a Member State from levying surcharges
         such as those at issue in the main proceedings. 
         
            
 Having regard to all the preceding considerations, the answer to the question referred must be that Articles 81, and EC and Directive 92/must be interpreted as meaning that they do not preclude a national rule providing for the levy of
         surcharges on the price of electricity such as those at issue in the main proceedings when the electricity is used in an electro-chemical
         process and that Recommendation 81/is not capable of preventing a Member State from levying such surcharges. 
         
Costs
            
 The costs incurred by the Italian Government and by the Commission, which have submitted observations to the Court, are not
         recoverable.  Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main action, a step in the proceedings pending before the
         national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
 in answer to the question referred to it by the Corte d'appello di Firenze by order of January 2001, hereby rules: 
         Articles 81, and EC and Council Directive 92/12/EEC of February on the general arrangements for products subject
            to excise duty and on the holding, movement and monitoring of such products, as amended by Council Directive 96/99/EC of December 1996, must be interpreted as meaning that they do not preclude a national rule providing for the levy of surcharges
            on the price of electricity such as those at issue in the main proceedings when the electricity is used in an electro-chemical
            process  
            and that Council Recommendation 81/924/EEC of October on electricity tariff structures in the Community is not capable
               of preventing a Member State from levying such surcharges.
Puissochet
Schintgen 
Skouris 
Macken
Cunha Rodrigues 
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on September 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
J.-P. Puissochet  
Registrar
President of the Sixth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: Italian.
Top  
 