
Order of the Court (Eighth Chamber) of February — Criminal proceedings against Vincenzo Veneruso
(Case C‑612/11)
Article 104(3), first subparagraph, of the Rules of Procedure — Freedom of establishment — Freedom to provide services — Betting and gaming — Collection of bets on sporting events — Licence required — Action to be taken following an infringement of European Union law in the awarding of licences — Award of additional licences — Principle of equal treatment and the obligation of transparency — Principle of legal certainty — Protection of holders of earlier licences — National legislation — Mandatory minimum distances between betting outlets — Whether permissible — Cross-border activities analogous to those engaged in under the licence — Prohibited by national legislation — Whether permissible
1.                     Freedom to provide services — Freedom of establishment — Restrictions — Gambling — National legislation prohibiting, on pain
            of criminal penalties, the collecting of bets without a licence or authorisation — Licence or authorisation refused in breach
            of Union law (Arts EC and EC) (see para. 7, operative part 1)
2.                     Freedom to provide services — Freedom of establishment — Restrictions — Gambling — National legislation prohibiting the collecting
            of bets without a licence or police authorisation — Operator excluded from the call for tenders for the award of such licences,
            in breach of Union law (Arts EC and EC) (see para. 8, operative part 2)
3.                     Freedom to provide services — Freedom of establishment — Gambling — National legislation prohibiting, on pain of criminal
            penalties, the collecting of bets without a licence or authorisation — Conditions for the withdrawal of licences granted at
            the end of a tendering procedure (Art. EC and EC) (see para. 9, operative part 3)
Re: 
Reference for a preliminary ruling — Tribunale ordinario di Milano — Freedom of movement of persons — Freedom to provide services —
                  Activity of collecting bets — Domestic legislation making the exercise of that activity conditional upon the obtaining of
                  authorisation and a public security permit — Protection afforded to persons obtaining authorisations and permits by means
                  of award procedures that unlawfully excluded other operators from the same sector — Whether compatible with Articles EC
                  and EC (now Articles TFEU and TFEU).
               
Operative part 
1.
	Articles EC and EC and the principles of equal treatment and effectiveness must be interpreted as precluding a Member
                     State which, in breach of European Union law, has excluded a category of operators from the award of licences for undertaking
                     an economic activity and seeks to remedy that breach by putting out to tender a significant number of new licences, from protecting
                     the market positions acquired by the pre-existing operators, by providing, inter alia, for minimum distances between the establishments
                     of new licence holders and those of pre-existing operators. 
                  
2.
	Articles EC and EC must be interpreted as precluding penalties for engaging in the organised activity of collecting
                     bets without a licence or police authorisation from being imposed on persons linked to an operator that was excluded from
                     an earlier tendering procedure in breach of Union law, even after the new call for tenders intended to remedy that breach
                     of Union law, in so far as that call for tenders and the subsequent award of new licences have not in fact remedied the unlawful
                     exclusion of that operator from the earlier call for tenders. 
                  
3.
	It follows from Articles EC and EC, the principle of equal treatment, the obligation of transparency and the principle
                     of legal certainty that the conditions and detailed rules of a call for tenders such as that at issue in the main proceedings
                     and, in particular, the provisions concerning the withdrawal of licences granted at the end of that tendering procedure, such
                     as those laid down in Article 23(2)(a) and (3) of the model contract between the Independent Authority for the Administration
                     of State Monopolies and the successful tenderer for the licence for betting on events other than horse-races, must be drawn
                     up clearly, precisely and unambiguously, a matter which it is for the referring court to verify. 
                  
Top  
 