
Case C-272/P
KME Germany AG and Others 
v
European Commission
(Appeal – Competition – Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Market for copper industrial tubes – Fines – Size of the market, duration of the infringement and cooperation capable of being taken into consideration – Effective judicial remedy)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Competition – Fines – Amount – Determination – Criteria – Obligation to take account of the actual impact on the market –
            Measurability – Meaning
(Council Regulation No 17, Art. 15(2); Commission Notice 98/C 9/03, Section A, first para.)
2.        Competition – Fines – Amount – Determination – Criteria – Overall turnover of the undertaking concerned – Turnover corresponding
            to the goods covered by the infringement – Both to be taken into consideration – Limits
(Council Regulation No 17, Art. 15(2))
3.        Competition – Fines – Amount – Determination – Criteria – Gravity and duration of the infringement – Increase in the amount
            on account of the duration of the infringement – Not necessary to establish a direct relation between that duration and increased
            prejudice to the competition rules
(Art. 81(1) EC; Council Regulation No 17, Art. 15(2); Commission Notice 98/C 9/03, Section B)
4.        Competition – Fines – Amount – Determination – Complex economic assessment – Commission’s margin of discretion – Judicial
            review – Review of legality – Scope
(Art. TFEU; Council Regulation No 17, Art. 15(2); Commission Notice 98/C 9/03)
5.        Competition – Fines – Amount – Determination – Criteria – Gravity and duration of the infringement
(Council Regulation No 17, Art. 15(2))
6.        Competition – Fines – Amount – Determination – Application of the Guidelines on the method of setting fines – Statement of
            reasons for the decision – Scope
(Council Regulation No 17, Art. 15(2); Commission Notice 98/C 9/03)
7.        Competition – Fines – Amount – Determination – Discretion of the Commission – Judicial review – Unlimited jurisdiction of
            the Courts of the European Union – Scope
(Art. TFEU; Council Regulations No 17, Art. 17, and No 1/2003, Art. 31)
8.        European Union law – Principles – Right to effective judicial protection – Judicial review of decisions adopted by the Commission
            in competition matters – Review of legality and in the Court’s unlimited jurisdiction of both the law and the facts – Infringement
            – None 
(Art. TFEU; Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, Art. 47; Council Regulation No 1/2003, Art. 31)
1.        According to Section A of the Guidelines on the method of setting fines imposed pursuant to Article 15(2) of Regulation
         No and Article 65(5) of the ECSC Treaty, in assessing the criterion of the gravity of the infringement, account is to be
         taken of the latter’s actual impact on the market only where this can be measured. Determination of the actual impact of a
         cartel on the market requires a comparison of the market situation resulting from the cartel with that which would have resulted
         from free competition. Such a comparison necessarily involves recourse to assumptions, given the multiplicity of variables
         capable of having an impact on the market.
      
(see paras 30-31)
2.        While it is permissible, for the determination of a fine for an infringement of the competition rules, to take into account
         both the undertaking’s overall turnover, which is an indication of the size of the undertaking and its economic strength,
         and that part of the turnover which derives from the goods which are the subject of the infringement and which therefore is
         capable of giving an indication of the scale of the infringement, the overall turnover of an undertaking nevertheless gives
         only an approximate and imperfect indication of the size of that undertaking. Moreover, it is important not to confer on one
         or the other of those figures an importance which is disproportionate in relation to the other factors to be assessed in relation
         to the gravity of the infringement.
      
(see paras 50-51)
3.        Where, in accordance with Section B of the Guidelines on the method of setting fines imposed pursuant to Article 15(2) of
         Regulation No and Article 65(5) of the ECSC Treaty, the amount determined for gravity is increased to take account of the
         duration of the infringement, it is not necessary to establish in practical terms a direct relation between that duration
         and increased damage to the Community objectives pursued by the competition rules. For the purpose of applying Article 81(1) EC,
         there is no need to take account of the concrete effects of an agreement once it appears that it has as its object the prevention,
         restriction or distortion of competition. That applies in particular in the case of obvious restrictions of competition such
         as price-fixing and market-sharing.
      
(see paras 64-65)
4.        Whilst, in areas giving rise to complex economic assessments, such as determination of the amount of fines imposed for infringement
         of the competition rules, the Commission has a margin of discretion with regard to economic matters, that does not mean that
         the Courts of the European Union must refrain from reviewing the Commission’s interpretation of information of an economic
         nature. In a review of legality, not only must those Courts establish, among other things, whether the evidence relied on
         is factually accurate, reliable and consistent but also whether that evidence contains all the information which must be taken
         into account in order to assess a complex situation and whether it is capable of substantiating the conclusions drawn from
         it.
      
The Courts must carry out the review of legality incumbent upon them on the basis of the evidence adduced by the applicant
         in support of the pleas in law put forward. In carrying out such a review, the Courts cannot use the Commission’s margin of
         discretion – either as regards the choice of factors taken into account in the application of the criteria relating to the
         setting of the fine mentioned in the Guidelines on the method of setting fines imposed pursuant to Article 15(2) of Regulation
         No and Article 65(5) of the ECSC Treaty, or as regards the assessment of those factors – as a basis for dispensing with
         the conduct of an in-depth review of the law and of the facts.
      
(see paras 94, 102)
5.        In order to determine the amount of a fine for infringement of the competition rules, it is necessary to take account of the
         duration of the infringements and of all the factors capable of affecting the assessment of their gravity, such as the conduct
         of each of the undertakings, the role played by each of them in the establishment of the concerted practices, the profit which
         they were able to derive from those practices, their size, the value of the goods concerned and the threat that infringements
         of that type pose to the European Community. Objective factors such as the content and duration of the anti-competitive conduct,
         the number of incidents and their intensity, the extent of the market affected and the damage to the economic public order
         must be taken into account. The analysis must also take into consideration the relative importance and market share of the
         undertakings responsible and also any repeated infringements.
      
(see paras 96-97)
6.        In the interests of transparency the Commission adopted the Guidelines on the method of setting fines imposed pursuant to
         Article 15(2) of Regulation No and Article 65(5) of the ECSC Treaty, in which it indicates the basis on which it will take
         account of one or other aspect of the infringement and what this will imply as regards the amount of the fine. Those guidelines,
         which form rules of practice from which the administration may not depart in an individual case without giving reasons compatible
         with the principle of equal treatment, merely describe the method used by the Commission to examine infringements and the
         criteria that the Commission requires to be taken into account in setting the amount of a fine. It is therefore for the Commission,
         when stating the reasons for its decision, in particular to explain the weighting and assessment of the factors taken into
         account.
      
(see paras 99-101)
7.        With regard to the determination of the amount of a fine imposed for infringement of the competition rules, the unlimited
         jurisdiction which the Courts of the European Union were afforded by Article of Regulation No is now recognised by Article
         of Regulation No 1/2003, in accordance with Article TFEU. That jurisdiction empowers the Courts, in addition to carrying
         out a mere review of the lawfulness of the penalty, to substitute their own appraisal for the Commission’s and, consequently,
         to cancel, reduce or increase the fine or penalty payment imposed.
      
However, the exercise of unlimited jurisdiction does not amount to a review of the Court’s own motion, and proceedings before
         the Courts of the European Union are inter partes. With the exception of pleas involving matters of public policy which the Courts are required to raise of their own motion,
         such as the failure to state reasons for a contested decision, it is for the applicant to raise pleas in law against that
         decision and to adduce evidence in support of those pleas. That requirement, which is procedural in nature, does not conflict
         with the rule that, in regard to infringements of the competition rules, it is for the Commission to prove the infringements
         found by it and to adduce evidence capable of demonstrating to the requisite legal standard the existence of the circumstances
         constituting an infringement. What the applicant is required to do in the context of a legal challenge is to identify the
         impugned elements of the contested decision, to formulate grounds of challenge in that regard and to adduce evidence – direct
         or circumstantial – to demonstrate that its objections are well founded.
      
(see paras 103-105)
8.        The review provided for by the Treaties in respect of decisions adopted by the Commission in competition matters thus involves
         review by the Courts of the European Union of both the law and the facts, and means that they have the power to assess the
         evidence, to annul the contested decision and to alter the amount of a fine. The review of legality provided for under Article
         TFEU, supplemented by the unlimited jurisdiction in respect of the amount of the fine, provided for under Article of
         Regulation No 1/2003, is not therefore contrary to the requirements of the principle of effective judicial protection in Article
         of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union.
      
(see para. 106)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
December (*)
      
(Appeal – Competition – Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Market for copper industrial tubes – Fines – Size of the market, duration of the infringement and cooperation capable of being taken into consideration – Effective judicial remedy)
In Case C‑272/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, brought on July 2009,
KME Germany AG, formerly KM Europa Metal AG, established in Osnabrück (Germany), 
      
KME France SAS, formerly Tréfimétaux SA, established in Courbevoie (France), 
      
KME Italy SpA, formerly Europa Metalli SpA, established in Florence (Italy), 
      
represented by M. Siragusa, avvocato, A. Winckler, avocat, G.C. Rizza, avvocato, T. Graf, advokat, and M. Piergiovanni, avvocato,
appellants,
the other party to the proceedings being:
European Commission, represented by E. Gippini Fournier and J. Bourke, acting as Agents, and by C. Thomas, Solicitor, with an address for service
         in Luxembourg,
      
defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, President of the Chamber, U. Lõhmus, A. Rosas (Rapporteur), A. Ó Caoimh and A. Arabadjiev,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: E. Sharpston,
Registrar: K. Malacek, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on October 2010,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on February 2011,
gives the following
Judgment
By their appeal, KME Germany AG, formerly KM Europa Metal AG, KME France SAS, formerly Tréfimétaux SA, and KME Italy SpA,
         formerly Europa Metalli SpA (collectively ‘the KME group’) seek to have set aside the judgment delivered by the Court of First
         Instance of the European Communities (now ‘the General Court’) on May in Case T‑127/KME Germany and Others v Commission [2009] ECR II‑(‘the judgment under appeal’) by which the General Court dismissed their application for annulment or
         for a reduction of the fines which were imposed on them under Article 2(c) to (e) of Commission Decision C(2003) final
         of December relating to a proceeding pursuant to Article [EC] and Article of the EEA Agreement (Case COMP/E‑1/38.– Industrial tubes) (‘the decision at issue’).
      
 Legal context
Article 15(2) of Council Regulation No of February 1962, First Regulation implementing Articles [81] and [82] of the
         Treaty (OJ, English Special Edition 1959-1962, p. 87) provided:
      
‘The Commission may by decision impose on undertakings or associations of undertakings fines of from to units
         of account, or a sum in excess thereof but not exceeding 10% of the turnover in the preceding business year of each of the
         undertakings participating in the infringement where, either intentionally or negligently:
      
(a)      they infringe Article [81](1) [EC] or Article [EC]; or
(b)      they commit a breach of any obligation imposed pursuant to Article 8(1).
In fixing the amount of the fine, regard shall be had both to the gravity and to the duration of the infringement.’
Article of Regulation No provided:
      
‘The Court of Justice shall have unlimited jurisdiction within the meaning of Article [EC] to review decisions whereby
         the Commission has fixed a fine or periodic penalty payment; it may cancel, reduce or increase the fine or periodic penalty
         payment imposed.’
      
Regulation No was repealed and replaced by Council Regulation (EC) No 1/of December on the implementation
         of the rules on competition laid down in Articles and of the Treaty (OJ L 1, p. 1), applicable as from May 2004.
         Article of that regulation is the equivalent of Article of Regulation No 17.
      
The Commission notice entitled ‘Guidelines on the method of setting fines imposed pursuant to Article 15(2) of Regulation
         No and Article 65(5) of the ECSC Treaty’ (OJ C 9, p. 3) (‘the Guidelines’), applicable at the time the decision at
         issue was adopted, states, in its preamble:
      
‘The principles outlined … should ensure the transparency and impartiality of the Commission’s decisions, in the eyes of the
         undertakings and of the Court of Justice alike, while upholding the discretion which the Commission is granted under the relevant
         legislation to set fines within the limit of 10% of overall turnover. This discretion must, however, follow a coherent and
         non-discriminatory policy which is consistent with the objectives pursued in penalising infringements of the competition rules.
      
The new method of determining the amount of a fine will adhere to the following rules, which start from a basic amount that
         will be increased to take account of aggravating circumstances or reduced to take account of attenuating circumstances.’
      
According to Section of the Guidelines, ‘[that] basic amount will be determined according to the gravity and duration of
         the infringement, which are the only criteria referred to in Article 15(2) of Regulation No 17’.
      
With regard to gravity, Section A of the Guidelines provides that in assessing the criterion of the gravity of the infringement,
         account must be taken of its nature, its actual impact on the market, where this can be measured, and the size of the relevant
         geographic market. Infringements are put into one of three categories: minor infringements, serious infringements and very
         serious infringements. 
      
According to the Guidelines, very serious infringements are, in particular, horizontal restrictions such as price cartels
         and market-sharing quotas. The basic amount of the likely fine is ‘above [EUR] million’. The Guidelines refer to the need
         to vary basic amounts according to the nature of the infringement committed; the effective economic capacity of offenders
         to cause significant damage to other operators, in particular consumers; the deterrent effect of the fine; and the undertakings’
         legal and economic knowledge and infrastructures which enable them to recognise that their conduct constitutes an infringement.
         It is also stated that where infringements involve several undertakings, it might be necessary to take account of the specific
         weight and, therefore, the real impact of the offending conduct of each undertaking on competition, particularly where there
         is considerable disparity between the sizes of the undertakings committing infringements of the same type. 
      
As regards the duration of infringements, the Guidelines make a distinction between infringements of short duration (in general,
         less than one year), infringements of medium duration (in general, one to five years) and infringements of long duration (in
         general, more than five years). With regard to the latter, provision is made for an increase in the amount of the fine of
         up to 10% per year in the amount determined for gravity. The Guidelines also strengthen the position regarding increases in
         fines for long-term infringements with a view to imposing effective sanctions on restrictions which have had a harmful impact
         on consumers over a long period and increasing the incentive to denounce the infringement or to cooperate with the Commission.
      
Under Section of the Guidelines the basic amount may be increased where there are aggravating circumstances such as, inter
         alia, repeated infringements of the same type by the same undertaking or undertakings. According to Section of the Guidelines,
         that basic amount may be reduced where there are attenuating circumstances such as the exclusively passive or ‘follow-my-leader’
         role of an undertaking in the infringement, non-implementation in practice of the agreements or the effective cooperation
         by the undertaking in the proceedings, outside the scope of the Commission notice on the non-imposition or reduction of fines
         in cartel cases (OJ C 207, p. 4) (‘the Leniency Notice’). 
      
The Guidelines were replaced as from September by the Guidelines on the method of setting fines imposed pursuant to
         Article 23(2)(a) of Regulation No 1/(OJ C 210, p. 2).
      
The Leniency Notice sets out the conditions under which undertakings cooperating with the Commission during an investigation
         which it carries out into a cartel may be exempted from fines, or may be granted reductions in the fine which would otherwise
         have been imposed upon them. According to Section B of that notice, an undertaking which informs the Commission about a cartel
         before the Commission has undertaken an investigation, provided that it does not have sufficient information to establish
         the existence of the alleged cartel, or which is the first to adduce decisive evidence of the cartel’s existence, will benefit
         from a reduction of at least 75% of the fine or from total exemption from the fine. According to Section D of the notice,
         an undertaking will benefit from a reduction of 10% to 50% of the fine if, inter alia, before the statement of objections
         is sent, it has provided the Commission with information, documents or other evidence which materially contribute to establishing
         the existence of the infringement. 
      
The Leniency Notice was replaced as from February by the Commission notice on immunity from fines and reduction of
         fines in cartel cases (OJ C 45, p. 3). The Commission nevertheless applied it in the present case, since that is the
         notice which the undertakings took into consideration when cooperating with the Commission.
      
 Background to the dispute
Together with other undertakings – Wieland Werke AG and also Outokumpu Oyj and Outokumpu Copper Products Oy (collectively
         ‘the Outokumpu group’) – producing semi-finished products in copper and copper alloys, the appellants took part in a set of
         agreements and practices designed to fix prices and share markets in the industrial tubes sector, more particularly copper
         tubes supplied in level wound coils.
      
Following inspections and investigations, on December the Commission adopted the decision at issue, a summary of which
         was published in the Official Journal of the European Union of April (OJ L 125, p. 50).
      
So far as the present appeal is concerned, the relevant paragraphs of the judgment under appeal in which the General Court
         summarised the part of the decision at issue that relates to the calculation of the fine are as follows:
      
‘Regarding, first, the determination of the starting amount of the fine, the Commission took the view that the infringement,
         which consisted essentially of price fixing and market sharing, was by its very nature a very serious infringement (recital
         of the [decision at issue]).
      
In determining the seriousness of the infringement, the Commission also took account of the fact that the cartel had affected
         the whole of the territory of the European Economic Area (EEA) (recital of the [decision at issue]). The Commission further
         examined the actual effects of the infringement, and found that the cartel had “overall had an impact on the market” (recital
         of the [decision at issue]). 
      
...
Finally, still in relation to the determination of the seriousness of the infringement, the Commission took into account the
         fact that the market in copper industrial tubes constituted an important industrial sector, with an estimated market value
         in the EEA of EUR million (recital 318). 
      
Having regard to all those circumstances, the Commission concluded that the infringement in question had to be regarded as
         very serious (recital 320). 
      
...
Fourthly, the Commission classified the duration of the infringement, which lasted from May until March 2001, as
         “long”. The Commission therefore considered it appropriate to increase the starting amounts of fines on the undertakings concerned
         by 10% for each year of participation in the cartel. …
      
…
Sixthly, in respect of attenuating circumstances, the Commission stated that, without the cooperation of Outokumpu, it would
         have been able to establish the existence of the infringing conduct for a period of only four years, and it therefore reduced
         the basic amount of its fine by EUR 22.million, in order that the basic amount correspond to the fine which would have
         been imposed for such a period (recital 386).
      
Seventhly and lastly, in accordance with Section D of the … Leniency Notice, the Commission reduced the amount of the fines
         by 50% for Outokumpu, 20% for Wieland [Werke AG], and 30% for the KME Group (recitals 402, and 423).’
      
 The proceedings in the General Court and the judgment under appeal
The appellants put forward five pleas in law, all concerning the determination of the amount of the fine imposed upon them.
         They alleged, respectively, failure to take sufficient account of the actual impact of the cartel for the purposes of calculating
         the starting amount of the fine, inadequate assessment of the size of the sector affected by the infringement, an erroneous
         increase in the starting amount of the fine by reason of the duration of the infringement, failure to take account of certain
         attenuating circumstances, and an insufficient reduction in the amount of the fine pursuant to the Leniency Notice.
      
The General Court rejected each of those pleas and dismissed the action in its entirety.
      
 Forms of order sought 
By its appeal, the KME group asks the Court to:
      
–        set aside the judgment under appeal;
–        in so far as possible, having regard to the facts before the Court, partially annul the decision at issue and reduce the amount
         of the KME group’s fine;
      
–        order the Commission to pay the costs of these proceedings and those incurred before the General Court; or
–        in the alternative, set aside the judgment under appeal, including with respect to the order of the General Court to the KME
         group to pay the costs, and refer the case back to that court.
      
The Commission contends that the Court should:
      
–        dismiss the appeal; and
–        order the KME group to pay the costs.
 The appeal
The KME group puts forward give grounds of appeal alleging, respectively, various errors of law relating to the impact of
         the infringement on the market, to the account taken of turnover, to the duration of the infringement and to the appellants’
         cooperation, and, lastly, infringement of the right to an effective judicial review.
      
 First ground of appeal: various errors of law relating to the impact of the infringement on the market
 Arguments of the parties
The appellants state that their first ground of appeal relates to paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal. Those
         paragraphs are preceded by a summary of the parties’ arguments and the General Court’s view on the admissibility of two new
         economic reports produced by the appellants to demonstrate the lack of real impact of the infringement on the market; the
         General Court concluded in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that those reports were admissible.
      
Paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal are worded as follows:
      
‘As for whether the present plea is well founded, it should be noted that, by that plea, the applicants challenge both the
         Commission’s assessment of the seriousness of the infringement ... and the differentiated treatment which it carried out on
         the basis of the market shares of the undertakings concerned ... 
      
Concerning, first, the differentiated treatment of the undertakings in question, the reasoning provided by the Commission
         in the [decision at issue] on that subject refers in particular to a concern to take account of the “specific weight and therefore
         the real impact of the offending conduct of each undertaking on competition” (recital of the [decision at issue]). It
         should, however, be emphasised that, even without proof of actual impact of the infringement on the market, the Commission
         is entitled to carry out differentiated treatment, by reference to the shares held in the market concerned, such as that set
         out in recitals to of the [decision at issue]. 
      
The case-law shows that the market share of each of the undertakings concerned in the market which formed the subject-matter
         of a restrictive practice constitutes an objective factor which gives a fair measure of the responsibility of each of them
         as regards the potential harmfulness of that practice for the normal operation of competition (see, to that effect, Joined
         Cases T‑236/01, T‑239/01, T‑244/to T‑246/01, T‑251/and T‑252/Tokai Carbon and Others v Commission [2004] ECR II‑1181, paragraph 197). 
      
Similarly, concerning the assessment of the seriousness of the infringement, it should also be noted that, even if the Commission
         had not proved that the cartel had had an actual effect on the market, that would have been irrelevant to the classification
         of the infringement as “very serious” and thus to the amount of the fine. 
      
In that regard, it should be noted that the Community system of penalties for infringement of the competition rules, as established
         by Regulation No and interpreted by the case-law, shows that, by reason of their very nature, cartels merit the severest
         fines. Their possible concrete impact on the market, particularly the question to what extent the restriction of competition
         resulted in a market price higher than would have obtained without the cartel, is not a decisive factor for determining the
         level of fines (see, to that effect, Joined Cases 100/to 103/Musique Diffusion française and Others v Commission [1983] ECR 1825, paragraphs and 129; Case C‑219/P Ferriere Nord v Commission [1997] ECR I‑4411, paragraph 33; Case C‑286/P Stora Kopparbergs Bergslags v Commission [2000] ECR I‑9925, paragraphs to 77; Case C‑407/P Dalmine v Commission [2007] ECR I‑829, paragraphs and 130; Tokai Carbon [and Others v Commission]…, at paragraph 225; Opinion of Advocate General Mischo in Case C‑283/P Mo och Domsjö v Commission [2000] ECR I‑9855, I‑9858, points to 101). 
      
Moreover, it follows from the Guidelines that agreements or concerted practices involving in particular, as in the present
         case, price-fixing and customer-sharing may be classified as “very serious” on the basis of their nature alone, without it
         being necessary for such conduct to have a particular impact or cover a particular geographic area. That conclusion is supported
         by the fact that, whilst the description of “serious” infringements expressly mentions market impact and effects over extensive
         areas of the common market, the description of “very serious” infringements makes no mention of a requirement that there be
         an impact or that there be effects in a particular geographic area (Case T‑38/Groupe Danone v Commission [2005] ECR II‑4407, paragraph 150).
      
In any event, and for the sake of completeness, the Court considers that the Commission has demonstrated to a sufficient legal
         standard that the cartel did have an actual impact on the market concerned.
      
In that context, it should be emphasised that the applicants’ premiss, to the effect that, if the Commission relied on concrete
         impact of the cartel in determining the amount of the fine, it was under a duty scientifically to demonstrate the existence
         of a tangible economic effect on the market and a link of cause and effect between the impact and the infringement, has been
         rejected by the case-law.
      
The Court of First Instance has held on numerous occasions that actual impact of a cartel on the market must be regarded as
         sufficiently demonstrated if the Commission is able to provide specific and credible evidence indicating with reasonable probability
         that the cartel had an impact on the market (see, in particular, [Case T‑241/01] Scandinavian Airlines System [v Commission [2005] ECR II‑2917], at paragraph 122; Case T‑59/Archer Daniels Midland v Commission [2006] ECR II‑3627, paragraphs to 161; Case T‑43/Jungbunzlauer v Commission [2006] ECR II‑3435, paragraphs to 155; Case T‑329/Archer Daniels Midland v Commission [2006] ECR II‑3255, paragraphs to 178; Case T‑322/Roquette Frères v Commission [2006] ECR II‑3137, paragraphs to 75).
      
It should be noted in that regard that the applicants have not challenged the accuracy of the facts, set out in paragraph
         above, on which the Commission relied in concluding that the cartel had an actual impact on the market, namely the fact
         that prices fell during periods when the collusive agreement was not strictly complied with and rose strongly in other periods,
         the implementation of a system for exchanging information concerning sales volumes and price levels, the major share of the
         market held by the cartel participants as a whole, and the fact that the respective market shares of the cartel participants
         remained relatively stable throughout the duration of the infringement. The applicants have merely argued that those facts
         were not capable of demonstrating that the infringement in question had an actual effect on the market.
      
On that point, however, the case-law shows that it is legitimate for the Commission to deduce, on the basis of the indicators
         referred to in the previous paragraph, that the infringement had an actual effect on the market (see, to that effect, [Jungbunzlauer v Commission, paragraph 159; Roquette Frères v Commission, paragraph 78; Case T‑59/Archer Daniels Midland v Commission, paragraph 165; Case T‑329/Archer Daniels Midland v Commission, paragraph 181]; and Joined Cases T‑259/to T‑264/and T‑271/Raiffeisen Zentralbank Österreich and Others v Commission [2006] ECR II‑5169, paragraphs to 287).
      
As for the applicants’ argument that the file contains examples of non‑compliance with the collusive agreements, the fact
         that cartel members did not always comply with the agreements is not sufficient to exclude their having had a market impact
         (see, to that effect, Groupe Danone [v Commission]…, at paragraph 148).
      
Nor can this Court accept the arguments which the applicants make based on their own conduct. The actual conduct which an
         undertaking claims to have adopted is irrelevant for the purposes of evaluating a cartel’s effect on the market; account must
         be taken only of effects resulting from the infringement taken as a whole (Case T‑224/Archer Daniels Midland and Archer Daniels Midland Ingredients v Commission [2003] ECR II‑2597, paragraph 167). Nor can the Commission be blamed for finding, in recital of the [decision at issue],
         that the initial report was not sufficient to refute the Commission’s conclusions concerning the actual effects of the cartel
         on the market. The econometric analysis contained therein deals only with detailed figures relating to the applicants.
      
Therefore, having regard to the above considerations as a whole, this plea must be dismissed as unfounded.
The Court further considers, in the context of its unlimited jurisdiction and in the light of the above considerations, that
         there is no cause to call into question the assessment of the starting amount of the fine determined by reference to seriousness,
         as carried out by the Commission.’
      
The appellants submit that the General Court gave an illogical and inadequate statement of reasons for the judgment under
         appeal and erred in law in holding that the Commission was permitted, in determining the starting amount of the fine, having
         regard to the gravity of the infringement, to take account of the impact of the cartel on the relevant market without being
         required to demonstrate that the arrangements actually had such an impact and, in any event, by inferring such an impact from
         mere indicators. Moreover, by holding that the Commission had demonstrated to the requisite legal standard that the arrangements
         had an impact on the market, the General Court manifestly distorted the facts and economic evidence which the KME group put
         before it.
      
The Commission maintains first of all that the first ground of appeal is ineffective. The appellants did not put forward any
         arguments challenging paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, in which the General Court held that it was not necessary
         to demonstrate the actual impact of the infringement on the market, whether as regards the differentiated treatment of the
         undertakings in question or the seriousness of the infringement. They merely challenged the grounds included by the Court
         for the sake of completeness, whereby the Court, in paragraph et seq. of the judgment under appeal, held that the Commission
         had demonstrated to the requisite legal standard that the cartel had an impact on the market concerned.
      
The Commission contends that, in any event, the first ground of appeal is inadmissible since it relates to an appraisal of
         the facts and the evidence.
      
It goes on to contend that, in its view, the General Court properly examined the evidence.
      
Lastly, it maintains that the General Court provided adequate reasons for the judgment under appeal, in particular in paragraph
         72, in which the Court rejected the arguments and the evidence put forward by the appellants.
      
 Findings of the Court
The appellants do not contest the General Court’s findings concerning the classification of the infringement as a ‘very serious
         infringement’ within the meaning of the Guidelines nor the differentiation between undertakings, by reference to the shares
         held in the market concerned, to take account of the specific weight and therefore the real impact of the offending conduct
         of each undertaking on competition. They merely contest the General Court’s findings concerning the actual impact of the cartel
         on the market as a factor taken into account in determining the basic amount of the fine.
      
According to Section A of the Guidelines, in assessing the criterion of the gravity of the infringement, account is to be
         taken of its actual impact on the market only where this can be measured. 
      
Determination of the actual impact of a cartel on the market requires a comparison of the market situation resulting from
         the cartel with that which would have resulted from free competition. Such a comparison necessarily involves recourse to assumptions,
         given the multiplicity of variables capable of having an impact on the market.
      
In recital of the decision at issue, the Commission emphasised the impossibility of determining what the evolution of
         prices during the period of infringement of more than years would have been in the absence of the cartel. Having refuted
         the appellants’ arguments, it provided evidence from which it concluded, in recital of that decision, that the anti-competitive
         scheme had overall had an impact on the market, although it was not possible to quantify it precisely. 
      
It thus follows from the decision at issue that, in this instance, the Commission did not consider it possible for the purposes
         of calculating the fine to take that optional element – the actual impact of the infringement on the market – into account
         since it could not be measured. That conclusion was not challenged in the judgment under appeal.
      
In paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, the General Court recalled the case-law relating to the standard of
         proof of the actual impact of a cartel on the market. In paragraphs and to of its judgment it checked, moreover,
         that the Commission had demonstrated to the requisite legal standard the actual impact of the cartel on the relevant market.
         However, it did so for the sake of completeness, as indicated in paragraph of that judgment, and after correctly observing,
         in paragraph 64, that the actual impact of cartels on the market is not a decisive factor for determining the level of fines.
         It follows from this that the appellants’ plea countering that part of the General Court’s reasoning is ineffective.
      
In any event, the General Court’s reasoning in relation to the statement of reasons for the decision at issue deals with the
         appellants’ argument, summarised in the last sentence of paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the reasoning and
         the conclusion contained in the decision at issue concerning the actual impact of the cartel were erroneous, uncorroborated
         and contradictory in character. The General Court found that there was evidence to prove the existence of such impact, but
         did not call in question the impossibility of measuring it precisely.
      
Thus the General Court was not contradicting itself when, on the one hand, it recalled the principle that the actual impact
         of the infringement on the market is not a decisive factor for determining the level of fines and, on the other, it reviewed
         the statement of reasons for the decision at issue in relation to that impact. 
      
Consequently, as is apparent from the wording of their first ground of appeal, the appellants incorrectly infer from the General
         Court’s review that the actual impact of the infringement on the market must have been taken into account for the purpose
         of calculating the starting amount of the fine that was imposed on them. That argument is based on a false premiss.
      
With regard to the claim that the General Court distorted the economic evidence adduced by the appellants, it is alleged not
         that the General Court construed those economic reports in a manner manifestly at odds with their wording (see, to that effect,
         Case C‑260/P Activision Blizzard Germany v Commission [2011] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 57), but that the General Court erred in its assessment of the content of those reports. In
         any event, the appellants do not indicate precisely which parts of those reports the General Court misconstrued as to their
         real meaning. Accordingly that argument is inadmissible.
      
It follows from the foregoing considerations that the first ground of appeal must be rejected.
      
 Second ground of appeal: various errors of law relating to the account taken of turnover
 Arguments of the parties
The second ground of appeal concerns paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal. It relates, in essence, to paragraphs
         to 94, which are worded as follows:
      
‘The applicants argue in that regard, first, that the price of copper is outside the control of industrial tube manufacturers,
         since it is fixed in accordance with the [London Metal Exchange] and, secondly, that it is the buyers of industrial tubes
         themselves who decide at what price the metal is bought. The applicants further emphasise that fluctuations in the metal price
         have no impact on their profit.
      
It must nevertheless be held that there is no valid reason to require that the turnover of a relevant market be calculated
         excluding certain production costs. As the Commission has rightly pointed out, there are in all industries costs inherent
         in the final product which the manufacturer cannot control but which nevertheless constitute an essential element of its business
         as a whole and which, therefore, cannot be excluded from its turnover when fixing the starting amount of the fine (see, to
         that effect, Joined Cases T‑25/95, T‑26/95, T‑30/to T‑32/95, T‑34/to T‑39/95, T‑42/to T‑46/95, T‑48/95, T‑50/to
         T‑65/95, T‑68/to T‑71/95, T‑87/95, T‑88/95, T‑103/and T‑104/Cimenteries CBR and Others v Commission [2000] ECR II‑491, paragraphs and 5031). The fact that the price of copper constitutes an important part of the final
         price of industrial tubes or that the risk of fluctuations of copper prices is far higher than for other raw materials does
         not invalidate that conclusion.
      
Finally, regarding the applicants’ various claims seeking to argue that, instead of using the criterion of the turnover of
         the relevant market, it would be more appropriate, having regard to the deterrent purpose of fines and the principle of equal
         treatment, to fix their amount by reference to the profitability of the sector affected or the added value relating thereto,
         the Court finds that they are irrelevant. First, the seriousness of the infringement is determined by reference to several
         factors, in respect of which the Commission has a discretion (Joined Cases T‑101/and T‑111/BASF v Commission [2007] ECR II‑4949, paragraph 65), no binding or exhaustive list of criteria having to be taken into account in that regard
         having been drawn up (Dalmine [v Commission], at paragraph 129), it is not for the Community Court but for the Commission to choose, within the framework of its discretion
         and in accordance with the limits which follow from the equal treatment principle and Regulation No 17, the factors and the
         detailed figures which it will take into account in order to implement a policy which ensures compliance with the prohibitions
         laid down by Article EC.
      
It is undeniable that, as a factor for assessing the seriousness of the infringement, the turnover of an undertaking of a
         market is necessarily vague and imperfect. It does not make a distinction either between sectors with a high added value and
         those with a low added value, or between undertakings which are profitable and those which are less so. However, despite its
         approximate nature, turnover is currently considered, by the Community legislature, the Commission and the Court, as an adequate
         criterion, in the context of competition law, for assessing the size and economic power of the undertakings concerned (see,
         in particular, [Musique Diffusion française and Others v Commission], at paragraph 121; Article 15(2) of Regulation No 17; recital and Articles and of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/of January on the control of concentrations between undertakings (OJ L 24, p. 1)). 
      
Having regard to all of the above, the Court finds that the Commission was right to take the copper price into account for
         the purposes of determining the size of the market concerned.’
      
In the appellants’ submission, the General Court infringed Community law and provided an inadequate statement of reasons for
         the judgment under appeal by approving the Commission’s reference – in order to assess the size of the market affected by
         the infringement for the purpose of establishing the gravity element of the fine – to a market value that wrongly included
         the revenue from sales made in an upstream market separate from the ‘cartel’ market, despite the fact that the cartel members
         were not vertically integrated in that upstream market.
      
They explain that the copper transformation industry has specific features. In particular, it is the customer who decides
         when the metal will be purchased on the London Metal Exchange and hence its price. Even though that price invoiced by the
         tubes manufacturer to the customer includes the processing margin, to take it into consideration when calculating the undertaking’s
         turnover would be to ignore the economic reality of the market, which is characterised in particular by the important part
         represented by the raw material in the cost of the product and the very significant fluctuations in the price of that raw
         material. Those facts were established by the General Court. 
      
According to the appellants, the General Court erred in law by failing to hold that the Commission should have taken account
         of the case-law of the General Court and the Commission’s own previous practice in taking decisions, whereby, when the Commission
         calculates the starting amount of the fine and/or applies the 10% turnover cap, it is required to take into consideration
         the specific features of the relevant market. 
      
They also claim that, by failing to distinguish the appellants from other undertakings whose turnover is not so greatly influenced
         by the price of the raw material, the General Court infringed the principle of non-discrimination, which requires that different
         situations be treated differently.
      
Lastly, the appellants challenge the case-law on which the General Court relied, which is based on the Commission’s discretion.
         They take the view that the General Court failed to examine whether the criteria used by the Commission to establish the gravity
         of the cartel were pertinent and adequate.
      
The Commission contends that, in so far as the appellants invite the Court of Justice to make a different appraisal from that
         of the General Court of whether the industrial tubes industry is unique, the ground of appeal is inadmissible. It also challenges
         the facts as described by the KME group, namely that tubes manufacturers often act as if they are agents for their customers
         in the purchasing of copper, and denies that the General Court gave a ruling on that matter.
      
In any event, the Commission submits that the General Court was correct in stating, in paragraph of the judgment under
         appeal, that there are in all industries costs inherent in the final product which the manufacturer cannot control but which
         nevertheless constitute an essential element of its business as a whole and which therefore cannot be excluded from its turnover
         when fixing the starting amount of the fine.
      
Likewise, the General Court was right to find in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that, despite its approximate nature,
         turnover is currently considered, by the Community legislature, the Commission and the Court, as an adequate criterion, in
         the context of competition law, for assessing the size and economic power of the undertakings concerned.
      
 Findings of the Court
It has consistently been held that, in assessing the gravity of an infringement, regard must be had to a large number of factors,
         the nature and importance of which vary according to the type of infringement in question and the particular circumstances
         of the case. Those factors may, depending on the circumstances, include the volume and value of the goods in respect of which
         the infringement was committed and the size and economic power of the undertaking and, consequently, the influence which the
         undertaking was able to exert on the market (see, to that effect, Musique Diffusion française and Others v Commission, paragraph 120).
      
While the Court of Justice has concluded from this that it is permissible, for the determination of the fine, to take into
         account both the undertaking’s overall turnover, which is an indication of the size of the undertaking and its economic strength,
         and that part of the turnover which derives from the goods which are the subject of the infringement and which therefore is
         capable of giving an indication of the scale of the infringement, it has nevertheless recognised that the overall turnover
         of an undertaking gives only an approximate and imperfect indication of the size of that undertaking (Musique Diffusion française and Others v Commission, paragraph 121; Case C‑185/P Baustahlgewebe v Commission [1998] ECR I‑8417, paragraph 139; Joined Cases C‑189/P, C‑202/P, C‑205/P to C‑208/P and C‑213/P Dansk Rørindustri and Others v Commission [2005] ECR I‑5425, paragraph 243; Case C‑397/P Archer Daniels Midland and Archer Daniels Midland Ingredients v Commission [2006] ECR I‑4429, paragraph 100; and Case C‑510/P Archer Daniels Midland v Commission [2009] ECR I‑1843, paragraph 74). 
      
It has also pointed out on a number of occasions that it is important not to confer on one or the other of those figures an
         importance which is disproportionate in relation to the other factors to be assessed in relation to the gravity of the infringement
         (Musique Diffusion française and Others v Commission, paragraph 121; Dansk Rørindustri and Others v Commission, paragraph 243; Case C‑397/P Archer Daniels Midland and Archer Daniels Midland Ingredients v Commission, paragraph 100; and Case C‑510/P Archer Daniels Midland v Commission, paragraph 74).
      
The General Court did not, therefore, err in law when it observed in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that turnover,
         although vague and imperfect, is an adequate criterion for assessing the size and economic power of the undertakings concerned.
         
      
Nor, moreover, did the General Court err in law when it held, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that there is
         no valid reason to require that the turnover of a relevant market be calculated excluding certain production costs. As the
         Advocate General noted in point of her Opinion, not to take gross turnover into account in some cases but to do so in
         others would require a threshold to be established, in the form of a ratio between net and gross turnover, which would be
         difficult to apply and would give scope for endless and insoluble disputes, including allegations of unequal treatment.
      
Lastly, the General Court provided adequate reasons for the judgment under appeal and carried out the review in the manner
         required of it. Thus, the appellants having challenged the use of the turnover in the assessment of the size of the relevant
         market, the General Court, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, rejected the Commission’s argument that the starting
         amount of the fine imposed on the appellants would not necessarily have been less than EUR million if the copper price
         had been deducted from the market turnover. It went on to determine, in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal,
         whether the Commission was wrong to take the copper price into account when determining the size of the market.
      
It follows from those considerations that the General Court carried out its review in the manner required of it, that it responded
         to the plea in law put forward by the appellants and that it did not err in law in concluding, in paragraph of the judgment
         under appeal, that the Commission was right to take the copper price into account for the purposes of determining the size
         of the market concerned. 
      
As regards the allegation that the General Court failed to examine whether the criteria used by the Commission to establish
         the gravity of the cartel were pertinent and adequate, it should be borne in mind that, in an action on a decision relating
         to a competition matter, it is for the applicant to formulate his pleas in law and not for the General Court to review of
         its own motion the weighting of the factors taken into account by the Commission in order to determine the amount of the fine.
         
      
The second ground of appeal is therefore unfounded.
      
 Third ground of appeal: various errors of law relating to the account taken of the duration of the infringement
 Arguments of the parties
The appellants state that their third ground of appeal relates to paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal. They
         claim that the General Court infringed Community law and provided an obscure, illogical and inadequate statement of reasons
         for that judgment by upholding the part of the decision at issue in which the Commission misapplied the Guidelines, and infringed
         the principles of proportionality and equal treatment by imposing the maximum percentage increase on the starting amount of
         the fine on account of the duration of the infringement.
      
According to the appellants, it is apparent from Section B of the Guidelines that the purpose of a fine increase on account
         of duration of an infringement is to ‘[impose] effective sanctions on restrictions which have had a harmful impact on consumers
         over a long period’. The requirement of a link between the infringement’s duration and its harmful effect is also clear from
         the case-law. The General Court, however, failed to enquire whether the Commission, in its assessment of the infringement’s
         gravity, really did give proper weight to the circumstance that the cartel’s intensity and effectiveness varied over time.
         The General Court was therefore wrong in holding, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the 125% increase in
         the starting amount of the fine is not manifestly disproportionate.
      
The Commission contends that the Court of Justice lacks jurisdiction to substitute its own appraisal of the amount of the
         fine for that of the General Court. This ground of appeal is therefore inadmissible.
      
In any event, the General Court provided a clear and logical explanation for its appraisal, which responded to all the legal
         arguments made by the KME group. 
      
 Findings of the Court
By their third ground of appeal, the appellants challenge both the principle of an increase in the fine to take account of
         the duration of the infringement and the result of the application of that principle in their particular case, namely the
         increase in the starting amount of the fine, set at EUR million, by 125% to take account of an infringement period of years and months, each year of participation corresponding to a 10% increase. The basic amount was thus increased to EUR 56.million.
      
As the Advocate General noted in point of her Opinion, the objection to the result is based on the erroneous assumption
         that the rate of increase was 125%, whereas in fact it was only 62.51% (56.88÷= 1.6251).
      
As regards the principle of an increase in the fine to take account of the duration of the infringement, it is not necessary
         to establish in practical terms a direct relation between that duration and increased damage to the Community objectives pursued
         by the competition rules.
      
For the purpose of applying Article 81(1) EC, there is no need to take account of the concrete effects of an agreement once
         it appears that it has as its object the prevention, restriction or distortion of competition (see, to that effect, Joined
         Cases 56/and 58/Consten and Grundig v Commission [1966] ECR 299). That applies in particular in the case, as in this instance, of obvious restrictions of competition such
         as price-fixing and market-sharing. If a cartel determines the state of the market at the moment it is agreed, its lengthy
         duration can make the structures of that market more rigid, reducing cartel participants’ incentive for innovation and development.
         A return to free competition will be all the more difficult and protracted, the longer the cartel continues.
      
Even if the cartel’s intensity and effectiveness varies over time, the fact remains that that cartel continues to exist and,
         therefore, to make the structures of the market all the more rigid. 
      
Where an agreement has not been implemented at all, it must be borne in mind that Section of the Guidelines provides that
         non-implementation in practice of the offending agreements or practices may constitute an attenuating circumstance giving
         rise to a reduction in the basic amount of the fine. It appears, however, that that has not been the case here, since the
         appellants have challenged not the implementation of the cartel in so far as it relates to them, but only the failure to take
         into consideration the variable intensity of that implementation and the actual and objective impact of the cartel on consumers.
      
Furthermore, real damage to the consumer can be difficult to quantify, given the range of variables affecting, in particular,
         price-setting in relation to a manufactured product.
      
In any event, the duration of the infringement is mentioned by the legislature as a factor to be taken into account as such
         for the purpose of determining the amount of the fines. 
      
In the light of those points, the General Court was right to reject as unfounded, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal,
         the plea relating to the increase in the amount of the fine for the duration of the cartel. 
      
It follows from all of those considerations that the third ground of appeal is unfounded.
      
 Fourth ground of appeal: various errors of law relating to the account taken of the appellants’ cooperation
 Arguments of the parties
The appellants state that their fourth ground of appeal relates to paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal. They
         submit that the General Court infringed Community law in upholding the part of the decision at issue in which the Commission
         refused to reduce their fine on account of the fact that they cooperated to an extent not covered by the Leniency Notice,
         in breach of the sixth indent of Section of the Guidelines and of the principles of fairness and equal treatment.
      
In the appellants’ view, they alone should have been granted the reduction in the fine, on the ground that they provided evidence
         of the duration of the infringement, unlike the Outokumpu group, which only provided information on the total duration of
         the cartel. 
      
The Commission contends that, since the KME group is inviting the Court to substitute its own appraisal for that of the General
         Court, this ground of appeal is inadmissible.
      
That ground of appeal is, according to the Commission, moreover unfounded. The Commission maintains that the General Court
         provided a clear and logical explanation for its appraisal of when partial immunity should be available, which responded to
         all the legal arguments put forward by the KME group.
      
As regards the grant of a reduction in the fine for the Outokumpu group, the Commission states that the information which
         that group provided enabled the Commission to investigate and seek evidence. The appellants facilitated that task by providing
         evidence, more than months after the Outokumpu group, but nothing more. Contrary to what the appellants imply in their
         appeal, they would not have been granted partial immunity under the Commission notice on immunity from fines and reduction
         of fines in cartel cases, since such immunity is granted in respect of evidence relating to ‘facts previously unknown to the
         Commission’, which was not the case as regards the full duration of the cartel.
      
The Commission contends, lastly, that the award of partial immunity in the situation described by the appellants would run
         counter to Section D of the Leniency Notice, which already provides for a reduction in the fine where an undertaking supplies
         the Commission with information, documents or other evidence which contributes to establishing the existence of the infringement.
      
 Findings of the Court
It must be noted that, according to the Leniency Notice, only an undertaking which is the first to adduce decisive evidence
         of the cartel’s existence will benefit from non-imposition of a fine or a very substantial reduction in its amount.
      
The General Court examined the circumstances of the appellants’ cooperation and that of the Outokumpu group in paragraphs
         and of the judgment under appeal. These are, however, observations and findings of fact which it is not for the Court
         of Justice to review in the context of an appeal.
      
Furthermore, in light of the finding that the appellants’ cooperation occurred after that of the Outokumpu group, the General
         Court correctly concluded, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the appellants were not in a situation comparable
         to that of the Outokumpu group and, in consequence, that they had not suffered discrimination.
      
Lastly, the appellants do not state in what respect the General Court erred in law in the reasoning set out in paragraphs
         and of the judgment under appeal, and, in particular, they do not explain how the production of evidence of facts
         already known to the Commission would justify a reduction in the fine on account of attenuating circumstances any more than
         the earlier provision of new information to the Commission. It follows that that argument is inadmissible as it is too vague.
      
It follows from all of those considerations that the fourth ground of appeal is, in part, inadmissible and, in part, unfounded.
      
 Fifth ground of appeal: infringement of the right to an effective judicial review
 Arguments of the parties
The appellants submit that the General Court infringed Community law and their fundamental right to a full and effective judicial
         review by failing to examine their arguments closely and thoroughly and deferred, to an excessive and unreasonable extent,
         to the Commission’s discretion.
      
They explain that the doctrine of ‘margin of appreciation’ and ‘judicial deference’ should now no longer be applied, since
         Community law is now characterised by the huge fines imposed by the Commission, a development which is frequently described
         as the de facto ‘criminalisation’ of European competition law.
      
Furthermore, the direct applicability of the exception provided for in Article 81(3) EC, introduced by Regulation No 1/– replacing the earlier authorisation scheme – excludes, by definition, any margin of appreciation on the part of the Commission
         in the application of the competition rules and thus mandates only a very limited degree of judicial deference by the Courts
         when reviewing their application by the Commission in a specific case.
      
The appellants also submit that a justification for the proposition that the Commission enjoys a margin of appreciation should
         not be sought in the Commission’s alleged superior expertise in evaluating complex factual or economic matters. The appellants
         state in that regard that both the Court of Justice and the General Court have satisfactorily engaged in particularly intense
         judicial scrutiny of complex cases.
      
Likewise, in view of the unlimited jurisdiction conferred on it under Article EC and Article of Regulation No 1/2003,
         the General Court should not admit of any margin of appreciation on the part of the Commission, not only as far as the appropriate
         and proportionate character of the amount of a fine is concerned, but also with regard to the working method followed by the
         Commission in its calculation. In the appellants’ view, the General Court must examine how in each particular case the Commission
         assessed the gravity and duration of unlawful conduct and is then entitled to substitute its own assessment for that of the
         Commission by cancelling, reducing or increasing the fine.
      
The appellants also observe that the European Court of Human Rights has accepted that the enforcement of administrative law
         via administrative decision‑making and fines is not as such contrary to Article 6(1) of the European Convention for the Protection
         of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, signed in Rome on November (‘the ECHR’). Such enforcement ought, however,
         to be governed by sufficiently strong procedural guarantees, combined with an effective regime of judicial control with full
         jurisdiction to review administrative decisions. The right to ‘an effective remedy before a tribunal’ has also been enshrined
         in Article of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (‘the Charter’).
      
The Commission contends, first of all, that the fifth ground of appeal is too general and imprecise to be assessed by the
         Court. It goes on to observe that the KME group does not contest the fundamental structure for judicial review of Commission
         decisions and offers no explanation why the references by the General Court to the Commission’s margin of appreciation demonstrate
         that that Court failed adequately to review the legality of the decision at issue in the light of the KME group’s second,
         third and fourth pleas before it.
      
Lastly, according to the Commission, the KME group merely alludes to ‘criminal charges’ and to Article 6(1) of the ECHR, but
         avoids any discussion of what this might imply. 
      
 Findings of the Court
By their fifth ground of appeal, the appellants challenge both the manner in which the General Court stated that it was obliged
         to take account of the Commission’s broad margin of appreciation and the manner in which it actually reviewed the decision
         at issue. They rely on Article of the ECHR and on the Charter, but do not establish precisely whether they are challenging
         the principles of judicial review or the manner in which the General Court carried out that review in the present case.
      
The principle of effective judicial protection is a general principle of European Union law to which expression is now given
         by Article of the Charter (see Case C‑279/DEB [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraphs and 31; order in Case C‑457/Chartry [2011] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 25; and Case C‑69/Samba Diouf [2011] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 49). 
      
The judicial review of the decisions of the institutions was arranged by the founding Treaties. In addition to the review
         of legality, now provided for under Article TFEU, a review with unlimited jurisdiction was envisaged in regard to the
         penalties laid down by regulations.
      
As regards the review of legality, the Court of Justice has held that whilst, in areas giving rise to complex economic assessments,
         the Commission has a margin of discretion with regard to economic matters, that does not mean that the Courts of the European
         Union must refrain from reviewing the Commission’s interpretation of information of an economic nature. Not only must those
         Courts establish, among other things, whether the evidence relied on is factually accurate, reliable and consistent but also
         whether that evidence contains all the information which must be taken into account in order to assess a complex situation
         and whether it is capable of substantiating the conclusions drawn from it (see Case C‑12/P Commission v Tetra Laval [2005] ECR I‑987, paragraph 39, and Case C‑525/P Spain v Lenzing [2007] ECR I‑9947, paragraphs and 57).
      
With regard to the penalties for infringements of competition law, the second subparagraph of Article 15(2) of Regulation
         No provides that in fixing the amount of the fine, regard is to be had both to the gravity and to the duration of the infringement.
      
The Court of Justice has held that, in order to determine the amount of a fine, it is necessary to take account of the duration
         of the infringements and of all the factors capable of affecting the assessment of their gravity, such as the conduct of each
         of the undertakings, the role played by each of them in the establishment of the concerted practices, the profit which they
         were able to derive from those practices, their size, the value of the goods concerned and the threat that infringements of
         that type pose to the European Community (Musique Diffusion française and Others v Commission, paragraph 129; Dansk Rørindustri and Others v Commission, paragraph 242; and Case C‑534/P Prym and Prym Consumer v Commission [2009] ECR I‑7415, paragraph 96). 
      
The Court has also stated that objective factors such as the content and duration of the anti-competitive conduct, the number
         of incidents and their intensity, the extent of the market affected and the damage to the economic public order must be taken
         into account. The analysis must also take into consideration the relative importance and market share of the undertakings
         responsible and also any repeated infringements (Joined Cases C‑204/P, C‑205/P, C‑211/P, C‑213/P, C‑217/P and
         C‑219/P Aalborg Portland and Others v Commission [2004] ECR I‑123, paragraph 91). 
      
This large number of factors requires that the Commission carry out a thorough examination of the circumstances of the infringement.
      
In the interests of transparency the Commission adopted the Guidelines, in which it indicates the basis on which it will take
         account of one or other aspect of the infringement and what this will imply as regards the amount of the fine.
      
The Guidelines, which, the Court has held, form rules of practice from which the administration may not depart in an individual
         case without giving reasons compatible with the principle of equal treatment (Case C‑397/P Archer Daniels Midland and Archer Daniels Midland Ingredients v Commission, paragraph 91), merely describe the method used by the Commission to examine infringements and the criteria that the Commission
         requires to be taken into account in setting the amount of a fine.
      
It is important to bear in mind the obligation to state reasons for Community acts. That is a particularly important obligation
         in the present case. It is for the Commission to state the reasons for its decision and, in particular, to explain the weighting
         and assessment of the factors taken into account (see, to that effect, Prym and Prym Consumer v Commission, paragraph 87). The Courts must establish of their own motion that there is a statement of reasons. 
      
Furthermore, the Courts must carry out the review of legality incumbent upon them on the basis of the evidence adduced by
         the applicant in support of the pleas in law put forward. In carrying out such a review, the Courts cannot use the Commission’s
         margin of discretion – either as regards the choice of factors taken into account in the application of the criteria mentioned
         in the Guidelines or as regards the assessment of those factors – as a basis for dispensing with the conduct of an in-depth
         review of the law and of the facts.
      
The review of legality is supplemented by the unlimited jurisdiction which the Courts of the European Union were afforded
         by Article of Regulation No and which is now recognised by Article of Regulation No 1/2003, in accordance with Article
         TFEU. That jurisdiction empowers the Courts, in addition to carrying out a mere review of the lawfulness of the penalty,
         to substitute their own appraisal for the Commission’s and, consequently, to cancel, reduce or increase the fine or penalty
         payment imposed (see, to that effect, Joined Cases C‑238/P, C‑244/P, C‑245/P, C‑247/P, C‑250/P to C‑252/P
         and C‑254/P Limburgse Vinyl Maatschappij and Others v Commission [2002] ECR I‑8375, paragraph 692). 
      
It must, however, be pointed out that the exercise of unlimited jurisdiction does not amount to a review of the Court’s own
         motion, and that proceedings before the Courts of the European Union are inter partes. With the exception of pleas involving matters of public policy which the Courts are required to raise of their own motion,
         such as the failure to state reasons for a contested decision, it is for the applicant to raise pleas in law against that
         decision and to adduce evidence in support of those pleas. 
      
That requirement, which is procedural in nature, does not conflict with the rule that, in regard to infringements of the competition
         rules, it is for the Commission to prove the infringements found by it and to adduce evidence capable of demonstrating to
         the requisite legal standard the existence of the circumstances constituting an infringement. What the applicant is required
         to do in the context of a legal challenge is to identify the impugned elements of the contested decision, to formulate grounds
         of challenge in that regard and to adduce evidence – direct or circumstantial – to demonstrate that its objections are well
         founded. 
      
The review provided for by the Treaties thus involves review by the Courts of the European Union of both the law and the facts,
         and means that they have the power to assess the evidence, to annul the contested decision and to alter the amount of a fine.
         The review of legality provided for under Article TFEU, supplemented by the unlimited jurisdiction in respect of the amount
         of the fine, provided for under Article of Regulation No 1/2003, is not therefore contrary to the requirements of the principle
         of effective judicial protection in Article of the Charter.
      
It follows from this that, in so far as it relates to the rules of judicial review in the light of the principle of effective
         judicial protection, the fifth ground of appeal is unfounded. 
      
In so far as it relates to the manner in which the General Court carried out its review of the decision at issue, the fifth
         ground of appeal is indissociable from the second, third and fourth grounds of the appeal and has thus already been examined
         by the Court of Justice.
      
It must be noted in that regard that although the General Court repeatedly referred to the ‘discretion’, the ‘substantial
         margin of discretion’ or the ‘wide discretion’ of the Commission, including in paragraphs to 37, 92, 103, 115, 118, and of the judgment under appeal, such references did not prevent the General Court from carrying out the full and unrestricted
         review, in law and in fact, required of it.
      
It follows from all of those considerations that the fifth ground of appeal is unfounded.
      
Consequently, none of the grounds that the KME group has put forward in support of its appeal can be accepted, and the appeal
         must therefore be dismissed.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, applicable to the procedure on appeal pursuant to Article of those Rules,
         the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings.
         Since the Commission has applied for the KME group to be ordered to pay the costs and the KME group has been unsuccessful,
         the latter must be ordered to pay the costs of the present proceedings.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
1.      Dismisses the appeal;
2.      Orders KME Germany AG, KME France SAS and KME Italy SpA to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 