
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Joined Cases C-83/P, C-93/P and C-94/P Chronopost SA, La Poste and French RepublicvUnion française de l'express (Ufex) and Others
«(Appeal – State aid – Postal sector – Public undertaking entrusted with a service of general economic interest – Logistical and commercial assistance to a subsidiary not operating in a reserved sector – Concept of State aid – Criterion of private operator acting under normal market conditions)»
Opinion of Advocate General Tizzano delivered on December I - Judgment of the Court, July I - Summary of the Judgment
State aid – Definition – Logistical and commercial assistance provided by an undertaking entrusted with a service of general economic interest to its
                     subsidiary – Not included – Conditions – Whether additional, variable costs are covered – Appropriate contribution to the fixed costs arising from use of the network set up by that undertaking – Adequate return on the capital investment used for the subsidiary's competitive activity
                   (EC Treaty, Art. 90(2) (now Art. 86(2) EC) and Art. 92(1) (now, after amendment, Art. 87(1) EC)) In the absence of any possibility of comparing the situation of an undertaking entrusted with a service of general economic
         interest within the meaning of Article 90(2) of the Treaty (now Article 86(2) EC), such as an undertaking operating as a legal
         monopoly in the ordinary mail sector whose network would never have been created by a private undertaking, with that of a
         private group of undertakings not operating in a reserved sector, the criterion, necessarily hypothetical, of  
         normal market conditions, which makes it possible to ascertain whether the provision of logistical and commercial assistance by a public undertaking
         to its subsidiary, which is governed by private law, is capable of constituting State aid, must be assessed by reference to
         the objective and verifiable elements which are available.The costs borne by that undertaking in respect of the provision of such assistance can constitute such objective and verifiable
         elements. On that basis, there is no question of State aid to the subsidiary if, first, it is established that the price charged
         properly covers all the additional, variable costs incurred by the provision of that assistance, an appropriate contribution
         to the fixed costs arising from use of the postal network and an adequate return on the capital investment in so far as it
         is used for the subsidiary's competitive activity and if, second, there is nothing to suggest that those elements have been
         underestimated or fixed in an arbitrary fashion.see paras 34, 36, 38-JUDGMENT OF THE COURTJuly (1)
((Appeal – State aid – Postal sector – Public undertaking entrusted with a service of general economic interest – Logistical and commercial assistance to a subsidiary not operating in a reserved sector – Concept of State aid – Criterion of private operator acting under normal market conditions))
In Joined Cases C-83/P, C-93/P and C-94/P, 
            
 Chronopost SA,  established in Issy-les-Moulineaux (France), represented by V. Bouaziz Torron and D. Berlin, avocats, with an address for
            service in Luxembourg (C-83/P) La Poste,  established in Boulogne-Billancourt (France), represented by H. Lehman, avocat, with an address for service in Luxembourg
            (C-94/P), French Republic,  represented by G. de Bergues and F. Million, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg (C-93/P),
            
appellants, 
APPEALS against the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities (Fourth Chamber, Extended Composition)
            of December in Case T-613/Ufex and Others  v  
             Commission   [2000] ECR II-4055, seeking to have that judgment set aside,
            
the other parties to the proceedings being: 
             Union française de l'express (Ufex),  established in Roissy-en-France (France), DHL International,  established in Roissy-en-France, Federal express international (France) SNC,  established in Gennevilliers (France), CRIE SA,   established in Asnières (France),represented by E. Morgan de Rivery and J. Derenne, avocats,applicants at first instance, and Commission of the European Communities, defendant at first instance, 
THE COURT,,
composed of: G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias, President, J.-P. Puissochet and M. Wathelet (Rapporteur) (Presidents of Chambers), C. Gulmann, D.A.O. Edward, P. Jann, V. Skouris, F. Macken, N. Colneric, S. von Bahr and A. Rosas, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: A. Tizzano, Registrar: M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator, 
            
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,after hearing oral argument from the parties at the hearing on May 2002,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on December 2002,
gives the following
Judgment
            
By applications lodged at the Court Registry on and February respectively, Chronopost SA (
         Chronopost), La Poste and the French Republic brought appeals pursuant to Article of the EC Statute of the Court of Justice against
         the judgment of the Court of First Instance in Case T-613/Ufex and Others  v  
          Commission  [2000] ECR II-(
         the judgment under appeal), by which the Court of First Instance in part annulled Article of Commission Decision 98/365/EC of October concerning
         alleged State aid granted by France to SFMI-Chronopost (OJ L 164, p. 37;  
         the decision at issue). 
         
Facts
            
The facts are set out as follows in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal: 
         
            
Syndicat français de l'express international (hereinafter  
         SFEI), now known as the Union française de l'express, of which [DHL International, Federal express international (France) SNC
         and CRIE SA] are members, is a trade association established under French law, grouping together almost all of the companies
         offering express courier services competing with Société française de messagerie internationale (hereinafter  
         SFMI). 
         
            
On December SFEI lodged a complaint with the Commission alleging principally that the logistical and commercial assistance
         afforded by the French Post Office (hereinafter  
         La Poste) to SFMI constituted State aid within the meaning of Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC). In
         particular, SFEI complained that the remuneration paid by SFMI for the assistance provided by La Poste was not in accordance
         with normal market conditions. It alleged that the difference between the market price for the purchase of such services and
         the price actually paid by SFMI constituted State aid. An economic study carried out by Braxton, a consultancy firm, at SFEI's
         request, was appended to the complaint in order to demonstrate the value of the amount of aid during the period from to 1989. 
         
            
La Poste, which operates as a legal monopoly in the ordinary mail sector, was an integral part of the French State administration
         until the end of 1990. Since January it has been a legal entity governed by public law by virtue of Law 90-of July
         1990. That law authorises it to perform certain activities open to competition, and particularly express delivery services.
         
         
            
SFMI is a company incorporated under private law which has been entrusted with the management of La Poste's express delivery
         service since the end of 1985. SFMI was formed with a share capital of FRF million held as to 66% by Sofipost, a holding
         company wholly owned by La Poste, and as to 34% by TAT Express, a subsidiary of the airline Transport aérien transrégional
         (hereinafter  
         TAT). 
         
            
The detailed conditions for the operation and marketing of the express delivery service provided by SFMI under the name of
         EMS/Chronopost were set out in an order from the Ministry for Posts and Telecommunications of August 1986. According to
         that order, La Poste was to provide SFMI with logistical and commercial assistance. The contractual relations between La Poste
         and SFMI are governed by agreements, the first of which dates from 1986. 
         
            
In the structure of the express delivery business carried out by SFMI changed. Sofipost and TAT set up a new company,
         Chronopost SA, in which their respective holdings were again 66% and 34%. Chronopost, which had exclusive access to La Poste's
         network until January 1995, concentrated on domestic express deliveries. SFMI was acquired by GD Express Worldwide France,
         the subsidiary of an international common operator whose participants are the Australian company TNT and the post offices
         of five countries, a concentration which was authorised by a Commission Decision of December (TNT/Canada Post, DBP
         Postdienst, La Poste, PTT Poste and Sweden Post, Case No IV/M.102, OJ C 322, p. 19). SFMI retained the international
         business, using Chronopost as an agent and service provider in the handling of its international dispatches in France (hereinafter
          
         SFMI-Chronopost). 
         
            
By letter of March the Commission notified SFEI of its decision to take no action on the complaint under Article of the Treaty. On May SFEI together with other undertakings lodged an action with the Court of Justice for annulment
         of that decision. The Court ruled that it was not necessary to proceed to judgment (order of November in Case C-222/SFEI and Others  v  
          Commission , not published in the ECR) in the light of the Commission Decision of July to withdraw the decision of March 1992.
         
         ...
         
            
On June SFEI and other undertakings brought an action before the Tribunal de commerce de Paris (Paris Commercial Court)
         against SFMI, Chronopost, La Poste and others. A second study by Braxton was attached to the application, updating the information
         contained in the first study and evaluating the amount of the aid up to the end of 1991. In a judgment of January 1994,
         the Tribunal de commerce de Paris referred several questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling on the interpretation
         of Articles and of the EC Treaty (now Article EC), one of which sought clarification of the concept of State aid
         in the circumstances of the present case. The French Government lodged, as an annex to its observations of May 1994, an
         economic study by Ernst & Young. In Case C-39/SFEI and Others  v  
          La Poste and Others  [1996] ECR I-(hereinafter  
         the  
          SFEI  judgment), the Court ruled that  
         the provision of logistical and commercial assistance by a public undertaking to its subsidiaries, which are governed by private
         law and carry on an activity open to free competition, is capable of constituting State aid within the meaning of Article
         of the EC Treaty if the remuneration received in return is less than that which would have been demanded under normal market
         conditions. 
         
            
In the meantime, by a letter from the Commission dated March 1996, France was notified of the initiation of the procedure
         under Article 93(2) of the EC Treaty. On May France sent the Commission its comments in this regard. 
         
            
On July the Commission published in the  
          Official Journal of the European Communities  a notice on the initiation of the procedure under Article 93(2) of the EC Treaty regarding aid allegedly granted by France
         to SFMI-Chronopost (OJ C 206, p. 3). 
         
            
On August SFEI submitted its observations to the Commission in response to that notice. It attached to its observations
         another economic study by Bain & Company. In addition, SFEI extended its complaint of December to cover a number of additional
         points, including the use of La Poste's brand image, privileged access to the air waves of Radio France, customs and tax privileges
         and La Poste's investment in dispatching platforms.
         
The decision at issue
            
According to paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal: 
         
            
On October the Commission adopted [the decision at issue], which was notified to SFEI by letter dated October 1997.
         
         
            
In the decision [at issue], the Commission stated that it was necessary to distinguish between two sets of measures. The first
         set is the provision by La Poste of (i) logistical assistance, which consists in making available to SFMI-Chronopost the use
         of the postal infrastructure for the collection, sorting, transport and delivery of its dispatches, and (ii) commercial assistance,
         which consists in SFMI-Chronopost's access to La Poste's customers and enjoyment of its goodwill. The second set is made up
         of individual measures, such as privileged access to Radio France and tax and customs privileges. 
         
            
According to the Commission, SFEI misconstrued the  
          SFEI  judgment by maintaining that  
         the Commission should disregard the group's strategic interests and the economies of scale arising from the privileged access
         of SFMI-Chronopost to [La Poste's] network and infrastructure ... because [La Poste] has a monopoly. By contrast, the Commission contended, the Court of Justice has never suggested that the Commission must apply a different
         approach if one of the parties to the transaction has a monopoly. Thus, in order to determine whether State aid was involved
         in the first set of measures, the Commission was not required to take account of the fact that the transactions took place
         between a parent company operating in a reserved market and its subsidiary operating in a market open to competition. 
         
            
Accordingly, the Commission considered that the relevant question was  
         whether the terms of the transaction between [La Poste] and SFMI-Chronopost [were] comparable to those of an equivalent transaction
         between a private parent company, which may very well be a monopoly (for instance, because of the ownership of exclusive rights),
         and its subsidiary. According to the Commission, there was no financial advantage if the internal prices at which products and services were
         provided between companies belonging to the same group were  
         full-cost prices (total costs plus a mark-up to remunerate equity capital investment). 
         
            
In this regard, the Commission noted that the payments made by SFMI-Chronopost did not cover total costs over the first two
         years of operation, but covered all costs other than central and local offices' overheads. It considered, first, that it was
         not abnormal that payments made by a new undertaking, that is to say, SFMI-Chronopost, covered only variable costs in the
         start-up period. Secondly, in the Commission's opinion, France had been able to show that as from the remuneration paid
         by SFMI-Chronopost covered all the costs incurred by La Poste, plus a return on the equity capital invested by the latter.
         Furthermore, the Commission calculated that the internal rate of return (IRR) of La Poste's investment as a shareholder was
         well in excess of the cost of the company's equity in 1986, that is to say, the normal rate of return that a private investor
         would require under similar circumstances. Consequently, La Poste provided logistical and commercial assistance to its subsidiary
         under normal business conditions and that assistance therefore did not constitute State aid. 
         
            
With regard to the second category, that is to say, the various individual measures, the Commission considered that SFMI-Chronopost
         derived no advantage from the customs clearance procedure, stamp duty, payroll tax or the periods allowed for payment. The
         use of La Poste's vehicles as advertising media should, in the opinion of the Commission, be regarded as normal commercial
         assistance between a parent company and its subsidiary, and SFMI-Chronopost enjoyed no preferential treatment for advertising
         on Radio France. The Commission also maintained that it had been able to establish that the commitments made by La Poste when
         the common operator was authorised by the Commission Decision of December did not constitute State aid. 
         
            
In Article of the decision [at issue] the Commission states:  
         The logistical and commercial assistance provided by [La Poste] to its subsidiary SFMI-Chronopost, the other financial transactions
         between those two companies, the relationship between SFMI-Chronopost and Radio France, the customs arrangements applicable
         to [La Poste] and SFMI-Chronopost, the system of payroll tax and stamp duty applicable to [La Poste] and its [business secret]
         investment in the dispatching platforms do not constitute State aid to SFMI-Chronopost. Article states that the decision [at issue] is addressed to France.
         
Procedure before the Court of First Instance and the judgment under appeal
            
By application lodged at the Registry of the Court of First Instance on December 1997, the Union française de l'express
         (Ufex), DHL International, Federal express international (France) SNC and CRIE SA (together,  
         Ufex and Others) brought an action for annulment of the decision at issue. Chronopost, La Poste and the French Republic intervened in support
         of the Commission. 
         
            
Paragraph of the judgment under appeal shows that Ufex and Others relied on four pleas for annulment in support of their
         application alleging, first,  
         infringement of the rights of the defence, in particular the right of access to the file, second,  
         an inadequate statement of reasons, third,  
         errors of fact and manifest errors of assessment and, fourth,  
         [error in applying] the concept of State aid. 
         
            
The fourth plea, which is of particular importance in the present appeals, raised two points, alleging that the Commission
         misapplied the concept of State aid, first in failing to take account of normal market conditions when analysing the remuneration
         for the assistance provided by La Poste to SFMI-Chronopost, and second in holding that this concept did not cover various
         measures from which SFMI-Chronopost was alleged to have benefited. 
         
            
As regards the first part of the fourth plea, the Court of First Instance responded to it in these terms in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal: 
         
            
The aim of Article 92(1) of the Treaty is to prevent trade between Member States from being affected by advantages granted
         by public authorities which, in various forms, distort or threaten to distort competition by favouring certain undertakings
         or certain products (Case C-387/Banco Exterior de España  v  
          Ayuntamiento de Valencia  [1994] ECR I-877, paragraph 12, Case 173/Italy  v  
          Commission  [1974] ECR 709, paragraph 26, and  
          SFEI , paragraph 58). 
         
            
The concept of aid thus encompasses not only positive benefits, such as subsidies, but also interventions which, in various
         forms, mitigate the charges which are normally included in the budget of an undertaking and which, without therefore being
         subsidies in the strict sense of the word, are of the same character and have the same effect (
          SFEI , paragraph 58,  
          Banco Exterior de España , cited above, paragraph 13, and Case C-200/Ecotrade  v  
          Altiforni e Ferriere di Servola  [1998] ECR I-7907, paragraph 34). In Case T-358/Air France  v  
          Commission  [1996] ECR II-2109, paragraph 67, the Court of First Instance stated, with regard to Article of the EC Treaty: That provision therefore covers all the financial means by which the public sector may actually support undertakings, irrespective
         of whether or not those means are permanent assets of the public sector.
         
            
Furthermore, as the Court of Justice held in Case 78/Steinike & Weinlig  v  
          Germany  [1977] ECR 595, paragraph 21, regard must primarily be had to the effects of the aid on the favoured undertakings or producers
         and not the status of the institutions distributing or administering the aid. 
         
            
It follows that the concept of aid is an objective one, the test being whether a State measure confers an advantage on one
         or more particular undertakings (Case T-67/Ladbroke Racing  v  
          Commission  [1998] ECR II-1, paragraph 52, and Case T-46/SIC  v  
          Commission  [2000] ECR II-2125, paragraph 83). 
         
            
The interpretation of the concept of State aid in the circumstances of the present case was given by the Court of Justice
         in the  
          SFEI  judgment, namely that  
         the provision of logistical and commercial assistance by a public undertaking to its subsidiaries, which are governed by private
         law and carry on an activity open to free competition, is capable of constituting State aid within the meaning of Article
         of the EC Treaty if the remuneration received in return is less than that which would have been demanded under normal market
         conditions. 
         
            
It follows from the above considerations that in order to determine whether the measures in question constitute State aid,
         it is necessary to examine the situation from the point of view of the recipient undertaking, in this case SFMI-Chronopost,
         and to establish whether it received the logistical and commercial assistance in question at a price which it would not have
         obtained under normal market conditions (
          SFEI  judgment, paragraph 60,  
          SIC  v  
          Commission , paragraph 78, Case C-342/Spain  v  
          Commission  [1999] ECR I-2459, paragraph 41, and Case C-256/DM Transport  [1999] ECR I-3913, paragraph 22). 
         
            
In the  
          SFEI  judgment the Court of Justice found that such a determination presupposes an economic analysis taking into account all the
         factors which an undertaking acting under normal market conditions should have taken into consideration when fixing the remuneration
         for the services provided (paragraph 61). 
         
            
In the present case, the Commission observes in the [decision at issue] that  
         the fact that the transaction takes place between an undertaking operating in a reserved market and its subsidiary operating
         in a competitive market is of no relevance to this case. The Court of Justice has never suggested that in determining whether
         State aid is involved the Commission must apply a different approach if one of the parties to the transaction has a monopoly. 
         
            
Consequently, the Commission considered that the internal prices at which products and services are provided between companies
         belonging to the same group  
         do not involve any financial advantage whatsoever if they are full-cost prices (total costs plus a mark-up to remunerate equity
         capital investment). 
         
            
It is evident from these statements that the Commission did not base its decision on an economic analysis of the kind required
         by the  
          SFEI  judgment in order to show that the transaction in question would be comparable to a transaction between undertakings operating
         in normal market conditions. On the contrary, in the [decision at issue] the Commission merely verified the costs incurred
         by La Poste in providing logistical and commercial assistance and the extent to which those costs were reimbursed by SFMI-Chronopost.
         
         
            
Even supposing that SFMI-Chronopost paid La Poste's full costs for the provision of logistical and commercial assistance,
         that would not be sufficient in itself to show that no aid within the meaning of Article of the EC Treaty was granted.
         Given that La Poste might, by virtue of its position as the sole public undertaking in a reserved sector, have been able to
         provide some of the logistical and commercial assistance at lower cost than a private undertaking not enjoying the same rights,
         an analysis taking account solely of that public undertaking's costs cannot, in the absence of other evidence, preclude classification
         of the measures in question as State aid. On the contrary, it is precisely a relationship in which the parent company operates
         in a reserved market and its subsidiary carries out its activities in a market open to competition that creates a situation
         in which State aid is likely to exist. 
         
            
The Commission should thus have examined whether those full costs took account of the factors which an undertaking acting
         under normal market conditions should have taken into consideration when fixing the remuneration for the services provided.
         Hence, the Commission should at least have checked that the payment received in return by La Poste was comparable to that
         demanded by a private holding company or a private group of undertakings not operating in a reserved sector, pursuing a structural
         policy ─ whether general or sectorial ─ and guided by long-term prospects (see to this effect Case C-305/Italy  v  
          Commission  [1991] ECR I-1603, paragraph 20). 
         
            
It follows from the foregoing that, in the [decision at issue], by ruling out the very existence of State aid without checking
         whether the remuneration received by La Poste for the provision of commercial and logistical assistance to SFMI-Chronopost
         corresponded to the price that would have been asked under normal market conditions, the Commission based its decision on
         an incorrect interpretation of Article of the Treaty. 
         
            
This interpretation is not invalidated by the Commission's submission that Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC)
         provides that the Treaty in no way prejudges the system of property ownership in Member States. To require that the remuneration
         which a public undertaking with a monopoly receives in return for the provision of commercial and logistical assistance to
         its subsidiary should correspond to the payment which would have been demanded under normal market conditions, does not prohibit
         such a public undertaking from entering an open market but subjects it to the rules of competition, as the fundamental principles
         of Community law require. Such a requirement does not adversely affect the system of public ownership and merely ensures that
         public and private ownership are treated equally. 
         
            
It follows that the first part of the fourth plea is well founded. 
         
            
The first article of the [decision at issue] must therefore be annulled in so far as it finds that the logistical and commercial
         assistance provided by La Poste to its subsidiary SFMI-Chronopost does not constitute State aid to SFMI-Chronopost, and it
         is not necessary to examine the second part of this plea or the other pleas in so far as they relate to the logistical and
         commercial assistance provided by La Poste to SFMI-Chronopost. In particular, it is not necessary to examine the second plea,
         in which [Ufex and Others] allege that the statement of reasons for the [decision at issue] regarding logistical and commercial
         assistance is inadequate.
         
            
In the ensuing paragraphs of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance therefore considered only the first plea,
         alleging infringement of the rights of defence of Ufex and Others, and the arguments expounded in connection with the third
         plea, relating to errors of fact and manifest errors of assessment, which were not indissociable from those already examined
         in connection with the fourth plea. In both cases, the allegations made by Ufex and Others were rejected. 
         
            
As a consequence, the Court of First Instance merely annulled Article of the decision at issue in so far as it finds that
         the logistical and commercial assistance provided by La Poste to its subsidiary, SFMI-Chronopost, does not constitute State
         aid to the latter company. 
         The appeals
            
Chronopost claims that the Court should: 
         
─
set aside the judgment under appeal in so far as it annuls Article of the decision at issue; 
         
─
give final judgment in the matter and declare that the application of Ufex and Others for annulment of the decision at issue
            was unfounded; 
         
─
order Ufex and Others to bear the costs; 
         
─
in the alternative, refer the case back to the Court of First Instance for judgment and order Ufex and Others to pay the costs
            incurred by Chronopost before the Court of First Instance and the Court of Justice. 
         
            
La Poste claims that the Court should: 
         
─
set aside the judgment under appeal in so far as it annuls Article of the decision at issue; 
         
─
order Ufex and Others to pay the costs incurred by La Poste before the Court of First Instance and the Court of Justice. 
         
            
The French Republic claims that the Court should: 
         
─
set aside the judgment under appeal; 
         
─
order Ufex and Others to pay the costs before the Court of Justice and make a new order on the costs of the proceedings at
            first instance. 
         
            
Ufex and Others contend that the Court should: 
         
─
dismiss the appeals as in part inadmissible and unfounded; 
         
─
order the appellants to pay the entirety of the costs. 
         
            
Having heard the parties and the Advocate General on the point, the Court considers that the present cases, on account of
         the connection between them, should be joined for the purposes of the final judgment in accordance with Article of the
         Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice. 
         
            
Chronopost, La Poste and the French Republic raise various pleas, which largely coincide. Essentially, the appellants criticise
         the Court of First Instance for having committed: 
         
─
infringement of Article 92(1) of the Treaty, arising from an incorrect interpretation of the concept of  
            normal market conditions used in the  
            SFEI judgment; 
         
─
breach of the procedure set out in Article 93(2) of the Treaty and an abuse of process; 
         
─
breach of the broad discretion accorded to the Commission in assessing an economically complex measure; 
         
─
infringement of Article 92(1) of the Treaty, arising from an incorrect interpretation of the constituent elements of the concept
            of State aid, in particular the grant of an advantage to the recipient undertaking and the transfer of public resources; 
         
─
breach of the obligation to provide a statement of reasons. 
         
The first pleaArguments of the parties
         
            
The first plea submitted by the appellants against the judgment under appeal turns on the concept of  
         normal market conditions used in the  
          SFEI  judgment to determine the circumstances in which the provision of logistical and commercial assistance by a public undertaking
         to its subsidiaries carrying on an activity open to competition is capable of constituting State aid. 
         
            
In that judgment, the Court held: 
         
            
... the supply of goods or services on preferential terms is capable of constituting State aid (see Joined Cases 67/85, 68/and 70/Van der Kooy and Others  v  
          Commission  [1988] ECR 219, paragraph 28, and Case C-56/Belgium  v  
          Commission  [1996] ECR I-723, paragraph 10). 
         
            
Accordingly, in order to determine whether a State measure constitutes aid, it is necessary to establish whether the recipient
         undertaking receives an economic advantage which it would not have obtained under normal market conditions. 
         
            
In examining that question, it is for the national court to determine what is normal remuneration for the services in question.
         Such a determination presupposes an economic analysis taking into account all the factors which an undertaking acting under
         normal market conditions should have taken into consideration when fixing the remuneration for the services provided. 
         
            
In the light of the foregoing considerations, the answer ... must be that the provision of logistical and commercial assistance
         by a public undertaking to its subsidiaries, which are governed by private law and carry on an activity open to free competition,
         is capable of constituting State aid within the meaning of Article of the Treaty if the remuneration received in return
         is less than that which would have been demanded under normal market conditions.
         
            
The appellants claim that, in holding in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that the Commission should have examined
         whether La Poste's full costs took account of the factors which an undertaking acting under normal market conditions would
         have to have taken into consideration when fixing the remuneration for the services provided, the Court of First Instance
         misinterpreted the concept of  
         normal market conditions. 
         
            
It is clear from the case-law of the Court that, in order to determine whether aid has been granted, it is necessary, at the
         first stage of reasoning, to compare the conduct of the public undertaking with that of a private operator  
         of a comparable size or  
         as far as possible in the same situation. In referring to a private undertaking  
         not operating in a reserved sector, the Court of First Instance erred in basing its comparison on an undertaking that was structurally different from La Poste
         instead of comparing the conduct of the latter with that of an undertaking in the same situation, that is to say, with a reserved
         sector at its disposal. 
         
            
It is only at the second stage of reasoning that it is appropriate to assess whether the conduct was normal, that is to say,
         whether, having regard to its own parameters (its structure, its capacity, etc.), the undertaking which has allegedly granted
         the aid took into consideration the economic factors appropriate to the basis of its decision and the parameters of its investment
         (its cost, its prospects of profitability, the risks generated, etc.). For example, it should be asked whether the extent
         of the costs borne by La Poste was normal. There would be State aid only if the answer to that question were no. 
         
            
In the same spirit, Chronopost recalls that the case-law of the Court does not in any way require the prices of the public
         undertaking to be compared with those of its competitors. It is incorrect to conclude that there is State aid simply because
         La Poste charged less for its services than the parent companies of SFMI-Chronopost's competitors. In fact, there would have
         been aid only if La Poste had not required normal remuneration for its services. 
         
            
The appellants also claim that the approach adopted by the Court of First Instance is impracticable. The French Republic submits
         on this point that a private operator which did not enjoy a legal monopoly would never provide itself with a public service
         network comparable with that of La Poste. La Poste, for its part, points out that Ufex and Others themselves maintained before
         the Court of First Instance that  
         the guarantee of a commercial opportunity such as that offered by SFMI, which is conceivable in the world of public service,
         appears completely unrealistic in a competitive sector and that  
         a network such as that of SFMI [that is to say, La Poste] is clearly not a market network. 
         
            
Chronopost also points out both the abstract nature of the solution adopted by the Court of First Instance in the judgment
         under appeal, which in practice would entail finding an ideal undertaking operating in an ideal market, and the difficulties
         which would flow from it with regard to legal certainty. 
         
            
More generally, the appellants observe that in practice the judgment under appeal prevents public monopolies from also operating
         in markets open to competition, thus subjecting them to serious discrimination. 
         
            
By contrast, according to Ufex and Others, in order to determine whether certain transactions are conducted under  
         normal market conditions, a distinction must be drawn between cases where the State acts as an investor or creditor and those where it is operating
         in a competitive market by diversifying the activities of a public undertaking which has a legal monopoly. 
         
            
In the first case, assessing whether  
         normal market conditions obtain does not require the determination of a market price. Where the State does not provide goods or services, it is necessary
         to take account solely of the return on the capital invested and the risks assumed. 
         
            
In the second case, where a public undertaking operating in a reserved sector provides services to its subsidiaries operating
         in a market open to competition, transactions are conducted under  
         normal market conditions only if the payment for such services corresponds to their market price. In that case, it is necessary to employ the parameter
         of the market price, which is normally used by the Commission to establish whether the grant of a State guarantee or the sale
         of public assets (for example, public undertakings, land or factories) involves State aid. It is necessary to take account
         of a market situation  
         exempt from factors connected with the State's particular situation. 
         
            
According to Ufex and Others, that is how the  
          SFEI  judgment should be interpreted. In order to establish whether the logistical and commercial assistance provided by La Poste
         constituted aid to SFMI-Chronopost within the meaning of that judgment, it is necessary to compare the price which the latter
         company paid with the price which one of its competitors would have had to pay to obtain the same services on the market.
         To that end, the services in question could also be assessed not in a completely separate market but within a group operating
         under  
         normal market conditions, thus taking into account the fact that, within such a group, the parent company could adjust its prices in the light of
         a structural policy involving long-term investments. However, in any event, as the Court of First Instance stated in the judgment
         under appeal, such a comparison should be made with a private holding company or a private group of undertakings  
         not operating in a reserved sector, inasmuch as the holder of a legal monopoly is certainly not operating under normal market conditions. 
         
            
In such circumstances, therefore, it is wrong to assess whether there is State aid by reference to the return obtained by
         a parent company operating in a reserved sector. The fact that the parent company enjoys a legal monopoly may indeed affect
         that assessment and give rise to a legitimate concern that a monopoly position of this kind may entail a reduction in costs
         by comparison with the market rate, thereby permitting an artificially high return. 
         
            
In the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance therefore rightly avoided concentrating on the costs borne by the
         public undertaking with the legal monopoly and thus on its profitability, referring instead to the market prices charged for
         the provision of the services in question by a private undertaking operating under normal market conditions and thus without
         a legal monopoly. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
By their first plea, the appellants allege that the Court of First Instance infringed Article 92(1) of the Treaty, by giving
         an incorrect interpretation of the concept of  
         normal market conditions used in the  
          SFEI  judgment. 
         
            
In that regard, the Court of First Instance stated, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the Commission should
         at least have checked that the payment received by La Poste was comparable to that demanded by a private holding company or
         a private group of undertakings not operating in a reserved sector. 
         
            
That assessment, which fails to take account of the fact that an undertaking such as La Poste is in a situation which is very
         different from that of a private undertaking acting under normal market conditions, is flawed in law. 
         
            
La Poste is entrusted with a service of general economic interest within the meaning of Article 90(2) of the EC Treaty (now
         Article 86(2) EC) (see Case C-320/Corbeau  [1993] ECR I-2533, paragraph 15). Such a service essentially consists in the obligation to collect, carry and deliver mail
         for the benefit of all users throughout the territory of the Member State concerned, at uniform tariffs and on similar conditions
         as to quality. 
         
            
To that end, La Poste had to acquire, or was afforded, substantial infrastructures and resources (the  
         postal network), enabling it to provide the basic postal service to all users, even in sparsely populated areas where the tariffs did not
         cover the cost of providing the service in question. 
         
            
Because of the characteristics of the service which the La Poste network must be able to ensure, the creation and maintenance
         of that network are not in line with a purely commercial approach. As was recalled in paragraph above, Ufex and Others
         have indeed accepted that a network such as that available to SFMI-Chronopost is clearly not a market network. Therefore that
         network would never have been created by a private undertaking. 
         
            
Moreover, the provision of logistical and commercial assistance is inseparably linked to the La Poste network, since it consists
         precisely in making available that network which has no equivalent on the market. 
         
            
Accordingly, in the absence of any possibility of comparing the situation of La Poste with that of a private group of undertakings
         not operating in a reserved sector,  
         normal market conditions, which are necessarily hypothetical, must be assessed by reference to the objective and verifiable elements which are available.
         
         
            
In the present case, the costs borne by La Poste in respect of the provision to its subsidiary of logistical and commercial
         assistance can constitute such objective and verifiable elements. 
         
            
On that basis, there is no question of State aid to SFMI-Chronopost if, first, it is established that the price charged properly
         covers all the additional, variable costs incurred in providing the logistical and commercial assistance, an appropriate contribution
         to the fixed costs arising from use of the postal network and an adequate return on the capital investment in so far as it
         is used for SFMI-Chronopost's competitive activity and if, second, there is nothing to suggest that those elements have been
         underestimated or fixed in an arbitrary fashion. 
         
            
In the light of all the foregoing considerations, the Court of First Instance erred in law in interpreting Article 92(1) of
         the Treaty as meaning that the Commission was not entitled to determine whether there was aid to SFMI-Chronopost by reference
         to the costs borne by La Poste but that it should have checked whether the payment received by La Poste  
         was comparable to that demanded by a private holding company or a private group of undertakings not operating in a reserved
         sector, pursuing a structural policy ─ whether general or sectorial ─ and guided by long-term prospects. 
         
            
The first plea must therefore be declared well founded and the judgment under appeal must accordingly be set aside. 
         The second to fifth pleas
            
Since the other pleas raised by the appellants cannot bring about any more extensive review, they do not need to be examined.
         
         Referral of the case back to the Court of First Instance
            
Under the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, if the appeal is well founded, the Court is
         to set aside the decision of the Court of First Instance. It may itself give final judgment in the matter, where the state
         of the proceedings so permits, or refer the case back to the Court of First Instance for judgment. 
         
            
Since the Court of First Instance did not assess the extent to which the payment made by SFMI-Chronopost covered La Poste's
         full costs (see paragraph of the judgment under appeal), the state of the proceedings does not permit the Court of Justice
         to give final judgment in the matter. The case must therefore be referred back to the Court of First Instance and costs must
         be reserved. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT,
hereby: 
         
1.
 Sets aside the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities of December in Case T-613/Ufex and Others  v  
             Commission ; 
            
2.
 Refers the case back to the Court of First Instance; 
            
3.
 Reserves the costs.
            
Rodríguez Iglesias
Puissochet 
Wathelet 
Gulmann
Edward 
Jann 
Skouris
Macken 
Colneric 
von Bahr
Rosas 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on July 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: French.
Top  
 