
Case C-282/P
Caisse fédérale du Crédit mutuel Centre Est Europe (CFCMCEE)
v
Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM)
(Appeal – Article of the Rules of Procedure – Community trade mark – Regulation (EC) No 40/– Article 7(1)(b) and (c) – Refusal to register – Global assessment with regard to the goods and services covered by the application for registration – Goods and services amounting to homogeneous groups – Appeal, in part clearly unfounded and in part clearly inadmissible)
Summary of the Order
1.        Community trade mark – Definition and acquisition of the Community trade mark – Absolute grounds for refusal – Separate examination
            of the grounds for refusal in relation to each of the products or services referred to in the application for registration
            – Duty to state reasons for a refusal of registration – Scope
(Council Regulation No 40/94, Arts 7(1), and 73)
2.        Community trade mark – Definition and acquisition of the Community trade mark – Absolute grounds for refusal – Separate examination
            of the various grounds for refusal – Overlapping of the ambits of the grounds set out in Article 7(1)(b) to (d) of Regulation
            No 40/(Council Regulation No 40/94, Art. 7(1))
1.        An examination of the absolute grounds for refusal set out in Article 7(1) of Regulation No 40/must, first, be carried
         out in relation to each of the goods and services for which trade mark registration is sought and, secondly, the decision
         of the competent authority refusing registration of a trade mark must, in principle, state reasons in respect of each of those
         goods or services.
      
However, the competent authority may use only general reasoning for all the goods and services concerned where the same ground
         of refusal is given for a category or group of goods or services. That power of the competent authority cannot, in particular,
         prejudice the essential requirement for any decision refusing the benefit of a right conferred by Community law to be subject
         to judicial review designed to secure effective protection of that right, that must, accordingly, cover the legality of the
         reasons for the decision.
      
First, such a power extends only to goods and services interlinked in a sufficiently direct and specific way, to the point
         where they form a sufficiently homogeneous category or group of goods or services. Secondly, the mere fact that the goods
         and services concerned are within the same class of the Nice Agreement is not sufficient for a finding that such homogeneity
         exists, as those classes often contain a large variety of goods and services not necessarily interlinked in a sufficiently
         direct and specific way.
      
(see paras 37-40)
2.        Even if there is a degree of overlapping of the respective ambits of the absolute grounds for refusal to register a trade
         mark set out in Article 7(1)(b) to (d) of Regulation No 40/on the Community trade mark, it is nevertheless the case that
         each of the grounds for refusal to register listed in Article 7(1) of that regulation is independent of the others and requires
         separate examination. 
      
The overlapping of the absolute grounds for refusal implies that a word mark descriptive of characteristics of goods or services
         may, on that account, be devoid of any distinctive character in relation to those goods or services, without prejudice to
         other reasons why it may be devoid of distinctive character.
      
(see paras 50, 52)
  
  
ORDER OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
March (*)
      
(Appeal – Article of the Rules of Procedure – Community trade mark – Regulation (EC) No 40/– Article 7(1)(b) and (c) – Refusal to register – Global assessment with regard to the goods and services covered by the application for registration – Goods and services amounting to homogeneous groups – Appeal, in part clearly unfounded and in part clearly inadmissible)
In Case C‑282/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, lodged on July 2009,
Caisse fédérale du Crédit mutuel Centre Est Europe (CFCMCEE), established in Strasbourg (France), represented by P. Greffe and L. Paudrat, avocats,
      
applicant,
the other party to the proceedings being:
Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM), represented by A. Folliard-Monguiral, acting as Agent,
      
defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
composed of E. Levits, President of the Chamber, M. Ilešič (Rapporteur) and M. Berger, Judges,
Advocate General: P. Cruz Villalón,
Registrar: R. Grass,
after hearing the Advocate General,
makes the following
Order
By its appeal, the Caisse fédérale du Crédit mutuel Centre Est Europe (CFCMCEE) seeks to have set aside the judgment of the
         Court of First Instance of the European Communities (now ‘the General Court’) of May in Joined Cases T‑405/and
         T‑406/CFCMCEE v OHIM (P@YWEB CARD and PAYWEB CARD) [2009] ECR II‑(‘the judgment under appeal’), in which the latter partially dismissed its action for the annulment of
         the decisions of the First Board of Appeal of the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs)
         (OHIM) of July (Case R 119/2007‑1) and of September (Case R 120/2007‑1) (‘the contested decisions’) which
         dismissed the application for registration of the signs P@YWEB CARD and PAYWEB CARD as Community trade marks (‘the signs at
         issue’).
      
 Legal context
Council Regulation (EC) No 40/of December on the Community trade mark (OJ L 11, p. 1) was repealed by Council
         Regulation (EC) No 207/of February on the Community trade mark (codified version) (OJ L 78, p. 1), which
         entered into force on April 2009. Nevertheless, the case in the main proceedings remains governed, having regard to the
         time when the facts occurred, by Regulation No 40/94.
      
Article 7(1)(b) and (c) of Regulation No 40/provides:
      
‘The following shall not be registered:
…
(b)      trade marks which are devoid of any distinctive character;
(c)      trade marks which consist exclusively of signs or indications which may serve, in trade, to designate the kind, quality, quantity,
         intended purpose, value, geographical origin or the time of production of the goods or of rendering of the service, or other
         characteristics of the goods or service’.
      
Article of that regulation, concerning the statement of reasons on which decisions are based, provides:
      
‘Decisions of [OHIM] shall state the reasons on which they are based. They shall be based only on reasons or evidence on which
         the parties concerned have had on opportunity to present their comments.’
      
 Background to the dispute
On June 2004, CFCMCEE applied to OHIM for registration as Community trade mark of the signs at issue.
      
The goods and services in respect of which registration of the mark was sought are in Classes 9, 36, and of the Nice Agreement
         of June concerning the International Classification of Goods and Services for the Purposes of the Registration of
         Marks, as revised and amended (‘the Nice Agreement’), and correspond, for each of those classes, to the description included
         in paragraph of the judgment under appeal.
      
By decisions of and January 2005, the OHIM Examiner refused registration of the signs at issue on the basis of Article
         7(1)(b) and (c) of Regulation No 40/94.
      
On March 2005, CFCMCEE submitted observations in response to OHIM’s objections.
      
On and December 2006, the OHIM Examiner confirmed the refusal decisions for the goods and services referred to in the
         applications for registration.
      
On January 2007, CFCMCEE filed an appeal against both of those decisions.
      
The First Board of Appeal of OHIM, by the contested decisions, dismissed those appeals, relying solely on Article 7(1)(b)
         of Regulation No 40/94.
      
CFCMCEE lodged appeals against those decisions before the General Court.
      
 The judgment under appeal
Concerning the meaning of the signs at issue, in the light of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94, the General Court considered,
         in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that those signs are composed of words which individually have a meaning for
         average English-speaking consumers or consumers with an elementary knowledge of English. The General Court adds, at paragraph
         of that judgment, that ‘the combinations “p@yweb” and “payweb”, which may designate a paid-for electronic or computing
         infrastructure, as well as paid-for services supplied in that context, are unlikely to convey to the average consumer the
         impression that the marks sought are unusual or arbitrary’.
      
The General Court held that the Board of Appeal of OHIM was entitled to consider that the relevant English-speaking public
         would readily perceive the signs at issue both individually and as a whole as ‘cards which enable either paid access to a
         computer or electronic communication network such as the internet, or electronic payment in commercial transactions made using
         such a network’ (paragraph of the judgment under appeal).
      
In the context of the assessment of the distinctive character of the signs at issue, the General Court first of all noted,
         in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that ‘the goods and services concerned falling within Classes 9, and of
         the Nice Agreement are very varied and encompass various groups and categories of goods and services’.
      
Next, the General Court noted, in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, that, where the same ground of refusal
         is given for a category or group of goods or services, it was possible to use only general reasoning for all the goods and
         services concerned, but that, none the less, the fact that OHIM is able to use general reasoning must not frustrate the objective
         of the obligation to state reasons under Article EC and the first sentence of Article of Regulation No 40/94. Therefore,
         according to the General Court, it was necessary to examine whether those goods and services are ‘interlinked in a sufficiently
         direct and specific way, to the point where they form a category or group of goods or services sufficiently homogeneous to
         permit OHIM to use general reasoning’. Lastly, the Court, considered that the mere fact that the goods or services in question
         come within the same class of the Nice Agreement is not sufficient for that purpose, since the classes often contain a wide
         variety of goods or services which are not necessarily interlinked in a sufficiently direct and specific way.
      
With regard to the goods in Class of that agreement, the General Court held, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal,
         that the integrated circuit cards (smart cards), magnetic encoded cards, magnetic or smart identity cards, magnetic or smart
         payment cards, both credit and debit and coin-operated mechanisms for television sets constitute a homogeneous category of
         products ‘by reason of their characteristics and their similar or even identical functions’.
      
In paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, the General Court rejected the plea alleging infringement of Article
         7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/with regard to the goods mentioned in the previous paragraph of this order, but upheld it,
         in paragraphs and of that judgement, for magnetic data media.
      
With regard to credit card services and debit card services within Class of the Nice Agreement, the General Court held,
         thereby upholding the contested decisions, that they are homogeneous in so far as they relate, in particular, to transactions
         carried out at a distance thanks to the availability of a payment card connected to the internet and, more generally, to a
         computer network. Therefore, it acknowledged that those services could be covered by general reasoning and held that the Board
         of Appeal of OHIM was entitled to find that the function of the signs at issue is to represent the services commercially and
         to conclude that the marks lack distinctive character in relation to those services (paragraphs to of the judgment under
         appeal).
      
The General Court then stated, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that there is ‘some connection’ between the other
         services concerned within Class since they have the same purpose, which is to carry out, in the real property, banking,
         financial and computing sectors, commercial transactions including payment by card and, where appropriate, by electronic means.
         Consequently, the General Court acknowledged that it was possible to consider them as coming within a homogeneous group of
         services for the purposes of a general statement of reasons.
      
The General Court next held, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the signs at issue do not have distinctive
         character in relation to those services since they cover ‘the possibility of making, by means of a card, payments at a distance
         or electronically in the context of commercial transactions in the real property, insurance, banking, finance and computing
         sectors’.
      
As regards the services within Class of the Nice Agreement, the General Court held, in paragraph of the judgment under
         appeal, that the telecommunications, communications by computer terminals, sending of telegrams, transmission of telegrams,
         information about telecommunication, electronic mail, message sending, computer-aided transmission of messages and images,
         satellite transmission, transmission of information by internet, intranet and extranet, interactive computerised transmission
         of information services, transmission of information from a computerised databank, international transmission of data between
         computerised network system services and online data transmission services are homogeneous since they all have the function
         of transmission of data via the internet or other communication networks. The Court then held that the signs at issue describe
         a quality of those services, namely the ability to access the internet or other communication networks by means of a card
         and transmit data and carry out other transactions online, for example, in order to make a distance purchase by means of a
         magnetic or microchip card.
      
Finally, having noted, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the contested decisions are based exclusively on
         Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94, the General Court held, in paragraph of that judgment, that the application of
         Article 7(1)(c) of that regulation did not form part of the subject-matter of the case before it.
      
In conclusion, the General Court, first, partially annulled the contested decisions, in so far as they refused the registration
         of the signs at issue as Community trade marks for the following goods and services:
      
–        photographic, cinematographic, signalling, checking (supervision) apparatus and instruments, apparatus for recording, transmission
         or reproduction of sound or images; recording discs, electronic diaries, automatic vending machines, video tapes, bank note
         dispensers, ticket dispensers, dispensers of statements of account and account summaries, cameras (cinematographic cameras),
         video cameras, video cassettes, CD-ROMs, bar code readers, compact discs (audio-video), compact discs (read-only memory),
         false coin detectors, floppy disks, magnetic data media, optical data media, video screens, data processing equipment, intercommunication
         equipment, computer interfaces, computer readers, software (recorded programs), monitors (computer programs), computers, computer
         peripheral devices, recorded computer programs, recorded computer operating programs, radiotelephony sets, audio-receivers
         and video-receivers, telephone apparatus, television apparatus, time recording apparatus, transmitters (telecommunication),
         central processing units (processors) within Class of the Nice Agreement;
      
–        news agencies, in particular in the banking sector, communications by radio, communications by telephone, sending of telegrams,
         transmission of telegrams, broadcasting of television programmes, radio broadcasting, television broadcasting, leasing of
         telecommunications equipment, leasing of equipment for the transmission of messages, leasing of telephones, cellular telephone
         communication, telephone services within Class of the Nice Agreement.
      
Secondly, the General Court dismissed the actions in relation to the registration of the signs at issue as Community trade
         marks for the following goods and services:
      
–        integrated circuit cards (smart cards), magnetic encoded cards, magnetic or smart identity cards, magnetic or smart payment
         cards, both credit and debit, coin-operated mechanisms for television sets within Class of the Nice Agreement;
      
–        credit card services and debit card services within Class of the Nice Agreement;
–        real estate affairs, accident insurance underwriting, factoring, banking affairs, financial affairs, monetary affairs, credit
         bureaux, debt collection agencies, financial analysis, insurance underwriting, lease-purchase financing, real estate appraisal,
         issue of tokens of value, provident funds, mutual funds and investment of capital, guarantees, exchanging money, cheque verification,
         issuing of travellers’ cheques, financial consultancy, insurance brokerage, housing agents, stocks and bonds brokerage, deposits
         of valuables, safe deposit services, savings banks, financial evaluation and assessments (insurance, banking, real estate),
         fiduciary, financing services, financial information (insurance, banking, real estate), capital investment services, electronic
         transfer of funds, financial management, financial information, rent collection, health insurance underwriting, marine insurance
         underwriting, mortgage loans, financial transactions, monetary transactions, financial sponsorship, loans (financing), banking,
         life insurance underwriting, management of securities accounts, online financial information services, computerised interactive
         financial information services, excluding, for all the services set out in the trade mark applications, healthcare services
         and medical technology by third-party payers within Class of the Nice Agreement, in so far as the provision of those services
         requires or involves the use of a card;
      
–        telecommunications, news agencies, in particular in the banking sector, communications by radio, communications by telephone,
         broadcasting of television programmes, radio broadcasting, television broadcasting, leasing of telecommunications equipment,
         leasing of equipment for the transmission of messages, leasing of telephones, cellular telephone communication, telephone
         services, transmission of information by internet, intranet and extranet, interactive computerised transmission of information
         services, transmission of information from a computerised databank, international transmission of data between computerised
         network systems services, online data transmission, excluding, for all the services set out in the trade mark applications,
         healthcare services and medical technology by third-party payers within Class of the Nice Agreement, in so far as the provision
         of those services requires or involves the use of a card.
      
 Forms of order sought by the parties
By its appeal, CFCMCEE asks the Court to set aside in part the judgment under appeal and to order OHIM to pay the costs.
      
OHIM asks the Court to dismiss the appeal as being inadmissible or, at the very least, as being unfounded and to order CFCMCEE
         to pay the costs.
      
 The appeal
Pursuant to Article of its Rules of Procedure, where the appeal is clearly inadmissible in whole or in part or clearly
         unfounded, the Court may at any time, acting on a report from the Judge-Rapporteur and after hearing the Advocate General,
         dismiss it in whole or in part by reasoned order.
      
 Arguments of the parties
In the context of the first of the two pleas that it puts forward in support of its appeal, CFCMCEE claims that the General
         Court infringed Article of Regulation No 40/by confirming the contested decisions with regard to the refusal to register
         the signs at issue for the following goods and services:
      
–        magnetic or smart identity cards within Class of the Nice Agreement;
–        real estate affairs, accident insurance underwriting, debt collection agencies, financial analysis, insurance underwriting,
         real estate appraisal, issue of tokens of value, provident funds, exchanging money, cheque verification, issuing of travellers’
         cheques, financial consultancy, insurance brokerage, housing agents, stocks and bonds brokerage, deposits of valuables, safe
         deposit services, financial evaluation and assessments (insurance, banking, real estate), financial information (insurance,
         banking, real estate), financial management, financial information, rent collection, health insurance underwriting, marine
         insurance underwriting, life insurance underwriting, online financial information services, computerised interactive financial
         information services within Class of that agreement;
      
–        communications by computer terminals, sending of telegrams, information about telecommunication, electronic mail, message
         sending, computer aided transmission of messages and images, satellite transmission within Class of that agreement.
      
CFCMCEE states in that regard that the Board of Appeal of OHIM merely assessed the distinctive character of the signs at issue
         in relation to the goods and services concerned, globally, without giving reasons for its decision in relation to each of
         the goods and services referred to.
      
However, as those goods and services do not constitute a homogenous group, the decisions at issue and the judgment under appeal
         contain clearly insufficient statements of reasons in infringement of Article of Regulation No 40/94.
      
According to CFCMCEE, goods and services are homogenous only if they share the same character and purpose. If those two cumulative
         criteria are not satisfied, which is the position in the present case, general reasoning is excluded.
      
By its second plea, relating to the infringement of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/concerning integrated circuit cards
         (smart cards), magnetic encoded cards, magnetic or smart identity cards, magnetic or smart payment cards, both credit and
         debit, coin-operated mechanisms for television sets within Class of the Nice Agreement, CFCMCEE claims that the General
         Court inferred the lack of distinctive character of the signs at issue from their descriptive character. As a result, the
         General Court incorrectly interpreted paragraph of the judgment in Case C‑304/P Eurohypo v OHIM [2008] ECR I‑3297, according to which each of the grounds for refusal to register listed in Article 7(1)(b) to (d) of that
         regulation is independent of the others and must be examined separately.
      
According to OHIM, where the same ground of refusal is given for a category or group of goods or services, the competent authority
         may use only general reasoning for all the goods and services concerned. OHIM states, furthermore, that CFCMCEE confuses the
         question of the homogeneous character of the categories of goods and services and that of the meaning (and lack of distinctive
         character) of the marks which are the subject of an application for registration where they are examined in the light of each
         of those categories. However, only the first question is relevant in the context of the examination of a plea alleging infringement
         of the first sentence of Article of Regulation No 40/94. The second question is relevant only in the context of the examination
         of a plea alleging infringement of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94.
      
Furthermore, OHIM considers as manifestly unfounded the argument put forward by CFCMCEE according to which goods and services
         are homogeneous, that being a necessary condition for the use of general reasoning for a refusal to register, only if they
         share the same character and purpose. CFCMCEE fails to show that the criteria relating to character and purpose must be cumulatively
         satisfied. In any event, the General Court took into consideration both the character and purposes of the goods concerned.
      
Finally, OHIM contends that, as to the remainder, CFCMCEE’s appeal is inadmissible in the absence of inaccuracy of the General
         Court’s findings of fact.
      
 Findings of the Court
As the Court has already held, first, an examination of the absolute grounds for refusal must be carried out in relation to
         each of the goods and services for which trade mark registration is sought and, secondly, the decision of the competent authority
         refusing registration of a trade mark must, in principle, state reasons in respect of each of those goods or services (see,
         by analogy, Case C‑239/BVBA Management, Training en Consultancy [2007] ECR I‑1455, paragraph 34).
      
However, with regard to that last requirement, the Court has stated that the competent authority may use only general reasoning
         for all of the goods and services concerned where the same ground of refusal is given for a category or group of goods or
         services (BVBA Management, Training en Consultancy, paragraph 37).
      
Moreover, that power of the competent authority cannot in particular prejudice the essential requirement for any decision
         refusing the benefit of a right conferred by Community law to be subject to judicial review which is designed to secure effective
         protection for that right and which, accordingly, must cover the legality of the reasons for the decision (see, to that effect,
         BVBA Management, Training en Consultancy, paragraph and case-law cited).
      
In the present case, it is apparent from paragraph of the judgment under appeal, first, that the General Court correctly
         inferred from that case-law that such a power extends only to goods and services which are interlinked in a sufficiently direct
         and specific way, to the point where they form a sufficiently homogeneous category or group of goods or services. Secondly,
         it was correct to find that the mere fact that the goods and services concerned are within the same class of the Nice Agreement
         is not sufficient for a finding that such homogeneity exists, as those classes often contain a large variety of goods and
         services which are not necessarily interlinked in a sufficiently direct and specific way.
      
Having held, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that defective reasoning constitutes a ground involving a question
         of public order, the General Court determined, in paragraphs to of that judgment, whether the Board of Appeal had examined
         and provided an adequate statement of reasons in relation to the lack of distinctive character of the signs at issue for the
         goods and services for which the registration of those signs as Community trade marks was refused.
      
Concerning goods within Class of the Nice Agreement in respect of which the applicant seeks to have the judgment under appeal
         set aside, the General Court held, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that, by reason of their characteristics
         and their similar or even identical functions, they constitute a sufficiently homogeneous group to permit OHIM to use general
         reasoning.
      
Likewise, concerning the services within Class of that agreement in respect of which the applicant seeks to have the judgment
         under appeal set aside, the General Court held, in paragraph of that judgment, that those services all share one characteristic
         or purpose, which is to carry out commercial transactions including payment by card and, where appropriate, by electronic
         means, so that it is possible to regard them as coming within a homogeneous group of services for the purposes of a general
         statement of reasons.
      
Finally, concerning the services within Class of that agreement in respect of which the applicant seeks to have the judgment
         under appeal set aside, the General Court held, in paragraph of that judgment, that they fall within a homogeneous group
         of services directly connected with the field of computing and the internet and that they all have the ability to access the
         internet or other communication networks by means of a card and carry out data transmission and other transactions online,
         such as distance purchases and payments.
      
Therefore, it is necessary to reject as manifestly unfounded CFCMCEE’s claim made in the context of the first plea that the
         General Court infringed Article of Regulation No 40/by failing to provide adequate reasoning for its finding that the
         goods and services in respect of which the applicant seeks to have the judgment under appeal set aside are sufficiently homogeneous.
      
It is also necessary to reject as manifestly unfounded CFCMCEE’s claim made in the context of the first plea that the General
         Court based that finding on wrong criteria. It is in no way apparent from the case-law noted in paragraph of the judgment
         under appeal that the relevant criteria for determining whether the goods and services are homogeneous are cumulative and
         that they are limited to the character and purposes thereof. Therefore, as is apparent from the grounds of the judgment under
         appeal noted in paragraphs to of the present judgment, the General Court was correct to take account, for the purposes
         of assessing whether the goods and services concerned are homogeneous, in particular their characteristics, their essential
         qualities and their purposes.
      
To the extent that, in the context of the first plea, CFCMCEE calls in question the findings of the General Court in connection
         with that assessment, it must be noted that, under Article EC and the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of
         the Court of Justice, an appeal lies on points of law only. The General Court has exclusive jurisdiction to find and appraise
         the relevant facts and to assess the evidence. The appraisal of those facts and the assessment of that evidence thus do not,
         save where they distort the evidence, constitute a point of law which is subject, as such, to review by the Court of Justice
         on appeal (see, inter alia, Case C‑214/P Rossi v OHIM [2006] ECR I‑7057, paragraph 26).
      
Since no distortion of the facts or evidence submitted to the General Court has been invoked with regard to those findings,
         the first plea, in so far as it criticises those findings, must be rejected as manifestly unfounded.
      
It follows that the first plea must be rejected as in part manifestly unfounded and in part manifestly inadmissible.
      
Concerning the second plea, it should be noted that it is apparent from paragraph of the judgment in Eurohydro v OHIM that even if there is a degree of overlap between the respective scope of the absolute grounds for refusal to register a
         trade mark set out in Article 7(1)(b) to (d) of Regulation No 40/94, it is nevertheless the case that, according to established
         case-law, each of the grounds for refusal to register listed in Article 7(1) of that regulation is independent of the others
         and requires separate examination.
      
In the present case, the General Court first of all examined, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, whether
         there is a ground for refusal to register inferred from Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94, by noting the legal basis
         and the principles inferable from the case-law relating to the distinctive character of a trade mark. Next, it analysed, in
         paragraphs to of that judgment, the perception of the signs at issue by the relevant public. Following that analysis,
         the General Court concluded that the Board of Appeal was entitled to hold, in essence, that those signs, assessed as a whole,
         were not unusual or arbitrary and that the relevant English-speaking public would immediately perceive them, both individually
         and as a whole, as denoting cards which enable either paid access to a computer or electronic communication network such as
         the internet, or electronic payment in commercial transactions made using such a network. Finally, the General Court examined,
         in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, the distinctive character of the signs at issue in relation to the goods
         within Class of the Nice Agreement, in respect of which the applicant seeks to have the judgment under appeal set aside.
      
As the General Court noted in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the overlap between the absolute grounds for refusal
         implies, in particular, that a word mark which is descriptive of characteristics of goods or services may, on that account,
         be devoid of any descriptive character in relation to those goods or services, without prejudice to other reasons why it may
         be devoid of distinctive character (see, by analogy, Eurohypo v OHIM, paragraphs and and case-law cited).
      
Therefore, the General Court was correct to hold, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the signs at issue have
         a descriptive character with regard to the goods concerned, within Class of the Nice Agreement, such that they are devoid
         of distinctive character.
      
Therefore, the second ground of appeal must be dismissed as clearly unfounded.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the appeal must be dismissed in its entirety.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, which applies to appeal proceedings by virtue of Article thereof, the unsuccessful
         party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. As OHIM has applied
         for costs and CFCMCEE has been unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fifth Chamber) hereby orders:
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
2.      The Caisse fédérale du Crédit mutuel Centre Est Europe shall pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 