
Avis juridique important
|
61987JJudgment of the Court of February 1989.  -  Commission of the European Communities v Council of the European Communities.  -  Temporary importation of containers - Action for annulment - Legal basis.  -  Case 275/87.  
European Court reports Page Pub.RJ Page Pub somm 
Summary
Parties
Operative part
Keywords
++++EEC Treaty - Article - Scope - Use of Article to regulate, under temporary importation arrangements which can be established on the the basis of other provisions of the Treaty, the use of containers in internal traffic - Unlawful  ( EEC Treaty, Art . 235; Council Regulation No 2096/)  
Summary
It follows from the very wording of Article that its use as a legal basis for a measure is justified only if no other provision of the Treaty gives the Community institutions the necessary power to adopt that measure ( see judgment of March in Case 45/(( )) ECR ).  No such justification is available since it involves the insertion into a regulation introducing temporary importation arrangements for containers and capable of adoption on the basis of Articles and of the Treaty of a provision regulating the use of such containers in internal traffic . In fact it is sufficient to establish that that legislation is an essential part of the arrangements for the temporary importation of containers and cannot be divorced from it having regard to the basis for its adoption .  
Parties
In Case 275/Commission of the European Communities, represented by its Legal Adviser, Peter Gilsdorf, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of Georgios Kremlis, a member of its Legal Department, Wagner Centre, Kirchberg,  applicant,  v  Council of the European Communities, represented by Raffaello Fornasier, Director, and Bernhard Schloh, an Adviser in the Council' s Legal Department, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of Joerg Kaeser, Manager of the Legal Directorate of the European Investment Bank, boulevard Konrad Adenauer,  defendant,  APPLICATION for a declaration that Council Regulation No 2096/of July on the temporary importation of containers ( Official Journal 1987, L 196, p . ) is void,  THE COURT  composed of : O . Due, President, R . Joliet and T . F . O' Higgins, ( Presidents of Chambers ), Sir Gordon Slynn, G . F . Mancini, F . A . Schockweiler and G . C . Rodríguez Iglesias, Judges,  ( the grounds of the judgment are not reproduced )  hereby :  
Operative part
( 1)Declares void Council Regulation No 2096/of July on the temporary importation of containers;  ( 2)Declares that the effects of that regulation shall continue to operate until such time as the measures which the Council is required to adopt in order to comply with this judgment have entered into force;  ( ) Orders the Council to pay the costs .  
Top  
 