
Case C-418/Praktiker Bau- und Heimwerkermärkte AG
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Bundespatentgericht)
(Trade marks –– Directive 89/104/EEC –– Trade marks in respect of services –– Registration –– Services provided in connection with retail trade –– Specification of content of services –– Similarity between the services in question and goods or other services)
Opinion of Advocate General Léger delivered on January Judgment of the Court (Second Chamber), July Summary of the Judgment
1.     Approximation of laws — Trade marks — Directive 89/— Trade marks in respect of services — Concept of ‘services’ — Community
            concept — Uniform interpretation
(Council Directive 89/104)
2.     Approximation of laws — Trade marks — Directive 89/— Trade marks in respect of services — Concept of ‘services’ — Retail
            trade in goods — Included — Requirements for registration
(Council Directive 89/104, Art. 2)
1.     It falls to the Court to supply a uniform interpretation of the concept of ‘services’ within the meaning of Directive 89/to approximate the laws of the Member States relating to trade marks.
      
Determination of the nature and content of the service eligible for protection by a registered trade mark is subject, not
         to the provisions on registration procedures, in regard to which the Member States retain full freedom, but to the substantive
         conditions for acquiring the right conferred by the trade mark. Moreover, if the concept of ‘services’ were a matter for the
         Member States, conditions for the registration of service trade marks could vary according to the national legislation concerned.
         Therefore, the objective that acquisition of the right in the trade mark should be subject to ‘conditions … identical’ in
         all Member States would not be attained.
      
(see paras 30-33)
2.     The concept of ‘services’ within the meaning of Directive 89/to approximate the laws of the Member States relating to
         trade marks covers services provided in connection with retail trade in goods. No overriding reason based on the directive
         or on general principles of Community law precludes those services from being covered by the concept of ‘services’ within
         the meaning of the directive or, therefore, the trader from having the right to obtain, through the registration of his trade
         mark, protection of that mark as an indication of the origin of the services provided by him.
      
For the purposes of registration of a trade mark for such services, it is not necessary to specify in detail the service(s)
         in question. However, details must be provided with regard to the goods or types of goods to which those services relate.
         
      
(see paras 35, 39, 52, operative part 1-2)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Trade marks – Directive 89/104/EEC – Trade marks in respect of services – Registration – Services provided in connection with retail trade – Specification of content of services – Similarity between the services in question and goods or other services)
In Case C-418/02,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Bundespatentgericht (Germany), made by decision of October
         2002, received at the Court on November 2002, in the proceedings
      
Praktiker Bau- und Heimwerkermärkte AG,
 
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, C. Gulmann (Rapporteur), R. Schintgen, N. Colneric and J.N. Cunha
         Rodrigues, Judges,
      
Advocate General: P. Léger,
Registrar: M. Múgica Arzamendi, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on July 2004,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Praktiker Bau- und Heimwerkermärkte AG, by M. Schaeffer, Rechtsanwalt,
–       the French Government, by G. de Bergues and A. Bodard‑Hermant, acting as Agents,
–       the Austrian Government, by E. Riedl, acting as Agent,
–       the United Kingdom Government, by K. Manji, acting as Agent, and M. Tappin, Barrister,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by N.B. Rasmussen and S. Fries, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 2005,
gives the following
Judgment
The reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles 2, 4(1)(b) and 5(1)(b) of First Council Directive
         89/104/EEC of December to approximate the laws of the Member States relating to trade marks (OJ L 40, p. 1, ‘the
         directive’).
      
That reference was made in proceedings between Praktiker Bau- und Heimwerkermärkte AG (‘Praktiker Märkte’) and the Deutsches
         Patent- und Markenamt (German Patent and Trade Mark Office) concerning the registration of a trade mark in respect of services
         provided in connection with retail trade.
      
 Law
Article of the directive provides:
‘A trade mark may consist of any sign capable of being represented graphically, particularly words, including personal names,
         designs, letters, numerals, the shape of goods or of their packaging, provided that such signs are capable of distinguishing
         the goods or services of one undertaking from those of other undertakings.’
      
Article 4(1) of that directive states:
‘A trade mark shall not be registered or, if registered, shall be liable to be declared invalid:
(a)      if it is identical with an earlier trade mark, and the goods or services for which the trade mark is applied for or is registered
         are identical with the goods or services for which the earlier trade mark is protected;
      
(b)      if because of its identity with, or similarity to, the earlier trade mark and the identity or similarity of the goods or services
         covered by the trade marks, there exists a likelihood of confusion on the part of the public, which includes the likelihood
         of association with the earlier trade mark.’
      
Article 5(1) provides:
‘The registered trade mark shall confer on the proprietor exclusive rights therein. The proprietor shall be entitled to prevent
         all third parties not having his consent from using in the course of trade:
      
(a)      any sign which is identical with the trade mark in relation to goods or services which are identical with those for which
         the trade mark is registered; 
      
(b)      any sign where, because of its identity with, or similarity to, the trade mark and the identity or similarity of the goods
         or services covered by the trade mark and the sign, there exists a likelihood of confusion on the part of the public, which
         includes the likelihood of association between the sign and the trade mark.’
      
The 12th recital in the preamble to the directive states that it is necessary that its provisions are entirely consistent
         with those of the Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, signed at Paris on March 1883, last revised at
         Stockholm on July and amended on September (United Nations Treaty Series, vol. 828, No 11851, p. 305, ‘the Paris Convention’), which is binding on all the Member States of the Community.
      
The Nice Agreement concerning the International Classification of Goods and Services for the Purposes of the Registration
         of Marks of June 1957, as revised and amended (‘the Nice Agreement’), was concluded on the basis of Article of the Paris
         Convention, which reserves for the countries of the Union the right to make separately between themselves special agreements
         for the protection of industrial property.
      
In the classification which it establishes (‘the Nice Classification’), Class 35, relating to services, is headed as follows:
         
      
‘Advertising;
business management;
business administration;
office functions.’
The Explanatory Note relating to that class states:
‘...
This Class includes, in particular:
–       the bringing together, for the benefit of others, of a variety of goods (excluding the transport thereof), enabling customers
         to conveniently view and purchase those goods;
      
…
This Class does not include, in particular:
–       activity of an enterprise the primary function of which is the sale of goods, i.e., of a so-called commercial enterprise;
…’
Article of the Nice Agreement states:
‘(1)      Subject to the requirements prescribed by this Agreement, the effect of the Classification shall be that attributed to it
         by each country of the Special Union. In particular, the Classification shall not bind the countries of the Special Union
         in respect of either the evaluation of the extent of the protection afforded to any given mark or the recognition of service
         marks. 
      
(2)      Each of the countries of the Special Union reserves the right to use the Classification either as a principal or as a subsidiary
         system. 
      
(3)      The competent Office of the countries of the Special Union shall include in the official documents and publications relating
         to registrations of marks the numbers of the classes of the Classification to which the goods or services for which the mark
         is registered belong. 
      
…’
 The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Praktiker Märkte filed for registration with the Deutsches Patent- und Markenamt the mark Praktiker in relation to, inter
         alia, the service described as ‘retail trade in building, home improvement, gardening and other consumer goods for the do-it-yourself
         sector’.
      
The Deutsches Patent- und Markenamt rejected that application. It considered that the concept of ‘retail trade’ claimed did
         not denote independent services having autonomous economic significance. That concept related only to the distribution of
         goods as such. The economic activities which formed the core of goods distribution, in particular the purchase and sale of
         goods, were not services for which a trade mark could be registered. Trade-mark protection could be achieved only by applying
         for registration of a trade mark in respect of the goods distributed in each case.
      
Praktiker Märkte brought an appeal before the Bundespatentgericht (Federal Patents Court) against the decision rejecting its
         application. It argued inter alia that the economic trend towards a service society necessitated a re‑appraisal of retail
         trade as a service. The consumer’s purchasing decision would increasingly be influenced not only by the availability and price
         of a product, but also by other aspects such as the variety and assortment of goods, their presentation, the service provided
         by staff, advertising, image and the location of the store, etc. Such services provided in connection with retail trade enabled
         retailers to be distinguishable from their competitors. Such services ought to be eligible for protection by service trade
         marks. Trade‑mark protection was now accepted in relation to the services provided by a retailer, not only by the Office for
         Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (‘OHIM’), but also by the majority of Member States. A uniform
         assessment of this question within the Community was imperative.
      
Against that background, the Bundespatentgericht decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to the
         Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Does retail trade in goods constitute a service within the meaning of Article of the directive?
If the answer to this question is in the affirmative:
2.      To what extent must the content of such services provided by a retailer be specified in order to guarantee the certainty of
         the subject‑matter of trade-mark protection that is required in order to:
      
(a)      fulfil the function of the trade mark, as defined in Article of the directive, namely, to distinguish the goods or services
         of one undertaking from those of other undertakings, and
      
(b)      define the scope of protection of such a trade mark in the event of a conflict?
3.      To what extent is it necessary to define the scope of similarity (Article 4(1)(b) and Article 5(1)(b) of the directive) between
         such services provided by a retailer and 
      
(a)      other services provided in connection with the distribution of goods, or
(b)      the goods sold by that retailer?’
The referring court points out that Article of the directive does not contain any definitions of the terms ‘goods’ and ‘services’
         which it uses.
      
In that court’s view, the core of the independent activity of a retailer, by which he comes into direct competition with other
         traders and for which separate protection of a service trade mark could be necessary, remains the specific activities of a
         trader which make distribution of goods possible, without being confined to carrying out such distribution. They include bringing
         together goods from a variety of undertakings to form a range and offering them for sale from a single distribution entity,
         whether by way of traditional retailing, mail order or e-commerce. Even if those services are not charged separately to individual
         customers, they can nevertheless be considered to be provided for remuneration, through the profit margin.
      
However, in the opinion of the Bundespatentgericht, for the function of the trade mark as an indication of origin to be fulfilled,
         the subject‑matter of the protection conferred must be determined with sufficient precision. General concepts such as ‘retail
         services’ do not satisfy the requirement of certainty in relation to exclusive rights. Restrictions confining such protection
         only to the goods distributed do not overcome the indeterminate nature of the words ‘retail trade’ in the individual sector
         concerned. They leave open the question of what services are covered, apart from the mere sale of those goods. Similar objections
         can be raised with regard to the provision of details relating to the type of sales location, such as ‘department store’ or
         ‘supermarket’, for example.
      
The need for a restriction, when registering trade marks, of the content of ‘services provided by a retailer’ applies to an
         even greater extent to the interpretation of ‘likelihood of confusion’ in Article 4(1)(b) and Article 5(1)(b) of the directive.
         Even a reasonable specification, at the time of the registration procedure, of the content of ‘services provided by a retailer’
         would ultimately prove insufficient if the service trade mark registered were to be granted a scope of protection which was
         not capable of review as a result of a wide interpretation of ‘similarity of [the] goods or services’. 
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 The first two questions
By its first two questions, which must be considered together, the Bundespatentgericht seeks in essence to ascertain whether
         the concept of ‘services’ referred to by the directive, in particular in Article 2, is to be interpreted as including services
         provided in connection with retail trade in goods and, if so, whether the registration of a service trade mark in respect
         of such services is subject to the specification of certain details.
      
 Observations submitted to the Court
Praktiker Märkte submits that retail trade in goods constitutes a service within the meaning of the directive. A trade mark
         protecting it as a service is capable of fulfilling the function of the trade mark as an indication of origin. It is not necessary
         to specify the content of the services provided in order to determine the subject‑matter of protection.
      
The French Government stated at the hearing that it now accepts that certain specific services ancillary to retailing, the
         content of which would have to be specified, may constitute services separate from selling and may therefore be eligible for
         trade‑mark protection.
      
The Austrian Government submits that the central core of retail trade, namely the sale of goods, is not a service capable
         of forming the subject‑matter, as such, of trade‑mark protection, as is confirmed, in its view, by the Explanatory Note to
         Class of the Nice Classification. Only services provided over and above that central core, the content of which would have
         to be specified, could give rise to registration of a service trade mark. 
      
The United Kingdom Government submits that a trade mark can properly be registered for a service if consumers are provided,
         by reference to that trade mark, with an identifiable service over and above mere trade in goods. The Explanatory Note to
         Class in the Nice Classification confirms that mere sale of goods does not constitute an identifiable service, but that
         aspects of the retail activity relating to the bringing together, for the benefit of others, of a variety of goods, enabling
         customers to conveniently view and purchase those goods, can constitute a service eligible for protection by a trade mark.
         For the purpose of registering such a trade mark, the aspects of the activity constituting the service as well as the sector(s)
         of retail activity covered should be specifically stated in order to guarantee the certainty of the subject‑matter of protection.
         
      
The Commission submits that retail trade in goods constitutes a service within the meaning of the directive where the conditions
         of Article EC are satisfied. Protection by a service trade mark may apply to any activities which are not pure selling.
         It is not possible to list exhaustively all the services in question. They may include arrangement of the goods, the site,
         general ease of use, the attitude and commitment of staff, and customer care. 
      
In the Commission’s view, the question of specification of the content of services arises, from a formal legal point of view,
         with respect to registration of the trade mark. That question is a matter for the Member States, as is clear from the fifth
         recital in the preamble to the directive, according to which it is for Member States to determine the provisions of procedure
         concerning registration, namely, for example, the form of registration procedures. In that regard, only Class of the Nice
         Classification can be contemplated for the registration of a trade mark for retail trade. The Nice Agreement does not, for
         its part, lay down any conditions concerning description of the service. 
      
 Reply of the Court
It follows from the first recital in the preamble to the directive that the purpose of the latter is to approximate the laws
         of the Member States in order to remedy disparities which may impede the free movement of goods and freedom to provide services
         and may distort competition within the common market.
      
Under Article 1, the directive applies to ‘every trade mark in respect of goods or services’.
It does not contain a definition of ‘services’, which Article EC describes as ‘normally provided for remuneration’.
Nor does it specify the conditions to which registration of a trade mark for a service is subject, where such registration
         is provided for by national legislation.
      
In that regard, it should be noted that the fifth recital in the preamble to the directive states that Member States remain
         free to fix the provisions of procedure concerning the registration of trade marks, in order, for example, to determine the
         form of registration procedures. The seventh recital nevertheless emphasises that attainment of the objectives sought by the
         approximation of laws requires that the conditions for obtaining a registered trade mark be, in general, identical in all
         Member States.
      
However, determination of the nature and content of the service eligible for protection by a registered trade mark is subject,
         not to the provisions on registration procedures, but to the substantive conditions for acquiring the right conferred by the
         trade mark.
      
If the concept of ‘services’ were a matter for the Member States, conditions for the registration of service trade marks could
         vary according to the national legislation concerned. The objective that acquisition of the right in the trade mark should
         be subject to ‘conditions … identical’ in all Member States would not be attained. 
      
It therefore falls to the Court to supply a uniform interpretation of the concept of ‘services’ within the meaning of the
         directive (see, by analogy, Joined Cases C-414/to C-416/Zino Davidoff and Levi Strauss [2001] ECR I‑8691, paragraphs and 43).
      
In that regard, it should be noted that the objective of retail trade is the sale of goods to consumers. That trade includes,
         in addition to the legal sales transaction, all activity carried out by the trader for the purpose of encouraging the conclusion
         of such a transaction. That activity consists, inter alia, in selecting an assortment of goods offered for sale and in offering
         a variety of services aimed at inducing the consumer to conclude the abovementioned transaction with the trader in question
         rather than with a competitor.
      
No overriding reason based on the directive or on general principles of Community law precludes those services from being
         covered by the concept of ‘services’ within the meaning of the directive or, therefore, the trader from having the right to
         obtain, through the registration of his trade mark, protection of that mark as an indication of the origin of the services
         provided by him.
      
That consideration is illustrated by the Explanatory Note to Class of the Nice Classification, according to which that
         class includes ‘the bringing together, for the benefit of others, of a variety of goods … enabling customers to conveniently
         view and purchase those goods’.
      
With regard to Council Regulation (EC) No 40/of December on the Community trade mark (OJ L 11, p. 1), it must
         be observed that OHIM now accepts that the services provided by retail undertakings are, as such, eligible for registration
         as Community trade marks and that they will fall under Class of the Nice Classification (see Communication No 3/of the
         President of [OHIM] of March concerning the registration of Community trade marks for retail services). 
      
Moreover, it must be noted that, firstly, all the parties concerned which have submitted observations to the Court have accepted
         that at least certain services provided in connection with retail trade can constitute services within the meaning of the
         directive and that, secondly, according the information before the Court, such an analysis underlies a practice now widely
         adopted in the Member States.
      
Consequently, it must be concluded that the concept of ‘services’ within the meaning of the directive includes services provided
         in connection with retail trade in goods.
      
The question arises as to whether, in the particular case of the retail trade, the concept of ‘services’ within the meaning
         of the directive needs further specification.
      
In that regard, in the observations submitted to the Court, it was maintained that the services eligible for protection as
         retail services should be identified in a way which distinguishes them from services which, being closely connected with the
         sale of goods, could not give rise to registration of a trade mark. It was pointed out, moreover, that the application for
         registration of the trade mark should specify in detail the service(s) for which the applicant seeks protection.
      
It is argued that such details are necessary, in particular, to safeguard the essential function of the trade mark, namely,
         as the guarantee of the identity of the origin of the goods or services covered by the trade mark, and to prevent trade marks
         for retail services from being afforded over‑wide and indeterminate protection.
      
The difficulty of the questions thus raised is illustrated by the different answers proposed by the parties which submitted
         observations and by the information available to the Court regarding the current practices of the Member States.
      
For the reasons set out below, there is no need to rely on a definition of ‘retail services’ for the purposes of the directive
         which is more restrictive than that which follows from the description contained in paragraph of this judgment.
      
It must first be stated that any distinction between the various categories of services provided with the sale of goods which
         involved a more restrictive definition of ‘retail services’ would prove artificial in the light of the reality of the important
         economic sector represented by retail trade. It would inevitably raise difficulties both as regards the general definition
         of the criteria to be adopted and as regards the application of those criteria in practice.
      
Admittedly, a more restrictive definition of ‘retail services’ would reduce the protection afforded to the proprietor of the
         trade mark, so that questions concerning the application of Articles 4(1) and 5(1) of the directive would arise less often.
      
However, that is not sufficient to justify a restrictive interpretation.
There is nothing to indicate that any problems resulting from the registration of trade marks for retail services could not
         be resolved on the basis of the two relevant provisions of the directive, as they have been interpreted by the Court. In that
         regard, it should be recalled that, according to the Court’s case‑law, the likelihood of confusion must be assessed globally,
         taking into account all the factors relevant to the circumstances of the case (see Case C-251/SABEL [1997] ECR I‑6191, paragraph 22, and Case C-39/Canon [1998] ECR I-5507, paragraph 16). In the context of that global assessment, it is possible to take into consideration, if
         need be, the particular features of the concept of ‘retail services’ that are connected with its wide scope, having due regard
         to the legitimate interests of all interested parties.
      
In those circumstances, for the purposes of registration of a trade mark covering services provided in connection with retail
         trade, it is not necessary to specify in detail the service(s) for which that registration is sought. To identify those services,
         it is sufficient to use general wording such as ‘bringing together of a variety of goods, enabling customers to conveniently
         view and purchase those goods’. 
      
However, the applicant must be required to specify the goods or types of goods to which those services relate by means, for
         example, of particulars such as those contained in the application for registration filed in the main proceedings (see paragraph
         of this judgment). 
      
Such details will make it easier to apply Articles 4(1) and 5(1) of the directive without appreciably limiting the protection
         afforded to the trade mark. They will also make it easier to apply Article 12(1) of the directive, which states that ‘[a]
         trade mark shall be liable to revocation if, within a continuous period of five years, it has not been put to genuine use
         in the Member State in connection with the … services in respect of which it is registered, and there are no proper reasons
         for non-use’.
      
The answer to the first two questions referred for a preliminary ruling must therefore be that the concept of ‘services’ referred
         to by the directive, in particular in Article 2, covers services provided in connection with retail trade in goods.
      
For the purposes of registration of a trade mark for such services, it is not necessary to specify the actual service(s) in
         question. However, details must be provided with regard to the goods or types of goods to which those services relate.
      
 The third question
By its third question, the referring court seeks, in essence, to ascertain whether the concept of ‘similarity’ referred to
         in Articles 4(1)(b) and 5(1)(b) of the directive, giving rise, in some circumstances, to a likelihood of confusion within
         the meaning of those provisions, must be interpreted by reference to specific restrictive criteria with regard to service
         trade marks protecting services provided in connection with retail trade in goods.
      
It is apparent from the order for reference that, in the main proceedings, the application for registration of the trade mark
         Praktiker in respect of retail services was refused on the ground that the definition claimed, ‘retail trade’, did not denote
         services eligible for registration as a trade mark.
      
The reference for a preliminary ruling does not contain any indication that the referring court could find it necessary to
         rule on the concept of ‘similarity’ referred to in Articles 4(1)(b) and 5(1)(b) of the directive in connection with a likelihood
         of confusion within the meaning of those provisions.
      
Consequently, those provisions, while relevant for the purposes of answering the first two questions, are not relevant in
         the context of the third question.
      
The Court has no jurisdiction to answer questions referred for a preliminary ruling where it is obvious that the interpretation
         of Community law sought bears no relation to the actual facts of the main proceedings or to their purpose, where the problem
         is hypothetical, or where the Court does not have before it the factual or legal material necessary to give a useful answer
         to the questions submitted (see, in particular, Case C-421/Traunfellner [2003] ECR I-11941, paragraph 37). 
      
In those circumstances, the third question referred for a preliminary ruling must be held to be hypothetical in the light
         of the main proceedings and, accordingly, must be declared inadmissible.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      The concept of ‘services’ referred to by First Council Directive 89/104/EEC of December to approximate the laws of
            the Member States relating to trade marks, in particular in Article 2, covers services provided in connection with retail
            trade in goods.
2.      For the purposes of registration of a trade mark for such services, it is not necessary to specify in detail the service(s)
            in question. However, details must be provided with regard to the goods or types of goods to which those services relate.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 