
Case C-294/Andrejs Eglītis
and
Edvards Ratnieks
v
Latvijas Republikas Ekonomikas ministrija
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Augstākās Tiesas Senāts)
(Air transport – Regulation (EC) No 261/– Article 5(3) – Compensation of passengers in the event of cancellation of a flight – Exemption from the obligation to pay compensation in the event of extraordinary circumstances – Implementation, by the air carrier, of all reasonable measures to avoid extraordinary circumstances – Organisation of resources in good time to be able to ensure the operation of the flight after such circumstances have ended)
Summary of the Judgment
Transport – Air transport – Regulation No 261/– Compensation and assistance to passengers in the event of cancellation
            of a flight – Exemption from the obligation to pay compensation in the event of extraordinary circumstances – Implementation,
            by the air carrier, of reasonable measures to avoid extraordinary circumstances
(European Parliament and Council Regulation No 261/2004, Arts 5(3) and 6(1))
Article 5(3) of Regulation No 261/2004, establishing common rules on compensation and assistance to passengers in the event
         of denied boarding and of cancellation or long delay of flights, must be interpreted as meaning that an air carrier, since
         it is obliged to implement all reasonable measures to avoid extraordinary circumstances, must reasonably, at the stage of
         organising the flight, take account of the risk of delay connected to the possible occurrence of such circumstances. It must,
         consequently, provide for a certain reserve time to allow it, if possible, to operate the flight in its entirety once the
         extraordinary circumstances have come to an end. The assessment of the reasonable nature of the measures taken to provide
         for a reserve time so as to prevent, if possible, the delay resulting from extraordinary circumstances leading to cancellation
         of the flight must be carried out not with regard to the delay in relation to the aeroplane’s scheduled departure time, but
         taking account of the delay that may exist at the end of the flight operated in the new conditions to which the extraordinary
         circumstances have given rise. Consequently, that assessment must take account of those secondary risks, insofar as their
         constituent elements are foreseeable and calculable.
      
However, that provision cannot be interpreted as requiring, as a ‘reasonable measure’, provision to be made, generally and
         without distinction, for a minimum reserve time applicable in the same way to all air carriers in all situations when extraordinary
         circumstances arise. The assessment of the ability of the air carrier to operate the programmed flight in its entirety in
         the new conditions resulting from the occurrence of those circumstances must be carried out in such a way as to ensure that
         the length of the required reserve time does not result in the air carrier’s being led to make intolerable sacrifices in the
         light of the capacities of its undertaking at the relevant time. 
      
Article 6(1) of that regulation is not applicable in the context of the assessment of the reasonable nature of measures taken,
         by the air carrier, to provide for a reserve time so as to operate the flight in its entirety. That provision relates to various
         categories of ‘delay’ attributable to the air carrier and not connected with the occurrence of extraordinary circumstances
         that could not have been avoided even if all reasonable measures had been taken.
      
(see paras 32, 34, 36-37, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
May (*)
      
(Air transport – Regulation (EC) No 261/– Article 5(3) – Compensation of passengers in the event of cancellation of a flight – Exemption from the obligation to pay compensation in the event of extraordinary circumstances – Implementation, by the air carrier, of all reasonable measures to avoid extraordinary circumstances – Organisation of resources in good time to be able to ensure the operation of the flight after such circumstances have ended)
In Case C‑294/10,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the Augstākās Tiesas Senāts (Latvia), made by decision of June 2010, received at the Court on June 2010, in the proceedings
      
Andrejs Eglītis,
Edvards Ratnieks
v
Latvijas Republikas Ekonomikas ministrija,
intervening party:
Air Baltic Corporation AS,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, D. Šváby, R. Silva de Lapuerta, E. Juhász and J. Malenovský (Rapporteur),
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: E. Sharpston,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        the Latvijas Republikas Ekonomikas ministrija, by J. Pūce, acting as Agent,
–        the Polish Government, by K. Rokicka, acting as Agent,
–        the United Kingdom Government, by L. Seeboruth, acting as Agent,
–        the European Commission, by A. Sauka and K. Simonsson, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles 5(3) and 6(1) of Regulation (EC) No 261/of the European Parliament and of the Council of February establishing common rules on compensation and assistance
         to passengers in the event of denied boarding and of cancellation or long delay of flights, and repealing Regulation (EEC)
         No 295/(OJ L 46, p. 1).
      
The reference has been made in the course of proceedings between Mr Eglītis and Mr Ratnieks, two passengers on a flight from
         Copenhagen to Riga, and the airline Air Baltic Corporation AS (‘Air Baltic’), following Air Baltic’s refusal to pay compensation
         to the passengers of flight BT 140, scheduled for July 2006, which had been cancelled.
      
 Legal context
Recitals and in the preamble to Regulation No 261/are worded as follows:
      
‘(1)      Action by the Community in the field of air transport should aim, among other things, at ensuring a high level of protection
         for passengers. Moreover, full account should be taken of the requirements of consumer protection in general.
      
(2)      Denied boarding and cancellation or long delay of flights cause serious trouble and inconvenience to passengers.’
Recitals to of Regulation No 261/state:
      
‘(13) Passengers whose flights are cancelled should be able either to obtain reimbursement of their tickets or to obtain re-routing
         under satisfactory conditions, and should be adequately cared for while awaiting a later flight.
      
(14)      As under the Montreal Convention, obligations on operating air carriers should be limited or excluded in cases where an event
         has been caused by extraordinary circumstances which could not have been avoided even if all reasonable measures had been
         taken. Such circumstances may, in particular, occur in cases of political instability, meteorological conditions incompatible
         with the operation of the flight concerned, security risks, unexpected flight safety shortcomings and strikes that affect
         the operation of an operating air carrier.
      
(15)      Extraordinary circumstances should be deemed to exist where the impact of an air traffic management decision in relation to
         a particular aircraft on a particular day gives rise to a long delay, an overnight delay, or the cancellation of one or more
         flights by that aircraft, even though all reasonable measures had been taken by the air carrier concerned to avoid the delays
         or cancellations.’
      
Article of Regulation No 261/2004, headed ‘Cancellation’, provides at paragraph 1: 
      
‘In case of cancellation of a flight, the passengers concerned shall:
(a)      be offered assistance by the operating air carrier in accordance with Article 8; and
(b)      be offered assistance by the operating air carrier in accordance with Article 9(1)(a) and 9(2), as well as, in event of re-routing
         when the reasonably expected time of departure of the new flight is at least the day after the departure as it was planned
         for the cancelled flight, the assistance specified in Article 9(1)(b) and 9(1)(c); and
      
(c)      have the right to compensation by the operating air carrier in accordance with Article 7, unless:
(i)      they are informed of the cancellation at least two weeks before the scheduled time of departure; or
(ii)      they are informed of the cancellation between two weeks and seven days before the scheduled time of departure and are offered
         re-routing, allowing them to depart no more than two hours before the scheduled time of departure and to reach their final
         destination less than four hours after the scheduled time of arrival; or
      
(iii) they are informed of the cancellation less than seven days before the scheduled time of departure and are offered re-routing,
         allowing them to depart no more than one hour before the scheduled time of departure and to reach their final destination
         less than two hours after the scheduled time of arrival.’
      
Article 5(3) of Regulation No 261/provides:
      
‘An operating air carrier shall not be obliged to pay compensation in accordance with Article 7, if it can prove that the
         cancellation is caused by extraordinary circumstances which could not have been avoided even if all reasonable measures had
         been taken.’
      
Article of Regulation No 261/2004, headed ‘Delay’, provides at paragraph 1:
      
‘When an operating air carrier reasonably expects a flight to be delayed beyond its scheduled time of departure:
(a)      for two hours or more in the case of flights of kilometres or less; or
(b)      for three hours or more in the case of all intra-Community flights of more than kilometres and of all other flights
         between and kilometres; or
      
(c)      for four hours or more in the case of all flights not falling under (a) or (b),
passengers shall be offered by the operating air carrier:
(i)      the assistance specified in Article 9(1)(a) and 9(2); and
(ii)      when the reasonably expected time of departure is at least the day after the time of departure previously announced, the assistance
         specified in Article 9(1)(b) and 9(1)(c); and
      
(iii) when the delay is at least five hours, the assistance specified in Article 8(1)(a).’
Article of Regulation No 261/2004, headed ‘Right to compensation’, provides at paragraph 1:
      
‘Where reference is made to this Article, passengers shall receive compensation amounting to:
(a)      EUR for all flights of kilometres or less;
(b)      EUR for all intra-Community flights of more than kilometres, and for all other flights between and kilometres;
(c)      EUR for all flights not falling under (a) or (b).
In determining the distance, the basis shall be the last destination at which the denial of boarding or cancellation will
         delay the passenger’s arrival after the scheduled time.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
On July 2006, Swedish air space in the Malmö region was closed from 20.as a result of failures in the power supply leading
         to a breakdown in radars and air navigation systems. On the same day, the departure of a Copenhagen-Riga flight, chartered
         by Air Baltic, was scheduled for 20.35.
      
The passengers boarded the aeroplane and remained there, awaiting departure, for a little over hours, that is, until approximately
         22.45. At 22.45, the passengers were informed that the flight was cancelled and were therefore asked to leave the aeroplane.
      
Considering that they were entitled, following the cancellation of their flight, to obtain compensation from Air Baltic, two
         passengers, Mr Eglītis and Mr Ratnieks, brought a claim before the Patērētāju tiesību aizsardzības centrs (Consumer Protection
         Office, ‘the Office’).
      
The Office refused their claim. That decision was confirmed by a decision of March of the Latvijas Republikas Ekonomikas
         ministrija (Department of the Economy for the Republic of Latvia, ‘the ministrija’).
      
The appellants in the main proceedings brought an action against the decision of the ministrija, first before the Administratīvā
         rajona tiesa (District Administrative Court), then before the Administratīvā apgabaltiesa (Administrative Court of Appeal).
         As their action was dismissed, they appealed in cassation to the referring court.
      
The Office, the ministrija and the administrative courts of first instance and appeal concluded that Air Baltic was not obliged
         to pay compensation to the appellants under Article 5(3) of Regulation No 261/since cancellation of the flight had to
         be regarded as having occurred in extraordinary circumstances, beyond the airline’s control.
      
The appellants in the main proceedings submit that the reason for the cancellation of the flight was not the closure of Swedish
         air space but rather the expiry of the permitted working hours for the crew of that flight. They do not dispute that the closure
         of Swedish air space, following failures in the power supply, qualifies as ‘extraordinary circumstances’ beyond the airline’s
         control. In their opinion, that event explains only the initial flight delay, namely between 20.and 22.45. The decision
         to cancel the flight was made at 22.because the permitted working hours of the crew were insufficient to complete the flight
         in its entirety.
      
The national court considers that it is possible to take the view that, at 20.35, the time for which departure was scheduled,
         there were extraordinary circumstances, namely, in this instance, the closure of Malmö air space, which were circumstances
         that the operator could not avoid. However, it adds that air carriers do not, in general, usually cancel flights each time
         it is not possible to depart exactly on time. In its view, taking account of the specific features of air transport, resulting
         from the fact that passengers cannot easily find another means of transport or alternative routes and flights and that air
         carriers cannot easily reorganise their resources, particularly at foreign airports, both the carrier and the airport usually
         strive to ensure that, where possible, a programmed flight is operated.
      
Accordingly, the national court asks whether the fact that departure is impossible at exactly the scheduled time is an adequate
         reason for taking a decision to cancel a flight. In particular, it asks whether, where departure at the scheduled time is,
         owing to extraordinary circumstances, impossible for a short time, those circumstances can be grounds for cancelling the flight.
      
The national court therefore asks whether, when it provides that air carriers are released from the obligation to pay compensation
         to travellers provided that all reasonable measures have been taken to avoid any extraordinary circumstances, Article 5(3)
         of Regulation No 261/includes among those measures an obligation for those carriers to organise their resources, including
         their crew, in such a way that flights can be operated over a certain period of time should such circumstances occur.
      
In relation to the definition of that ‘period of time’, the appellants in the main proceedings submit that sufficient resources
         must be set aside to ensure that a flight can be operated at least during a two-hour period following the time originally
         scheduled for its departure. In this respect, their submission before the national court is based upon the provisions of Regulation
         No 261/which lay down the obligations of air carriers in the event of delay. According to Article 6(1)(a) of Regulation
         No 261/2004, when an operating air carrier reasonably expects a flight to be delayed beyond its scheduled time of departure
         for two hours or more, in the case of flights of kilometres or less, passengers are to be offered the assistance provided
         for in that regulation. They conclude that a two-hour delay, in the present case, is ‘normal’, that is to say, that the fact
         that it is impossible to operate a flight during a two-hour period is not, in itself, a circumstance that justifies cancellation
         of that flight.
      
The national court considers that the primary objective of Article 6(1) of Regulation No 261/is not to regulate those
         issues in the way in which the appellants in the main proceedings propose but that it cannot be excluded that that provision
         may have a role to play in the systemic interpretation of Article 5(3) of the regulation.
      
It was in those circumstances that the Augstākās Tiesas Senāts (Supreme Court) decided to stay proceedings and to refer the
         following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Is Article 5(3) of [Regulation No 261/2004] to be interpreted as meaning that an air carrier is required, in order to be found
         to have taken all reasonable measures to avoid extraordinary circumstances, to organise its resources in good time so that
         it is possible to operate a programmed flight once the unforeseen extraordinary circumstances have ceased to obtain, that
         is to say, during a certain period following the scheduled departure time?
      
(2)      If the first question is to be answered in the affirmative, does Article 6(1) of Regulation [No 261/2004] apply for the purpose
         of determining the minimum “reserve time” which the air carrier, when organising its resources at the appropriate time, must
         provide for as a possible foreseeable delay in the event that extraordinary circumstances arise?’
      
 Consideration of the questions referred
By its two questions, which it is appropriate to consider together, the national court asks, in essence, whether Article 5(3)
         of Regulation No 261/must be interpreted in such a way that an air carrier has an obligation, in respect of the reasonable
         measures that it is required to implement in order to guard against extraordinary circumstances, to organise its resources
         in good time in order to provide a certain minimum ‘reserve time’ after the scheduled departure time, so as to be able, if
         possible, to operate the flight after the extraordinary circumstances have come to an end. It asks, in particular, whether
         that ‘reserve time’ may be determined with reference to Article 6(1) of Regulation No 261/2004.
      
As a preliminary point, it should be noted that, under Article 5(1) of Regulation No 261/2004, in the event of cancellation
         of a flight, the passengers concerned are to be offered by the air carrier, on the conditions laid down in that paragraph,
         firstly, assistance in accordance with Article of that regulation, that is, the right to reimbursement or re-routing, secondly,
         free of charge, meals, accommodation and telephone calls as provided for in Article of the regulation and, thirdly, flat-rate
         compensation in accordance with the rules laid down in Article of the regulation, unless they have been informed in good
         time that the flight has been cancelled.
      
However, under Article 5(3) of Regulation No 261/2004, by way of exception to the provisions of Article 5(1), the air carrier
         is released from one of its obligations, that is, the one requiring that passengers be paid compensation, if it can prove
         that the cancellation is caused by extraordinary circumstances which could not have been avoided even if all reasonable measures
         had been taken.
      
In that regard, at paragraph of Case C‑549/Wallentin-Hermann [2008] ECR I‑11061, the Court held that, since not all extraordinary circumstances confer exemption, the onus is on the party
         seeking to rely on them to establish, in addition, that they could not on any view have been avoided by measures appropriate
         to the situation, that is to say, by measures which, at the time those extraordinary circumstances arise, meet, inter alia,
         conditions which are technically and economically viable for the air carrier concerned. Indeed, that air carrier must, as
         the Court specified at paragraph of that judgment, establish that, even if it had deployed all its resources in terms of
         staff or equipment and the financial means at its disposal, it would clearly not have been able, unless it had made intolerable
         sacrifices in the light of the capacities of its undertaking at the relevant time, to prevent the extraordinary circumstances
         with which it was confronted from leading to the cancellation of the flight.
      
It should be noted at the outset that, very often, the occurrence of extraordinary circumstances makes it difficult, if not
         impossible, to operate a flight at the scheduled time. Thus, the risk of delay to a flight, which may ultimately result in
         its cancellation, is the usual – and therefore foreseeable – detrimental consequence for passengers when extraordinary circumstances
         arise.
      
It follows that the air carrier, since it is obliged, under Article 5(3) of Regulation No 261/2004, to implement all reasonable
         measures to avoid extraordinary circumstances, must reasonably, at the stage of organising the flight, take account of the
         risk of delay connected to the possible occurrence of extraordinary circumstances.
      
More particularly, to prevent any delay, even insignificant, to which extraordinary circumstances have given rise inevitably
         leading to cancellation of the flight, the reasonable air carrier must organise its resources in good time to provide for
         some reserve time, so as to be able, if possible, to operate that flight once the extraordinary circumstances have come to
         an end. If, in such a situation, an air carrier does not, however, have any reserve time, it cannot be concluded that it has
         taken all reasonable measures as provided for in Article 5(3) of Regulation No 261/2004.
      
With regard, firstly, to the determination, generally, of a minimum reserve time to which the national court refers, it should
         be noted that, at paragraph of Wallentin-Hermann, the Court held, in that connection, that it was necessary to ascertain whether the air carrier concerned had taken measures
         appropriate to the particular situation, that is to say, measures which, at the time of the occurrence of the extraordinary
         circumstances whose existence the air carrier is to establish, met, inter alia, conditions which were technically and economically
         viable for that carrier.
      
The Court therefore established an individualised and flexible concept of reasonable measures, leaving to the national court
         the task of assessing whether, in the circumstances of the particular case, the air carrier could be regarded as having taken
         measures appropriate to the situation.
      
It follows that Article 5(3) of Regulation No 261/cannot be interpreted as requiring, as a ‘reasonable measure’, provision
         to be made, generally and without distinction, for a minimum reserve time applicable in the same way to all air carriers in
         all situations when extraordinary circumstances arise.
      
With regard, secondly, to the assessment of the reasonable nature of the measures taken to provide for a reserve time so as
         to prevent, if possible, the delay resulting from extraordinary circumstances leading to cancellation of the flight, it should
         be stated at the outset that that assessment must be carried out not, as the national court seems to suggest, with regard
         to the delay in relation to the aeroplane’s scheduled departure time, but taking account of the delay that may exist at the
         end of the flight operated in the new conditions to which the extraordinary circumstances have given rise.
      
In the context of such an assessment, the only issue to matter is the ability of the air carrier to operate the programmed
         flight in its entirety – the flight being regarded as a ‘unit’ of transport performed by an air carrier which fixes its itinerary
         (see, to that effect, Case C‑173/Emirates Airlines [2008] ECR I‑5237, paragraph 40) – despite the fact that extraordinary circumstances have given rise to some delay. A delay
         as initially noted, at the time when those extraordinary circumstances come to an end or in relation to the time scheduled
         for departure, may increase thereafter, on account of a series of various secondary complications connected to the fact that
         the flight at issue could not be properly operated, in accordance with the scheduled timetable, such as difficulties related
         to the reallocation of air corridors or accessibility conditions at the destination airport, including the possible total
         or partial closure of that airport for part of the night. The result could be that, by the end of the flight, the delay will
         ultimately be appreciably longer than the delay as initially noted.
      
The assessment of the reasonable nature of measures taken by the air carrier when organising its flight must, consequently,
         also take account of those secondary risks, insofar as their constituent elements are foreseeable and calculable.
      
As to the ability of the air carrier to operate the programmed flight in its entirety in those conditions, it must be assessed
         in light of the criteria formulated by the Court in Wallentin-Hermann. Such an assessment must be carried out in such a way as to ensure that the length of the required reserve time does not
         result in the air carrier being led to make intolerable sacrifices in the light of the capacities of its undertaking at the
         relevant time.
      
Furthermore, when assessing the reasonable nature of the measures implemented in order to provide that reserve time, Article
         6(1) of Regulation No 261/is not applicable. That provision relates to various categories of ‘delay’ attributable to
         the air carrier and not connected with the occurrence of extraordinary circumstances that could not have been avoided even
         if all reasonable measures had been taken.
      
In view of the foregoing, the answer to the questions is that Article 5(3) of Regulation No 261/must be interpreted as
         meaning that an air carrier, since it is obliged to implement all reasonable measures to avoid extraordinary circumstances,
         must reasonably, at the stage of organising the flight, take account of the risk of delay connected to the possible occurrence
         of such circumstances. It must, consequently, provide for a certain reserve time to allow it, if possible, to operate the
         flight in its entirety once the extraordinary circumstances have come to an end. However, that provision cannot be interpreted
         as requiring, as a ‘reasonable measure’, provision to be made, generally and without distinction, for a minimum reserve time
         applicable in the same way to all air carriers in all situations when extraordinary circumstances arise. The assessment of
         the ability of the air carrier to operate the programmed flight in its entirety in the new conditions resulting from the occurrence
         of those circumstances must be carried out in such a way as to ensure that the length of the required reserve time does not
         result in the air carrier being led to make intolerable sacrifices in the light of the capacities of its undertaking at the
         relevant time. Article 6(1) of that regulation is not applicable in the context of such an assessment.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
Article 5(3) of Regulation (EC) No 261/of the European Parliament and of the Council of February establishing
            common rules on compensation and assistance to passengers in the event of denied boarding and of cancellation or long delay
            of flights, and repealing Regulation (EEC) No 295/must be interpreted as meaning that an air carrier, since it is obliged
            to implement all reasonable measures to avoid extraordinary circumstances, must reasonably, at the stage of organising the
            flight, take account of the risk of delay connected to the possible occurrence of such circumstances. It must, consequently,
            provide for a certain reserve time to allow it, if possible, to operate the flight in its entirety once the extraordinary
            circumstances have come to an end. However, that provision cannot be interpreted as requiring, as a ‘reasonable measure’,
            provision to be made, generally and without distinction, for a minimum reserve time applicable in the same way to all air
            carriers in all situations when extraordinary circumstances arise. The assessment of the ability of the air carrier to operate
            the programmed flight in its entirety in the new conditions resulting from the occurrence of those circumstances must be carried
            out in such a way as to ensure that the length of the required reserve time does not result in the air carrier being led to
            make intolerable sacrifices in the light of the capacities of its undertaking at the relevant time. Article 6(1) of that regulation
            is not applicable in the context of such an assessment.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Latvian.
      
Top  
 