
ORDER OF THE COURT (Eighth Chamber)
June (*)
      
(Appeal — Article of the Rules of Procedure — Dumping — Implementing Regulation (EU) No 60/— Import of ferro-silicon originating, inter alia, in Russia — Regulation (EC) No 1225/— Article 11(3) and (9) — Partial interim review)
In Case C‑345/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, brought on July 2015,
Chelyabinsk electrometallurgical integrated plant OAO (CHEMK), established in Chelyabinsk (Russia),
      
Kuzneckie ferrosplavy OAO (KF), established in Novokuznetsk (Russia),
      
represented by B. Evtimov, lawyer, and D. O’Keefe, Solicitor,
appellants,
the other parties to the proceedings being:
Council of the European Union, represented by J.-P. Hix, S. Boelaert and E. McGovern, acting as Agents,
      
defendant at first instance,
European Commission, represented by J.-F. Brakeland and M. França, acting as Agents,
      
Euroalliages, established in Brussels (Belgium),
      
interveners at first instance,
THE COURT (Eighth Chamber),
composed of D. Šváby, President of the Chamber, M. Safjan and M. Vilaras (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: Y. Bot,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to give a decision by reasoned order, in accordance with Article of
         the Rules of Procedure of the Court,
      
makes the following
Order
By their appeal, Chelyabinsk electrometallurgical integrated plant OAO (CHEMK) and Kuzneckie ferrosplavy OAO (KF) seek to
         have set aside the judgment of the General Court of the European Union of April in CHEMK and KF v Council (T‑169/12, ‘the judgment under appeal’), by which the General Court dismissed their action for partial annulment of Council
         Implementing Regulation (EU) No 60/of January terminating the partial interim review pursuant to Article 11(3)
         of Regulation (EC) No 1225/of the anti-dumping measures applicable to imports of ferro-silicon originating, inter alia,
         in Russia (OJ L 22, p. 1, ‘the regulation at issue’), in so far as it concerns the appellants.
      
 Legal context
Article 11(3) and (9) of Council Regulation (EC) No 1225/of November on protection against dumped imports from
         countries not members of the European Community (OJ L 343, p. 51, ‘the basic regulation’) provides:
      
‘3.      The need for the continued imposition of measures may also be reviewed, where warranted, on the initiative of the Commission
         or at the request of a Member State or, provided that a reasonable period of time of at least one year has elapsed since the
         imposition of the definitive measure, upon a request by any exporter or importer or by the Community producers which contains
         sufficient evidence substantiating the need for such an interim review.
      
An interim review shall be initiated where the request contains sufficient evidence that the continued imposition of the measure
         is no longer necessary to offset dumping and/or that the injury would be unlikely to continue or recur if the measure were
         removed or varied, or that the existing measure is not, or is no longer, sufficient to counteract the dumping which is causing
         injury.
      
In carrying out investigations pursuant to this paragraph, the Commission may, inter alia, consider whether the circumstances
         with regard to dumping and injury have changed significantly, or whether existing measures are achieving the intended results
         in removing the injury previously established under Article 3. In these respects, account shall be taken in the final determination
         of all relevant and duly documented evidence.
      
...
9.      In all review or refund investigations carried out pursuant to this Article, the Commission shall, provided that circumstances
         have not changed, apply the same methodology as in the investigation which led to the duty, with due account being taken of
         Article 2, and in particular paragraphs and thereof, and of Article 17.’
      
 Background to the dispute
The background to the dispute and the content of the regulation at issue are set out in paragraphs to of the judgment
         under appeal. For the purposes of the present proceedings, they can be summarised as follows.
      
The appellants’ imports were covered by Council Regulation (EC) No 172/of February imposing a definitive anti-dumping
         duty and collecting definitively the provisional duty imposed on imports of ferro-silicon originating in the People’s Republic
         of China, Egypt, Kazakhstan, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Russia (OJ L 55, p. 6). They therefore submitted,
         under Article 11(3) of the basic regulation, a request for partial interim review relating solely to dumping. They claimed
         that the circumstances on the basis of which regulation No 172/had been adopted had changed and that those changes were
         of a lasting nature.
      
At the end of the interim review relating to the period from October to September (‘the investigation and review
         period’), the Council of the European Union did not amend, in the regulation at issue, the level of the anti-dumping duty
         set in regulation No 172/2008.
      
In the regulation at issue, the Council recalled, first, that when assessing the need to continue existing measures, the EU
         institutions have a wide discretion, which includes the option of carrying out a prospective assessment of the pricing policy
         of the exporters concerned. Second, it set out the EU institutions’ considerations on whether the appellants may have still
         been dumping on the European Union market during the investigation and review period and roughly assessed, in that regard,
         the dumping margin at ‘approximately 13%’. Third, having examined the appellants’ arguments in this connection, it concluded
         that there was insufficient evidence of the allegedly lasting nature of the changes of circumstances relied on by the appellants,
         whatever the amount of the dumping margin during the investigation and review period and that, consequently, it would be premature
         and therefore unjustified, at that point in time, to reduce the anti-dumping duty in force.
      
 The procedure before the General Court and the judgment under appeal
By application lodged at the General Court Registry on April 2012, the appellants brought an action for annulment of the
         regulation at issue in so far as it concerned the appellants.
      
In support of their action, the appellants put forward three pleas in law. The first plea in law alleged infringement of Article 11(9)
         of the basic regulation, read in conjunction with the first sentence of Article 2(12) thereof, that the EU institutions had
         erred in law and exceeded their margin of discretion in the application of Article 11(3) of the basic regulation and infringement
         of their rights of defence. The second alleged a manifest error of assessment by those institutions in the calculation of
         the export price for the purposes of determining the dumping margin during the review investigation. The third alleged an
         infringement of Article 11(3) of the basic regulation and a manifest error of assessment.
      
First, the General Court examined together the first and third pleas in law, inasmuch as they complained that the Council
         had infringed, first, Article 11(3) of the basic regulation, second, Article 11(9) of that regulation, read in conjunction
         with Article 2(12) thereof and, third, the appellants’ rights of defence. The General Court then examined the second plea
         in law in the action.
      
In the examination of the alleged infringement of Article 11(3) of the basic regulation, the General Court distinguished two
         complaints, which it examined in turn.
      
In response to the first complaint, alleging an error of law as to the scope of the EU institutions’ discretion under Article 11(3)
         of the basic regulation, the General Court held, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that those institutions had
         first to assess the need for the continued imposition of the existing measures and, on that basis, to find a not only significant
         but also lasting change of circumstances with regard to the dumping, and that it was only as a second step, once those institutions
         had assessed the need for the continued imposition of the existing measures and decided to amend those measures, that they
         were bound, when determining the fresh measures, by the provisions in Article 11(9) of the basic regulation, which confers
         on them the express power and obligation to apply, in principle, the same methodology as that used in the original investigation
         which led to the imposition of anti-dumping duty.
      
The General Court held, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, that the institution concerned had to check,
         in the framework of a prospective examination and in the light of the evidence adduced by the author of the review request,
         who was required to prove that the circumstances behind the dumping had changed in a lasting manner, whether the dumping would
         not reappear or would not increase once more in the future, with the result that measures would no longer be necessary to
         counteract the dumping.
      
The General Court concluded, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, that since the conditions as to significant
         change of circumstances and the lasting nature of that change were cumulative, the EU institutions could begin with the prospective
         examination, in order to assess whether the alleged change of circumstances concerning dumping was of a lasting nature, and,
         if they concluded that this was not the case, they could refrain, in the review procedure, from precisely calculating the
         dumping margin.
      
The General Court rejected, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, the various arguments put forward by the
         appellants in relation to the alleged error by the EU institutions in having failed to calculate precisely the dumping margin.
      
In response to the second complaint, that the EU institutions had made a manifest error of assessment in finding that the
         change of circumstances relied on was not of a lasting nature, the General Court examined all the evidence adduced by the
         appellants and, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, it rejected the four reasons put forward by them as to
         why the change of circumstances was lasting. It held, in essence, that it was not possible to consider that, in the future,
         the export prices to the European Union would be higher and would not result in dumping, on the ground that the appellants
         had not adduced evidence to that effect, whereas it had been found in the regulation at issue that, during the investigation
         and review period, they had been dumping at a considerable margin and at volatile export prices.
      
In the examination of the alleged infringement of Article 11(9) of the basic regulation, read in conjunction with Article 2(12)
         thereof, the General Court held, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, that it is only when the need for the
         continued imposition of existing measures has been assessed and the EU institutions have decided to amend them that they are
         bound, when determining the fresh measures, by the provision in Article 11(9) of the basic regulation requiring them to apply
         the methodology prescribed in Article of that regulation. Since, at the end of the prospective examination, those institutions
         concluded that the change of circumstances was not lasting, the General Court held that they could refrain from precisely
         determining the dumping margin.
      
Lastly, the General Court rejected the allegation as to infringement of the appellants’ rights of defence, and dismissed as
         ineffective the second plea in law relating to the calculation of the export price because, according to the General Court,
         the EU institutions were fully entitled to refrain from precisely determining the dumping margin, of which the calculation
         of the export price was one element.
      
 Forms of order sought by the parties before the Court of Justice
The appellants claim that the Court should:
      
–        set aside the judgment under appeal;
–        give final judgment in the matter, where the state of the proceedings so permits;
–        in the alternative, refer the case for reconsideration to the General Court;
–        order the Council to pay the costs of the proceedings before the Court as well as the costs of the proceedings before the
         General Court;
      
–        order any interveners to bear their own costs.
The Council contends that the Court should:
      
–        dismiss the appeal and
–        order the appellants to pay the costs of the proceedings in both instances.
The Commission contends that the Court should:
      
–        dismiss the appeal as being inadmissible and, in any event, unfounded and
–        order the appellants to pay the costs.
 The appeal
Under Article of its Rules of Procedure, where the appeal is, in whole or in part, manifestly inadmissible or manifestly
         unfounded, the Court may at any time, acting on a proposal from the Judge-Rapporteur and after hearing the Advocate General,
         decide by reasoned order to dismiss that appeal in whole or in part.
      
It is appropriate to apply that provision in the context of the present appeal.
      
The appellants put forward two grounds of appeal in support of their appeal.
      
First, they submit that the General Court misinterpreted Article 11(3) of the basic regulation and erred in law when it rejected
         the plea in law that Article 11(9) of that regulation and its reference to Article thereof require the EU institutions to
         calculate a dumping margin in all interim reviews. Second, they claim that the General Court’s interpretation of the judgment
         of November in MTZ Polyfilms v Council (T‑143/06, EU:T:2009:441) is wrong in law, inasmuch as that judgment does not support the EU institutions following an order
         in the partial interim review process that gives those institutions the right to terminate a duly initiated investigation
         without having calculated the dumping margin.
      
Both the Council and the Commission contend that the appeal must be dismissed on the ground that the grounds of appeal put
         forward by the appellants are ineffective, since the judgment under appeal is based on other grounds that are not contested
         in the appeal.
      
It should be recalled that, in accordance with settled case-law, where one of the grounds adopted by the General Court is
         sufficient to sustain the operative part of its judgment, any defects that might vitiate other grounds given in the judgment
         concerned in any event have no bearing on that operative part and, accordingly, a plea relying on such defects is ineffective
         and must be dismissed (see, inter alia, judgments of April in Commission v CAS Succhi di Frutta, C‑496/P, EU:C:2004:236, paragraph 68, and November in United Kingdom v Commission, C‑416/P, EU:C:2012:761, paragraph 45).
      
In the present case, by their grounds of appeal, the appellants submit, in essence, that the General Court erred in law by
         endorsing the reasoning of the Council in the regulation at issue, which consists in accepting that, in a partial interim
         review limited to dumping, there is no need to calculate a dumping margin where, at the end of the examination of the need
         for the continued imposition of existing measures, the EU institutions reach the conclusion that the change of circumstances
         relied on is not of a lasting nature.
      
It should be noted that the General Court held, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, approving the methodology
         followed by the Council in the regulation at issue, that, in order for it to be necessary to amend the existing measures,
         in the first stage of the interim review investigation both a retrospective and a prospective examination must be carried
         out to determine whether it is necessary to continue to impose those measures and that the need to carry out a review of those
         measures is subject to the finding that the circumstances concerning the dumping have significantly changed and that those
         changes are of a lasting nature. It inferred that if either of those cumulative conditions is not satisfied, the EU institutions
         may conclude that there is a need to continue to impose the existing measures.
      
In paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, the General Court examined the various circumstances relied on by the
         appellants as representative of a change concerning the dumping, and it held that the Council was correct in finding that
         they had not adduced sufficient evidence of the lasting nature of the change of circumstances concerning the dumping.
      
In their appeal, the appellants have not called in question the conclusion, set out in paragraph of the judgment under
         appeal, that the EU institutions must find a lasting change of circumstances before amending the existing measures. On that
         point, they state merely that the General Court wrongly interchanged ‘the assessment of the need for continued imposition
         of the existing measures’ with the prospective analysis of the lasting nature of the change of circumstances. The sole purpose
         of such an argument is in fact to criticise the part of the judgment under appeal in which the General Court held that the
         order in which the assessment of the need for the continued imposition of the measures had been carried out by the EU institutions
         did not constitute an error of law.
      
It must be recalled that, according to the Court’s case-law, the review which the EU institutions must conduct in this regard
         may lead them to carry out not only a retrospective analysis of the development of the situation under consideration, as from
         the imposition of the original definitive measure, in order to assess the need for the continued imposition of or an amendment
         to that measure to counteract the dumping which is causing injury, but also a prospective analysis of the probable development
         of the situation, as from the adoption of the review measure, in order to assess the likely effect of removing or amending
         that measure (judgment of September in Valimar, C‑374/12, EU:C:2014:2231, paragraph 55).
      
In this connection, the appellants have accepted that the discretionary considerations that may be submitted for evaluation
         by the EU institutions include a prospective inquiry into the lasting nature of the relevant changed circumstances.
      
In addition, the appellants claim in their appeal that, ‘without ... due evidence of the Appellants’ pricing conduct during
         the review investigation period, it would not be possible to properly assess the need for continued imposition of the existing
         measures, as well as the discretionary considerations such as the lasting effect, significance of changes or [their] prospective
         pricing behaviour’. However, they do not draw therefrom any conclusions on the obligation to determine the lasting nature
         of the changes of circumstances for amending the existing measures.
      
Furthermore, the appellants state merely that the General Court considered that none of the ‘duly documented evidence on reduced
         dumping margins [they] had submitted was adequate or needed to be taken into account by the Council’.
      
In those circumstances, having regard to their content, the two grounds of appeal submitted in support of the appeal cannot
         enable the appellants to have the judgment under appeal set aside, since the operative part of that judgment is based on other
         grounds not contested in the appeal.
      
Therefore, pursuant to Article of the Rules of Procedure, the appeal must be dismissed.
      
 Costs
In accordance with Article 184(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, where the appeal is unfounded, the Court
         is to make a decision as to costs.
      
Under Article 138(1) of those rules, which apply to the procedure on appeal by virtue of Article 184(1) thereof, the unsuccessful
         party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings.
      
Since the Council has applied for costs and the appellants have been unsuccessful, the appellants must be ordered to bear
         their own costs and to pay those incurred by the Council.
      
In accordance with Article 140(1) of the Rules of Procedure, applicable to the procedure on appeal by virtue of Article 184(1)
         thereof, the Commission is to bear its own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Eighth Chamber) hereby orders:
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
2.      Chelyabinsk electrometallurgical integrated plant OAO (CHEMK) and Kuzneckie ferrosplavy OAO (KF) are to bear their own costs
            and to pay those incurred by the Council of the European Union.
3.      The European Commission is to bear its own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 