
Case C-471/Sanna Maria Parviainen
v
Finnair Oyj
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Helsingin käräjäoikeus)
(Social policy – Directive 92/85/EEC − Protection of the safety and health at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given
         birth or are breastfeeding − Articles 5(2) and 11(1) − Worker temporarily transferred to another job during her pregnancy
         − Compulsory transfer because of a risk to her safety or health and that of her child − Pay less than the average pay received
         before the transfer − Previous pay made up of a basic salary and various supplementary allowances − Calculation of the salary
         to which a pregnant worker is entitled during the period of her temporary transfer)
      
Summary of the Judgment
Social policy – Protection of the safety and health of workers – Pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth
            or are breastfeeding – Directive 92/(Council Directive 92/85, Arts. 5(2), and 11(1))
Article 11(1) of Directive 92/on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health at work
         of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding (tenth individual Directive within the
         meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391) must be interpreted as meaning that a pregnant worker who, in accordance with
         Article 5(2) thereof, has been temporarily transferred on account of her pregnancy to a job in which she performs tasks other
         than those she performed before that transfer, is not entitled to the pay she received on average before that transfer. In
         addition to the maintenance of her basic salary, such a worker is entitled, pursuant to Article 11(1), to pay components or
         supplementary allowances relating to her professional status, such as allowances relating to her seniority, her length of
         service and her professional qualifications. Although Article 11(1) of Directive 92/does not preclude the use of a method
         of calculating remuneration to be paid to such a worker based on the average amount of the allowances linked to working conditions
         of all the air crew in the same pay grade during a given reference period, the failure to take account of those pay components
         or supplementary allowances must be regarded as contrary to the latter provision. However, the Member States and, where appropriate,
         management and labour, are not required pursuant to Article 11(1) of Directive 92/85, to maintain, during the temporary transfer,
         the pay components or supplementary allowances which, as is clear from paragraph of this judgment, are dependent on the
         performance by the worker concerned of specific functions in particular circumstances and which are intended essentially to
         compensate for the disadvantages related to that performance.
      
Article 11(1) of Directive 92/on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health at work
         of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding (tenth individual Directive within the
         meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391) must be interpreted as meaning that a pregnant worker who, in accordance with
         Article 5(2) thereof, has been temporarily transferred on account of her pregnancy to a job in which she performs tasks other
         than those she performed prior to that transfer, is not entitled to the pay she received on average prior to that transfer.
         In addition to the maintenance of her basic salary, such a worker is entitled, pursuant to Article 11(1), to pay components
         or supplementary allowances relating to her professional status, such as allowances relating to her seniority, her length
         of service and her professional qualifications. Although Article 11(1) of Directive 92/does not preclude the use of a method
         of calculating remuneration to be paid to such a worker based on the average amount of the allowances linked to working conditions
         of all the air crew in the same pay grade during a given reference period, the failure to take account of those pay components
         or supplementary allowances must be regarded as contrary to the latter provision.
      
Article 11(1) of Directive 92/85/EEC on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health at
         work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding (tenth individual Directive within
         the meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391) must be interpreted as meaning that a pregnant worker who, in accordance
         with Article 5(2) thereof, has been temporarily transferred on account of her pregnancy to a job in which she performs tasks
         other than those she performed prior to that transfer, is not entitled to the pay she received on average prior to that transfer.
         In addition to the maintenance of her basic salary, such a worker is entitled, pursuant to Article 11(1), to pay components
         or supplementary allowances relating to her professional status, such as allowances relating to her seniority, her length
         of service and her professional qualifications. Although Article 11(1) of Directive 92/does not preclude the use of a method
         of calculating remuneration to be paid to such a worker based on the average amount of the allowances linked to working conditions
         of all the air crew in the same pay grade during a given reference period, the failure to take account of those pay components
         or supplementary allowances must be regarded as contrary to the latter provision.
      
(see paras 61, 73, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Social policy – Directive 92/85/EEC − Protection of the safety and health at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given
         birth or are breastfeeding − Articles 5(2) and 11(1) − Worker temporarily transferred to another job during her pregnancy
         − Compulsory transfer because of a risk to her safety or health and that of her child − Pay less than the average pay received
         before the transfer − Previous pay made up of a basic salary and various supplementary allowances − Calculation of the salary
         to which a pregnant worker is entitled during the period of her temporary transfer)
      
In Case C‑471/08,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Helsingin käräjäoikeus (Finland), made by decision of October 2008, received at the Court on November 2008, in the proceedings
      
Sanna Maria Parviainen
v
Finnair Oyj,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, President of the Second Chamber, acting as President of the Third Chamber, P. Lindh, A.
         Rosas, A. Ó Caoimh (Rapporteur) and A. Arabadjiev, Judges,
      
Advocate General: P. Mengozzi,
Registrar: C. Strömholm, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on September 2009,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Ms Parviainen, by M. Penttinen, asianajaja,
–        Finnair Oyj, by P. Verronen and A. Kujala, varatuomarit,
–        the Italian Government, by I. Bruni, acting as Agent, and W. Ferrante, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Finnish Government, by A. Guimaraes-Purokoski, acting as Agent,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by M. van Beek, M. Huttunen and P. Aalto, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on December 2009,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 11(1) of Council Directive 92/85/EEC of October on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health at work of pregnant workers
         and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding (tenth individual Directive within the meaning of Article 16(1)
         of Directive 89/391/EEC) (OJ L 348, p. 1).
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings between Ms Parviainen, employed as a purser by Finnair Oyj (‘Finnair’),
         an airline company, against the latter concerning the pay she received following her temporary transfer to ground work during
         her pregnancy.
      
 Legal background
 European Union law
The 9th and 16th recitals in the preamble to Directive 92/are worded as follows:
      
‘… the protection of the safety and health of pregnant workers, workers who have recently given birth or workers who are breastfeeding
         should not treat women on the labour market unfavourably nor work to the detriment of directives concerning equal treatment
         for men and women;
      
…
… measures for the organisation of work concerning the protection of the health of pregnant workers, workers who have recently
         given birth or workers who are breastfeeding would serve no purpose unless accompanied by the maintenance of rights linked
         to the employment contract, including maintenance of payment and/or entitlement to an adequate allowance’.
      
Article of Directive 92/states:
      
‘For the purposes of this Directive:
(a)      pregnant worker shall mean a pregnant worker who informs her employer of her condition, in accordance with national legislation and/or national
         practice;
      
(b)      worker who has recently given birth shall mean a worker who has recently given birth within the meaning of national legislation and/or national practice and
         who informs her employer of her condition, in accordance with that legislation and/or practice;
      
(c)      worker who is breastfeeding shall mean a worker who is breastfeeding within the meaning of national legislation and/or national practice and who informs
         her employer of her condition, in accordance with that legislation and/or practice.’
      
Article of Directive 92/85, entitled ‘Assessment and information’, provides in paragraph 1:
      
‘For all activities liable to involve a specific risk of exposure to the agents, processes or working conditions of which
         a non-exhaustive list is given in Annex I, the employer shall assess the nature, degree and duration of exposure, in the undertaking
         and/or establishment concerned, of workers within the meaning of Article 2, either directly or by way of the protective and
         preventive services referred to in Article of [Council Directive 89/391/EEC of June on the introduction of measures
         to encourage improvements in the safety and health of workers at work (OJ L 183, p. 1)], in order to:
      
–        assess any risks to the safety or health and any possible effect on the pregnancies or breastfeeding of workers within the
         meaning of Article 2,
      
–        decide what measures should be taken.’
Article of Directive 92/85, entitled ‘Action further to the results of the assessment’, states in paragraphs to 3:
      
‘1.      Without prejudice to Article of Directive 89/391/EEC, if the results of the assessment referred to in Article 4(1) reveal
         a risk to the safety or health or an effect on the pregnancy or breastfeeding of a worker within the meaning of Article 2,
         the employer shall take the necessary measures to ensure that, by temporarily adjusting the working conditions and/or the
         working hours of the worker concerned, the exposure of that worker to such risks is avoided.
      
2.      If the adjustment of her working conditions and/or working hours is not technically and/or objectively feasible, or cannot
         reasonably be required on duly substantiated grounds, the employer shall take the necessary measures to move the worker concerned
         to another job.
      
3.      If moving her to another job is not technically and/or objectively feasible or cannot reasonably be required on duly substantiated
         grounds, the worker concerned shall be granted leave in accordance with national legislation and/or national practice for
         the whole of the period necessary to protect her safety or health.’
      
Article of Directive 92/85, entitled ‘Maternity leave’, provides in paragraph 1:
      
‘Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that workers within the meaning of Article are entitled to a
         continuous period of maternity leave of at least weeks allocated before and/or after confinement in accordance with national
         legislation and/or practice.’
      
Article of Directive 92/85, entitled ‘Employment rights’, reads as follows:
      
‘In order to guarantee workers within the meaning of Article the exercise of their health and safety protection rights as
         recognised in this Article, it shall be provided that:
      
1.      in the cases referred to in Articles 5, and 7, the employment rights relating to the employment contract, including the
         maintenance of a payment to, and/or entitlement to an adequate allowance for, workers within the meaning of Article 2, must
         be ensured in accordance with national legislation and/or national practice;
      
2.      in the case referred to in Article 8, the following must be ensured:
(a)      the rights connected with the employment contract of workers within the meaning of Article 2, other than those referred to
         in point (b) below;
      
(b)      maintenance of a payment to, and/or entitlement to an adequate allowance for, workers within the meaning of Article 2;
3.      the allowance referred to in point 2(b) shall be deemed adequate if it guarantees income at least equivalent to that which
         the worker concerned would receive in the event of a break in her activities on grounds connected with her state of health,
         subject to any ceiling laid down under national legislation;
      
4.      Member States may make entitlement to pay or the allowance referred to in points and 2(b) conditional upon the worker concerned
         fulfilling the conditions of eligibility for such benefits laid down under national legislation.
      
These conditions may under no circumstances provide for periods of previous employment in excess of months immediately
         prior to the presumed date of confinement.’
      
Annex I to Directive 92/85, to which Article thereof refers, includes as physical agents which may cause foetal lesions
         and/or be likely to disrupt placental attachment, in particular, ionising and non-ionising radiation. 
      
 National law
According to Paragraph 7(1) of the Law on equality between men and women (naisten ja miesten välisesta tasa-arvosta annettu
         laki (609/1986)), as amended by Law 232/(‘Law 609/1986’), direct and indirect discrimination based on sex is prohibited.
         Under Paragraph 7(2), direct discrimination means treating a person differently for reasons of pregnancy or childbirth.
      
Under the second subparagraph of Paragraph 8(1) of Law 609/1986, the action of an employer is to be deemed to constitute discrimination
         prohibited by law if, when deciding on the conditions of employment, the employer acts in such a way that the person concerned
         finds herself in a less favourable position on the basis of pregnancy, childbirth or for some other gender-related reason.
      
The Law on employment contracts (työsopimuslaki (55/2001)) (‘Law on employment contracts’), in Paragraph of Chapter 2, provides
         that if the working duties or working conditions of a pregnant worker endanger her health or that of the foetus, and if the
         risk factor arising from the work or conditions of employment cannot be eliminated, every effort must be made to transfer
         the worker concerned to other duties suitable in terms of her working capacities and skills for the period of pregnancy.
      
There is a similar provision in Paragraph 11(2) of Chapter of the Law on safety at work (työturvallisuuslaki (738/2002)).
      
Paragraph of Chapter of the Law on sickness insurance (sairausvakuutuslaki (1224/2004)) provides that a pregnant woman
         in paid employment is entitled to receive special maternity benefits (‘erityisäitiysraha’) if a chemical substance, radiation,
         a transmissible illness associated with her occupational tasks or conditions of work or another comparable factor endangers
         her health or that of the foetus. The payment of such benefits is subject to the condition that the insured person is fit
         for work, that it is impossible to organise other work for her within the meaning of Paragraph 3(2) of Chapter of the Law
         on employment contracts, and that the insured person is required for that reason not to work.
      
It is apparent from the information provided to the Court that Finnish law does not contain an express provision relating
         to the determination of the salary in the case where a pregnant worker is temporarily moved to another job in order to perform
         tasks which differ from those she normally performs.
      
The collective agreement for air crew (matkustamohenkilökunnan työehtosopimus; ‘the collective agreement’) was concluded between
         the trade union of air hostesses and stewards of Finland and the employers’ union for service sectors. That agreement was
         in force from April to September 2007.
      
Maternity benefits and special maternity benefits are governed by Paragraph 16(B) of the collective agreement. According to
         Paragraph 16(B)(2), an air hostess may stop in-flight work immediately after she is found to be pregnant. Without prejudice
         to grounds of health, in-flight work is allowed until the 18th week of pregnancy at the latest.
      
According to Paragraph 16(B)(3), an air hostess may, on request, be transferred to other work provided by the employer during
         pregnancy. At the request of the person concerned, the employer is to provide other work until the date of commencement of
         maternity benefits (‘äitiyspäiväraha’) referred to by the Law on sickness insurance, or is to pay her salary during the period
         concerned.
      
Under Paragraph 16(B)(4), the salary referred to in Paragraph 16(B)(3) is paid up to the amount for the annual holidays of
         the worker concerned. If an air hostess refuses the work assigned to her, she loses her entitlement to that pay.
      
On June 1989, Finnair adopted a decision which entered into force on July concerning the determination of pay for
         ground work to be paid to air hostesses during pregnancy (‘the decision of June 1989’). Pursuant to that decision, and
         in accordance with the collective agreement, air hostesses transferred to ground work on account of pregnancy are to be paid
         an amount corresponding to annual paid holidays. The monthly earnings to be paid during the period of ground work are made
         up of the basic monthly salary and times the additional pay called ‘lisäpäiväpalkka’. The latter is calculated on the basis
         of the average amount of the additional pay for all air hostesses and stewards in the same pay grade. The pay grade is determined
         by the length of service of the worker concerned. The multiplying factor results from the fact that days’ salary is
         paid per month.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
The applicant in the main proceedings has worked for Finnair as an air hostess since April 1998. She was promoted to purser
         in October 2005.
      
The applicant in the main proceedings became pregnant at the beginning of 2007. The date of confinement was October 2007.
         On account of her pregnancy she was temporarily transferred to ground duties, namely office work, on April 2007. She occupied
         that position until September 2007, the date on which her maternity leave began.
      
The transfer took place in accordance with Article 5(1) and (2) of Directive 92/85, the relevant provisions of the Law on
         employment contracts, the Law on safety at work and the collective agreement. It is apparent from the file that the reason
         for the transfer was the fact that the work of the applicant in the main proceedings exposed her to physical agents, such
         as ionising and non-ionising radiation which may cause foetal lesions.
      
It is clear from the order for reference that, as a purser, a substantial part of the overall pay of the applicant in the
         main proceedings is made up of supplementary allowances. The allowances paid to workers may vary considerably depending on
         whether the person concerned has a supervisory role, such as purser, or whether he or she is an air hostess or steward. Workers
         may receive various supplementary allowances such as, in particular, allowances for night work, work on Sundays and holidays,
         an overtime allowance if the working day exceeds eight hours, and allowances for long-haul flights and flights entailing a
         time difference. In addition, the number of hours worked by persons with the same pay grade may vary considerably, which affects
         the amount of the supplementary allowances paid. 
      
The supplementary allowances represented approximately 40% of the pay of the applicant in the main proceedings before she
         was temporarily transferred to ground work. Her basic monthly salary is EUR 821.and her average monthly pay is EUR 383.04.
         After her transfer, the total monthly pay of the applicant in the main proceedings was reduced by EUR 834.56.
      
According to the applicant in the main proceedings, Finnair was not entitled to reduce her pay following her temporary transfer,
         in particular by failing to take into consideration the fact that she was a purser. Such a reduction constitutes discriminatory
         conduct contrary to Directive 92/and Law 609/1986. In her action before the national court, the applicant claimed payment,
         for the period at issue in the main proceedings, of at least the same pay as that she received as a purser.
      
Finnair contends that the action should be dismissed. It argues that during her pregnancy the applicant in the main proceedings
         was paid more than is normally paid to a worker who performs corresponding ground duties. Furthermore, while working as a
         purser she could not claim a guaranteed amount of allowances. The amount of allowances paid to her is always dependent on
         how many and what kind of flights she flies.
      
Taking the view that the Court has not yet given a ruling on the interpretation of Article 11(1) of Directive 92/85, and that
         the interpretation of that provision is of great importance as regards the resolution of the dispute before it, the Helsingin
         käräjäoikeus (Helsinki District Court) decided to stay its proceedings and to refer the following question to the Court for
         a preliminary ruling: 
      
‘Is Article 11(1) of Directive [92/85] to be interpreted as meaning that a worker who is transferred to other lower-paid work
         because of her pregnancy must, on the basis of that provision, be paid as much as she received on average before the transfer,
         and is it relevant in that respect what kind of allowances and on what basis the worker was paid in addition to her basic
         monthly pay?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
By its question, the referring court asks essentially whether Article 11(1) of Directive 92/must be interpreted as meaning
         that a pregnant worker who, in accordance with Article 5(2) thereof, has been temporarily transferred to a post in which she
         performs tasks other than those which she performed prior to that transfer is entitled to the same pay as she received on
         average before the transfer. The referring court also asks whether the type of allowances received by that worker and the
         reasons for the payment of those allowances while performing her previous duties are relevant in that respect.
      
As a preliminary point, it should be recalled that because certain activities may present a specific risk of exposure to hazardous
         agents, processes or working conditions for a pregnant worker or for one who is breastfeeding or who has recently given birth,
         such as those listed in Annex I to Directive 92/85, endangering safety or health, the European Union legislature, by adopting
         Directive 92/85, introduced the requirement to evaluate and communicate risks and a prohibition on the exercise of certain
         activities (see, to that effect, Case C‑203/Commission v Austria [2005] ECR I‑935, paragraph 44).
      
Where the results of the risk assessment carried out in accordance with Article of Directive 92/reveal a risk to safety
         or health and an effect on the pregnancy or breastfeeding of a worker, Article 5(1) and (2) of that directive provide that
         the employer is required temporarily to adjust the working conditions and/or the working hours or, if that is not technically
         and/or objectively feasible or cannot reasonably be required on duly substantiated grounds, to move the worker concerned to
         another job.
      
It is only when such a move is also not feasible that Article 5(3) of that directive provides that the worker is to be granted
         leave, in accordance with national legislation and/or national practice, for the whole of the period necessary to protect
         her safety or health (Case C‑66/Høj Pedersen and Others [1998] ECR I‑7327, paragraph 57).
      
It is clear from Article 11(1) of Directive 92/that, in the cases referred to in Articles 5, and thereof, the rights
         relating to the employment contract, including the maintenance of a payment to, and/or entitlement to an adequate allowance
         for, pregnant workers, must be ensured in accordance with national legislation and/or national practice.
      
It should be recalled that, as regards workers on maternity leave, Article 11(2)(b) of Directive 92/also provides that
         they must be guaranteed the ‘maintenance of a payment to [them], and/or entitlement to an adequate allowance’.
      
According to settled case-law of the Court, the concept of pay used in Article of that directive, like the definition in
         the first subparagraph of Article 141(2) EC, encompasses the consideration paid directly or indirectly by the employer during
         the worker’s maternity leave in respect of her employment. By contrast, the concept of allowance to which that provision also
         refers includes all income received by the worker during her maternity leave which is not paid to her by her employer pursuant
         to the employment relationship (see Case C‑411/Boyle and Others [1998] ECR I‑6401, paragraph 31). 
      
As regards the concept of the adequate allowance to which workers on maternity leave are entitled under Article 11(2)(b) of
         Directive 92/85, the Court has also held that the definition in Article 11(3) is intended to ensure that during her maternity
         leave the worker receives an income at least equivalent to the sickness allowance provided for by national social security
         legislation in the event of a break in her activities on health grounds (Boyle and Others, paragraph 32).
      
According to that case-law, female workers must be guaranteed an income of that level during their maternity leave, irrespective
         of whether, in accordance with Article 11(2)(b) of Directive 92/85, it is paid in the form of an allowance, pay or a combination
         of the two (Boyle and Others, paragraph 33).
      
However, even if Article 11(1) and 11(2)(b) and 11(3) of Directive 92/all refer to the ‘maintenance of a payment to, and/or
         entitlement to an adequate allowance for, [pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding]’,
         it is clear from the objectives pursued by that directive and the case-law of the Court relating to those provisions that,
         as far as concerns the receipt of an income, the situation of pregnant workers referred to in Article of that directive
         and that of workers on maternity leave which is dealt with by Article thereof cannot be treated alike for all purposes.
      
In the first place, the pregnant workers referred to in Article 5(1) and (2) of Directive 92/85, whose working conditions
         have been temporarily adjusted, continue to work and to perform the duties requested by their employer.
      
However, women taking maternity leave provided for by Article of that directive are in a special position which requires
         them to be afforded special protection, but which is not comparable either with that of a man or with that of a woman actually
         at work (see Case C‑342/Gillespie and Others [1996] ECR I‑475, paragraph 17, and Case C‑147/Alabaster [2004] ECR I‑3101, paragraph 46).
      
In the second place, it is clear from Article 11(3) of Directive 92/that the definition of adequate allowance which is
         mentioned therein applies only to Article 11(2)(b), and thus only to workers on maternity leave (see, to that effect, Høj Pedersen and Others, paragraph 39).
      
Bearing in mind the differences mentioned above between the cases referred to in Article 5(1) and (2) of Directive 92/85,
         on the one hand, and Article thereof, on the other, it is therefore impossible to transpose the case-law of the Court relating
         to the definition of the concepts of pay and adequate allowance in Article 11(2)(b) and (3) of that directive, which covers
         workers taking maternity leave, to the entitlement to remuneration of workers who, during their pregnancy, have had their
         working conditions adjusted or have been moved temporarily to another job pursuant to Article 5(1) and (2).
      
The transposition of the case-law of the Court on maternity leave to workers in situations such as those referred to in Article
         5(1) and (2) of Directive 92/could give rise to an unfair situation in which a worker, such as the applicant in the main
         proceedings, who is temporarily transferred, because she is pregnant, to a post other than that which she occupied before
         the transfer, could have her pay cut during that period to an amount equivalent to the allowance provided for by national
         social security law, where for health reasons that worker stops working.
      
Such a pay cut for a worker who actually continues working would not only be contrary to the protection of the security and
         health of pregnant workers pursued by Directive 92/85, but would also undermine the legal provisions of the European Union
         on equal treatment for male and female workers, contrary to the ninth recital in the preamble thereto.
      
In the case in the main proceedings, Finnair and the Finnish Government submit that, pursuant to Article 11(1) of Directive
         92/85, the determination of the amount of income to be paid to a worker temporarily transferred to another job because of
         her pregnancy is left to the discretion of the Member States. According to the Finnish Government, the level of pay must be
         such that the objective of protecting the safety and health of the pregnant worker referred to by that directive is not undermined.
      
By contrast, the applicant in the main proceedings and the Commission argue that a pregnant worker in a situation comparable
         to that of the applicant must a priori be entitled to continue receiving the full amount of her salary during her temporary
         transfer.
      
The Italian Government states that, according to Italian law, a pregnant worker assigned to duties which correspond to those
         of a grade lower than those she usually performs retains the pay corresponding to her previous duties. However, as regards
         bonuses and supplementary allowances which are added to the basic salary, a distinction should be made between those paid
         as consideration for the professional qualities specific to the worker concerned, which the employer should not be able to
         withhold or reduce if that worker is temporarily moved to another job in order to protect her health, and those paid on account
         of the particular methods of performing the work which are awarded only in order to compensate for specific disadvantages
         or difficulties encountered by the worker and which may be withheld if the specific situations justifying them no longer exist.
         
      
In that connection, it must be recalled that, during the period which gave rise to the dispute before the referring court,
         the applicant in the main proceedings continued working and performing the tasks entrusted to her by her employer. Furthermore,
         the temporary transfer was not made at the applicant’s request, but in accordance with the relevant provisions of Finnish
         law and Article 5(2) of Directive 92/85, and was intended to avoid any risks to the safety or health of the worker concerned
         or to her child.
      
That being the case, an examination of the wording of Article 11(1) of Directive 92/and of the objective of protecting
         pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding pursued by that directive indicates that,
         contrary to the submissions of the Commission and the applicant in the main proceedings, a pregnant worker, such as the applicant,
         who is temporarily transferred to another job and whose pay before the transfer is made up of a basic salary and a series
         of supplementary allowances, the payment of which depends with respect to some of those allowances on the performance of specific
         functions, cannot, on the basis of that provision, claim that she should continue to receive all the remuneration she received
         before the temporary transfer. 
      
First, even if, being based on the employment relationship and paid to a pregnant worker covered by Article 5(1) and (2) of
         Directive 92/who continues to work, the income that the employer pays to that worker constitutes pay within the meaning
         of Article EC, the fact remains that Article 11(1) thereof, in most of the language versions existing at the time of its
         adoption, refers to the maintenance of ‘a’ payment and not ‘the’ payment to the worker concerned.
      
Furthermore, Article 11(4) of that directive provides that Member States may make entitlement to pay or the allowance referred
         to in Article 11(1) conditional upon the worker concerned fulfilling the conditions of eligibility for such benefits laid
         down under national legislation.
      
Next, the Court has already observed that the facts relating to the nature of the work done and the conditions in which it
         is carried out may, if appropriate, be considered to be objective factors unrelated to any discrimination on grounds of sex
         such as to justify any differences in pay between different groups of workers (see, to that effect, in the context of Article
         EC, Case C‑236/JämO [2000] ECR I‑2189, paragraph 52).
      
In the present case, it is common ground that the payment of some of the supplementary allowances to which the applicant in
         the main proceedings was entitled before her temporary transfer was dependent on the performance of specific functions in
         particular circumstances and that, during her temporary transfer to another job, she did not perform such functions.
      
Finally, Article 11(1) of Directive 92/refers explicitly to national legislation and/or national practice.
      
Thus, that provision leaves to the Member States and, where appropriate, to management and labour a certain amount of discretion
         when they define the conditions for the exercise and implementation of the entitlement of the pregnant workers covered by
         Article 5(2) of Directive 92/to pay. It is therefore for the Member States to define the detailed rules for the application
         of that entitlement, although they are not able to make the existence of that entitlement, which derives directly from that
         directive and the employment relationship between the pregnant worker and her employer, subject to any preconditions whatsoever
         (see, by analogy, Case C‑173/BECTU [2001] ECR I‑4881, paragraph 53).
      
The exercise by the Member States and, where appropriate, management and labour of that discretion when determining the pay
         to which a pregnant worker, who is temporarily transferred to another job during and on account of her pregnancy, is entitled
         cannot undermine the objective of protecting the safety and health of pregnant workers pursued by Directive 92/nor ignore
         the fact that such a worker actually continues to work and to perform the tasks entrusted to her by her employer.
      
As is clear from the 16th recital in the preamble to Directive 92/85, measures for the organisation of work concerning the
         protection of the health of pregnant workers, workers who have recently given birth or workers who are breastfeeding would
         serve no purpose unless accompanied by the maintenance of rights linked to the employment contract, including maintenance
         of payment and/or entitlement to an adequate allowance.
      
The pay which must be maintained with respect to a pregnant worker in accordance with Article 11(1) of Directive 92/85, following
         her temporary transfer to a position other than that which she occupied before her pregnancy, cannot, in any event, be less
         than that paid to workers occupying the job to which she is temporarily assigned. For the duration of that temporary transfer,
         the pregnant worker is also entitled to the pay components and supplementary allowances relating to that job provided that
         she fulfils the conditions of eligibility for them in accordance with Article 11(4) of that directive.
      
Furthermore, as the Advocate General observed, in points and of his Opinion, in defining the pay components of such
         a worker which must be maintained for the duration of the temporary transfer, in accordance with Article 11(1) of Directive
         92/85, the Member States and, where appropriate, management and labour are bound by the nature of the various supplementary
         allowances paid by the employer and which may, in some cases, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, constitute a
         substantial part of the overall pay of the pregnant worker concerned.
      
It follows that, in addition to the basic salary relating to her contract or her employment relationship, a pregnant worker
         temporarily transferred to another job, pursuant to Article 5(2) of Directive 92/85, remains, during that transfer, entitled
         to the pay components or supplementary allowances which relate to her professional status such as, in particular, her seniority,
         her length of service and her professional qualifications.
      
However, the Member States and, where appropriate, management and labour are not required pursuant to Article 11(1) of Directive
         92/to maintain, during the temporary transfer, the pay components or supplementary allowances which, as is clear from paragraph
         of this judgment, are dependent on the performance by the worker concerned of specific functions in particular circumstances
         and which are intended essentially to compensate for the disadvantages related to that performance.
      
It is clear from the foregoing that, following her temporary transfer to a job other than that which she occupied before her
         pregnancy, in accordance with Article 5(2) of Directive 92/85, a pregnant worker is not entitled under Article 11(1) thereof
         to the pay she received on average before that transfer.
      
Nevertheless, it should be recalled that Article 11(1) of Directive 92/provides only for minimum protection with respect
         to the pay of pregnant workers covered by Article thereof. None of the provisions of that directive prevents the Member
         States or, where appropriate, management and labour from providing for the maintenance of all the pay components and supplementary
         allowances to which the pregnant worker was entitled before her pregnancy and her temporary transfer to another job.
      
Directive 92/85, which was adopted in accordance with Article 118a of the EC Treaty (Articles to of the EC Treaty
         have been replaced by Articles EC to EC), does not prevent a Member State, as is clear from Article 137(4) EC, from
         maintaining or laying down more stringent protective measures, provided that they are compatible with the provisions of the
         Treaty (see, to that effect, Case C‑438/Jiménez Melgar [2001] ECR I‑6915, paragraph 37).
      
In the case in the main proceedings, as is clear from paragraphs and of this judgment, in accordance with the collective
         agreement and the decision of June 1989, following her transfer to ground duties on account of her pregnancy, a pregnant
         air hostess receives pay up to the amount of her annual paid holiday.
      
The remuneration paid by Finnair to a pregnant worker during her temporary transfer is made up of her basic monthly salary
         and a supplementary allowance called ‘lisäpäiväpalkka’. As is clear from paragraph of this judgment, that supplementary
         allowance is calculated in two stages. First, the average supplementary allowance received by an air hostess or steward during
         a given reference period is calculated. That is the personal supplementary allowance called ‘lisäpäiväpalkka’ paid to the
         worker concerned during that period. Second, the average amount of the personal supplementary allowances of all air hostesses
         and stewards in the same pay grade is calculated.
      
It should be noted that because the pay of pregnant workers following a temporary transfer to a post other than that which
         they previously occupied is calculated on the basis of an average amount over a given reference period of the allowances received
         by all the air hostesses and stewards in the same pay grade, such a pay scheme may lead either to a reduction or an increase
         in income received by the pregnant worker as compared with the amount which was paid to her during the reference period concerned.
         As is clear from the order for reference, air crew may receive more than a dozen different allowances, the payment of which
         is related to the particular ways in which the work is carried out. In those circumstances, both the amount and the type of
         allowances received by air hostesses and stewards in the same pay grade during that reference period may vary considerably.
      
The choice by a Member State or, where appropriate, management and labour of a pay scheme, according to which the income of
         pregnant workers following a temporary transfer is made up of the basic monthly salary and the average amount of allowances
         received by air crew during a given reference period, cannot, in principle, be regarded as contrary to Article 11(1) of Directive
         92/85. 
      
However, in so far as such a pay scheme, in the calculation of the average monthly pay for pregnant air hostesses who have
         been temporarily transferred in accordance with Article 5(2) of Directive 92/85, fails to take account of the pay components
         or supplementary allowances which relate to the professional status of the pregnant worker – which is in no way affected by
         the temporary transfer – such as supplementary allowances relating to the seniority of the worker concerned, her length of
         service and her professional qualifications, that scheme cannot be regarded as compatible with the requirements of Article
         11(1) of Directive 92/85.
      
As is clear from paragraph of this judgment, although, in accordance with Article 11(1) of Directive 92/85, the determination
         of the methods of calculating the pay entitlement of a pregnant worker covered by Article 5(2) thereof is entrusted to the
         Member States, they must not lay down methods which are not compatible with the objective of protecting the safety and health
         of pregnant workers pursued by that directive. Further, they must not ignore the fact, when determining that pay, that such
         a worker actually continues to work.
      
In the present case, as the applicant in the main proceedings submits, while her personal supplementary allowance called ‘lisäpäiväpalkka’
         was EUR 74.per day during the reference period, the average amount of that supplementary allowance paid to all air hostesses
         and stewards in the same pay grade was, for the same period, EUR 39.per day. As a result of the worker concerned being
         temporarily transferred to ground work, her total monthly pay was reduced by EUR 834.as compared with the pay she received
         before the temporary transfer.
      
It is for the referring court to ascertain whether, according to the method of calculating the pay provided for by the collective
         agreement and/or the decision of June as regards air hostesses during pregnancy, the applicant in the main proceedings
         was deprived, following her temporary transfer to a post other than that which she normally occupied, of pay components or
         supplementary allowances relating to her professional status. If that is the case, the pay scheme providing for such a reduction
         in her pay for the duration of the temporary transfer pursuant to Article 5(2) of Directive 92/must be regarded as contrary
         to the provisions of Article 11(1) thereof.
      
Having regard to all the foregoing, the answer to the question referred is that Article 11(1) of Directive 92/must be interpreted
         as meaning that a pregnant worker who, in accordance with Article 5(2) thereof, has been temporarily transferred on account
         of her pregnancy to a job in which she performs tasks other than those she performed prior to that transfer is not entitled
         to the pay she received on average prior to that transfer. In addition to the maintenance of her basic salary, such a worker
         is entitled, pursuant to Article 11(1), to pay components or supplementary allowances relating to her professional status,
         such as allowances relating to her seniority, her length of service and her professional qualifications. Although Article
         11(1) of Directive 92/does not preclude the use of a method of calculating remuneration to be paid to such a worker based
         on the average amount of the allowances linked to working conditions of all the air crew in the same pay grade during a given
         reference period, the failure to take account of those pay components or supplementary allowances must be regarded as contrary
         to that provision.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
Article 11(1) of Council Directive 92/85/EEC of October on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements
            in the safety and health at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding (tenth
            individual Directive within the meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC) must be interpreted as meaning that a pregnant
            worker who, in accordance with Article 5(2) thereof, has been temporarily transferred on account of her pregnancy to a job
            in which she performs tasks other than those she performed prior to that transfer is not entitled to the pay she received
            on average prior to that transfer. In addition to the maintenance of her basic salary, such a worker is entitled, pursuant
            to Article 11(1), to pay components or supplementary allowances relating to her professional status, such as allowances relating
            to her seniority, her length of service and her professional qualifications. Although Article 11(1) of Directive 92/does
            not preclude the use of a method of calculating remuneration to be paid to such a worker based on the average amount of the
            allowances linked to working conditions of all the air crew in the same pay grade during a given reference period, the failure
            to take account of those pay components or supplementary allowances must be regarded as contrary to that provision.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Finnish.
      
Top  
 