
Case C-380/Centro Europa Srl
v
Ministero delle Comunicazioni e Autorità per le garanzie nelle comunicazioni
and
Direzione generale per le concessioni e le autorizzazioni del Ministero delle Comunicazioni
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Consiglio di Stato)
(Freedom to provide services – Electronic communications – Television broadcasting activities – New common regulatory framework – Allocation of radio frequencies)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Preliminary rulings – Admissibility – Questions referred without sufficient information on the factual and legislative context
            
(Art. EC)
2.        Preliminary rulings – Admissibility – Need to provide the Court with sufficient information on the factual and legislative
            context 
(Arts EC, 86(1)EC and EC)
3.        Preliminary rulings – Jurisdiction of the Court
(Art. EC)
4.        Freedom to provide services – Electronic communications networks and services – Regulatory framework, authorisation and competition
            – Directives 2002/21, 2002/and 2002/(Art. EC; European Parliament and Council Directives 2002/20, Arts 5(1) and (2), second subpara., and 7(3), and 2002/21,
            Art. 9(1); Commission Directive 2002/77, Art. 4)
1.        In the context of the cooperation between the Court and national courts established by Article EC, the decision making
         the reference must set out the precise reasons why the national court was unsure as to the interpretation of Community law
         and why it considered it necessary to refer questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling. Against that background, it is
         essential that the national court provide at the very least some explanation of the reasons for the choice of the Community
         provisions which it requires to be interpreted and of the link it establishes between those provisions and the national legislation
         applicable to the dispute in the main proceedings.
      
In that respect, a question referred by a national court is inadmissible where it does not give any indication as to the Community
         provisions which it requires to be interpreted or any explanation of the link it establishes between those provisions and
         the dispute in the main proceedings or the subject-matter of that dispute.
      
(see paras 54-56)
2.        The need to provide an interpretation of Community law which will be of use to the national court makes it necessary that
         the referring court should define the factual and legislative context of the questions it is asking or, at the very least,
         explain the factual circumstances on which those questions are based. Those requirements are of particular importance in the
         area of competition, which is characterised by complex factual and legal situations.
      
In that regard, questions concerning, by implication, Article 86(1) EC, read in conjunction with Article EC, are inadmissible
         if the decision making the reference does not contain any indication regarding, inter alia, the definition of the relevant
         market, the calculation of the market shares held by the various undertakings operating on that market, and the supposed abuse
         of a dominant position. 
      
(see paras 57-59, 61-63)
3.        As regards a question referred for a preliminary ruling, where all aspects of the main proceedings before the national court
         are confined within only one Member State, a reply might nonetheless be useful to that national court if its national law
         were to require that a national of that Member State must be allowed to enjoy the same rights as those which a national of
         another Member State would derive from Community law in the same situation. 
      
(see paras 64, 69)
4.        Article EC and, from the date on which they became applicable, Article 9(1) of Directive 2002/21/EC on a common regulatory
         framework for electronic communications networks and services, Article 5(1), the second subparagraph of Article 5(2) and Article
         7(3) of Directive 2002/on the authorisation of electronic communications networks and services, and Article of Directive
         2002/on competition in the markets for electronic communications networks and services must be interpreted as precluding,
         in television broadcasting matters, national legislation the application of which makes it impossible for an operator holding
         rights to broadcast in the absence of broadcasting radio frequencies granted on the basis of objective, transparent, non-discriminatory
         and proportionate criteria.
      
(see para. 116, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
January (*)
      
(Freedom to provide services – Electronic communications – Television broadcasting activities – New common regulatory framework – Allocation of radio frequencies)
In Case C‑380/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, from the Consiglio di Stato (Italy), made by decision of April
         2005, received at the Court on October 2005, in the proceedings
      
Centro Europa Srl
v
Ministero delle Comunicazioni e Autorità per le garanzie nelle comunicazioni,
      
Direzione generale per le concessioni e le autorizzazioni del Ministero delle Comunicazioni,
      
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, G. Arestis, R. Silva de Lapuerta, J. Malenovský and T. von Danwitz,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: M. Poiares Maduro,
Registrar: B. Fülöp, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on November 2006,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Centro Europa Srl, by A. Pace, R. Mastroianni and O. Grandinetti, avvocati,
–        the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, assisted by P. Gentili, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by F. Benyon, E. Traversa, M. Shotter and F. Amato, acting as Agents, assisted
         by L.G. Radicati di Brozolo, avvocato,
      
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2007,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation, in the national terrestrial television broadcasting sector,
         of the provisions of the EC Treaty on freedom to provide services and competition, Directive 2002/21/EC of the European Parliament
         and of the Council of March on a common regulatory framework for electronic communications networks and services (Framework
         Directive) (OJ L 108, p. 33) (‘the Framework Directive’), Directive 2002/20/EC of the European Parliament and of the
         Council of March on the authorisation of electronic communications networks and services (Authorisation Directive)
         (OJ L 108, p. 21) (‘the Authorisation Directive’), Commission Directive 2002/77/EC of September on competition
         in the markets for electronic communications networks and services (OJ L 249, p. 21) (‘the Competition Directive’), and
         Article of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, signed in Rome on November
         (‘the ECHR’), in so far as Article EU refers thereto.
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between Centro Europa Srl (‘Centro Europa 7’) and the Ministero delle Comunicazioni,
         the Autorità per le garanzie nelle comunicazioni and the Direzione generale per le concessioni e le autorizzazioni del Ministero
         delle Comunicazioni (collectively, ‘the defendants in the main proceedings’).
      
 Relevant provisions
 Community legislation 
The new common regulatory framework for electronic communications services, electronic communications networks, associated
         facilities and associated services (‘the NCRF’) consists of the Framework Directive and four specific directives, including
         the Authorisation Directive, which are supplemented by the Competition Directive.
      
 The Framework Directive 
Article 1(1) of the Framework Directive provides as follows:
      
‘This Directive establishes a harmonised framework for the regulation of electronic communications services, electronic communications
         networks, associated facilities and associated services. It lays down tasks of national regulatory authorities and establishes
         a set of procedures to ensure the harmonised application of the regulatory framework throughout the Community.’
      
Article 1(3) of the Framework Directive provides:
      
‘This Directive as well as the Specific Directives are without prejudice to measures taken at Community or national level,
         in compliance with Community law, to pursue general interest objectives, in particular relating to content regulation and
         audio-visual policy.’
      
Article of the Framework Directive provides:
      
‘For the purposes of this Directive:
(a)      “electronic communications network” means transmission systems … which permit the conveyance of signals by wire, by radio,
         by optical or by other electromagnetic means, including satellite networks, fixed … and mobile terrestrial networks, … networks
         used for radio and television broadcasting, and cable television networks, irrespective of the type of information conveyed;
      
…
(c)      “electronic communications service” means a service normally provided for remuneration which consists wholly or mainly in
         the conveyance of signals on electronic communications networks, including telecommunications services and transmission services
         in networks used for broadcasting …
      
…’
Article of the Framework Directive, entitled ‘Policy objectives and regulatory principles’, provides:
      
‘1.      Member States shall ensure that in carrying out the regulatory tasks specified in this Directive and the Specific Directives,
         the national regulatory authorities take all reasonable measures which are aimed at achieving the objectives set out in paragraphs
         2, and 4. Such measures shall be proportionate to those objectives.
      
…
2.      The national regulatory authorities shall promote competition in the provision of electronic communications networks, electronic
         communications services and associated facilities and services by inter alia:
      
…
(b)      ensuring that there is no distortion or restriction of competition in the electronic communications sector;
…
(d)      encouraging efficient use and ensuring the effective management of radio frequencies and numbering resources. 
3.      The national regulatory authorities shall contribute to the development of the internal market by inter alia:
(a)      removing remaining obstacles to the provision of electronic communications networks, associated facilities and services and
         electronic communications services at European level;
      
…’
Article 9(1) of the Framework Directive provides that ‘Member States shall ensure the effective management of radio frequencies
         for electronic communication services in their territory’ and ‘that the allocation and assignment of such radio frequencies
         by national regulatory authorities are based on objective, transparent, non-discriminatory and proportionate criteria’.
      
Article 28(1) of the Framework Directive states that ‘Member States shall adopt and publish the laws, regulations and administrative
         provisions necessary to comply with this Directive not later than July 2003’ and ‘shall apply those measures from July
         2003.’
      
 The Authorisation Directive 
Article of the Authorisation Directive provides:
      
‘1.      The aim of this Directive is to implement an internal market in electronic communications networks and services through the
         harmonisation and simplification of authorisation rules and conditions in order to facilitate their provision throughout the
         Community.
      
2.      This Directive shall apply to authorisations for the provision of electronic communications networks and services.’
Article 2(1) of the Authorisation Directive provides:
      
‘For the purposes of this Authorisation Directive, the definitions set out in Article of … [the Framework Directive] shall
         apply.’
      
Article 2(2)(a) of the Authorisation Directive provides that ‘general authorisation’ means ‘a legal framework established
         by the Member State ensuring rights for the provision of electronic communications networks or services and laying down sector
         specific obligations that may apply to all or to specific types of electronic communications networks and services, in accordance
         with this Directive’.
      
Article of the Authorisation Directive, entitled ‘General authorisation of electronic communications networks and services’,
         provides: 
      
‘1.      Member States shall ensure the freedom to provide electronic communications networks and services, subject to the conditions
         set out in this Directive. To this end, Member States shall not prevent an undertaking from providing electronic communications
         networks or services, except where this is necessary for the reasons set out in Article 46(1) of the Treaty.
      
2.      The provision of electronic communications networks or the provision of electronic communications services may, without prejudice
         to the specific obligations referred to in Article 6(2) or rights of use referred to in Article 5, only be subject to a general
         authorisation. The undertaking concerned may be required to submit a notification but may not be required to obtain an explicit
         decision or any other administrative act by the national regulatory authority before exercising the rights stemming from the
         authorisation. Upon notification, when required, an undertaking may begin activity, where necessary subject to the provisions
         on rights of use in Articles 5, and 7.
      
…’
Article of the Authorisation Directive, entitled ‘Rights of use for radio frequencies and numbers’, reads as follows:
      
‘1.      Member States shall, where possible, in particular where the risk of harmful interference is negligible, not make the use
         of radio frequencies subject to the grant of individual rights of use but shall include the conditions for usage of such radio
         frequencies in the general authorisation.
      
2.      Where it is necessary to grant individual rights of use for radio frequencies and numbers, Member States shall grant such
         rights, upon request, to any undertaking providing or using networks or services under the general authorisation, subject
         to the provisions of Articles 6, and 11(1)(c) of this Directive and any other rules ensuring the efficient use of those
         resources in accordance with … [the Framework Directive].
      
Without prejudice to specific criteria and procedures adopted by Member States to grant rights of use of radio frequencies
         to providers of radio or television broadcast content services with a view to pursuing general interest objectives in conformity
         with Community law, such rights of use shall be granted through open, transparent and non-discriminatory procedures …
      
… 
5.      Member States shall not limit the number of rights of use to be granted except where this is necessary to ensure the efficient
         use of radio frequencies in accordance with Article 7.’
      
Article of the Authorisation Directive, entitled ‘Procedure for limiting the number of rights of use to be granted for radio
         frequencies’, provides:
      
‘1.      Where a Member State is considering whether to limit the number of rights of use to be granted for radio frequencies, it shall
         inter alia:
      
(a)      give due weight to the need to maximise benefits for users and to facilitate the development of competition;
…
(c)      publish any decision to limit the granting of rights of use, stating the reasons therefore;
(d)      after having determined the procedure, invite applications for rights of use; and
(e)      review the limitation at reasonable intervals or at the reasonable request of affected undertakings.
…
3.      Where the granting of rights of use for radio frequencies needs to be limited, Member States shall grant such rights on the
         basis of selection criteria which must be objective, transparent, non-discriminatory and proportionate. Any such selection
         criteria must give due weight to the achievement of the objectives of Article of … [the Framework Directive].
      
…’
Article of the Authorisation Directive, entitled ‘Existing authorisations’, reads as follows:
      
‘1.      Member States shall bring authorisations already in existence on the date of entry into force of this Directive into line
         with the provisions of this Directive by at the latest the date of application referred to in Article 18(1), second subparagraph.
      
…’
Article 18(1) of the Authorisation Directive states that the ‘Member States shall adopt and publish the laws, regulations
         and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directive by July at the latest’ and ‘shall apply those
         measures from July 2003.’
      
 The Competition Directive
According to points and of Article of the Competition Directive, that directive is to apply to electronic communications
         networks and electronic communications services, as defined in Article 2(a) and (c) of the Framework Directive. 
      
Article of the Competition Directive, entitled ‘Exclusive and special rights for electronic communications networks and
         electronic communications services’, provides: 
      
‘1.      Member States shall not grant or maintain in force exclusive or special rights for the establishment and/or the provision
         of electronic communications networks, or for the provision of publicly available electronic communications services.
      
2.      Member States shall take all measures necessary to ensure that any undertaking is entitled to provide electronic communications
         services or to establish, extend or provide electronic communications networks.
      
…
4.      Member States shall ensure that a general authorisation granted to an undertaking to provide electronic communications services
         or to establish and/or provide electronic communications networks, as well as the conditions attached thereto, shall be based
         on objective, non-discriminatory, proportionate and transparent criteria.
      
…’
Article of the Competition Directive, entitled ‘Rights of use of frequencies’, states:
      
‘Without prejudice to specific criteria and procedures adopted by Member States to grant rights of use of radio frequencies
         to providers of radio or television broadcast content services with a view to pursuing general interest objectives in conformity
         with Community law:
      
1.      Member States shall not grant exclusive or special rights of use of radio frequencies for the provision of electronic communications
         services.
      
2.      The assignment of radio frequencies for electronic communication services shall be based on objective, transparent, non-discriminatory
         and proportionate criteria.’
      
Article of the Competition Directive provides:
      
‘Member States shall supply to the Commission not later than July such information as will allow the Commission to
         confirm that the provisions of this Directive have been complied with.’
      
 National legislation
 Law No of July Law No of July (Ordinary Supplement to GURI No of July 1997) (‘Law No 249/1997’), which came into force
         on August 1998, set up the Autorità per le garanzie nelle comunicazioni (Communications Regulatory Authority; ‘the Autorità’).
      
Article 2(6) of Law No 249/imposed restrictions on concentrations in the television broadcasting sector, prohibiting
         the same operator from holding rights permitting it to broadcast at national level on more than 20% of the television channels
         operating on terrestrial frequencies.
      
Article 3(1) of Law No 249/provided that operators authorised to broadcast under the previous legal framework could continue
         to broadcast at national and local level until new rights were granted or applications for new rights were rejected but, in
         any event, not after April 1998.
      
Article 3(2) of Law No 249/provided for the adoption by the Autorità of a national plan for the allocation of radio frequencies
         for broadcast television (‘the national allocation plan for radio frequencies’) by January at the latest and, on the
         basis of that plan, the allocation of new rights by April at the latest.
      
According to the information in the decision making the reference, borne out by the observations of the Italian Government
         and the Commission of the European Communities, the national allocation plan for radio frequencies was adopted on October
         by Decision No 68/of the Autorità, and that authority adopted, by Decision No 78/of December 1998, the regulation
         concerning the conditions and detailed rules governing the grant of television broadcasting rights on analogue terrestrial
         frequencies.
      
Article 3(6) of Law No 249/provided for transitional arrangements for the existing national television channels exceeding
         the limits for concentration imposed in Article 2(6) of that Law (‘the channels in breach of the threshold’) by allowing those
         channels to continue to broadcast on terrestrial radio frequencies on a transitional basis after April 1998, in compliance
         with the obligations imposed on the channels holding rights, provided that the programmes were broadcast on satellite or cable
         at the same time.
      
Under Article 3(7) of Law No 249/1997, the Autorità was entrusted with determining the period within which, having regard
         to the real and significant increase in users watching programmes by cable or satellite, the channels in breach of the threshold
         were to broadcast their programmes only by satellite or cable, thus relinquishing terrestrial radio frequencies. 
      
According to the information in the decision making the reference and supported by the observations of the Italian Government
         and the Commission, by judgment No of the Corte costituzionale (Constitutional Court) (Italy) of November (GURI
         of November 2002), that deadline was fixed at December 2003.
      
 Law No of March According to the case-file, under Decree-Law No of January (GURI No of January 2001, p. 5), converted into
         law and amended by Law No of March (GURI No of March 2001, p. 3), the operators lawfully engaged in television
         broadcasting activities on terrestrial frequencies were authorised to continue to broadcast until the national allocation
         plan for radio frequencies for digital television was implemented.
      
 Law No of February and Law No of May Article of Decree-Law No of December (GURI No of December 2003, p. 4; ‘Decree-Law No 352/2003’), converted
         into law and amended by Law No of February (GURI No of February 2004, p. 4), authorised the channels in breach
         of the threshold to continue their broadcasts on the televised analogue and digital networks pending the completion of an
         inquiry into the development of digital television channels.
      
Law No of May (Ordinary Supplement to GURI No of May 2004) (‘Law No 112/2004’) specified the different stages
         for the launch of the phase of digital broadcasting on terrestrial radio frequencies.
      
Article of Law No 112/provides:
      
1.      ‘Until the national allocation plan for radio frequencies for digital television has been implemented, the operators exercising,
         on any basis, television broadcasting activities at national or local level who fulfil the conditions necessary to obtain
         authorisation for experimental digital broadcasting on terrestrial frequencies, under … Decree-Law No [of January 2001],
         now, after amendment, Law No [of March 2001], may carry out, including by simultaneous repeats of programmes already
         broadcast using analogue technology, the experimentation in question, until the conversion of the networks has been completed,
         and apply, from the date of entry into force of this Law, … for the licences and authorisations necessary to broadcast using
         digital technology on terrestrial frequencies.
      
2.      Experimental digital broadcasting may be carried out by means of installations lawfully exercising analogue activities on
         the date of the entry into force of this Law.
      
3.      In order to allow digital networks to be set up, transfers of installations or branches of undertakings between operators
         lawfully televising at national or local level shall be authorised, on condition that acquisitions are intended for digital
         broadcasting.
      
…
5.      With effect from the date of entry into force of this Law, the licence to operate a television network shall be issued, upon
         request, to persons lawfully engaged in television broadcasting pursuant to a grant of rights or under the general consent
         provided for in subparagraph 1, where they show that they have attained a coverage of not less than 50% of the population
         or of the local catchment area.
      
…
9.      In order to facilitate the conversion of the analogue system to the digital system, the broadcasting of television programmes
         shall be carried on through installations lawfully operating on the date of the entry into force of this Law …’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
The dispute in the main proceedings relates to compensation for the harm which Centro Europa claims to have suffered as
         a result of the fact that the defendants in the main proceedings did not allocate to it radio frequencies for terrestrial
         analogue television broadcasting.
      
On July 1999, Centro Europa was granted by the competent Italian authorities, pursuant to Law No 249/1997, rights for
         terrestrial television broadcasting at national level authorising the installation and use of a television network using analogue
         technology. For the allocation of radio frequencies, the rights referred to the national allocation plan for radio frequencies,
         which was adopted on October 1998. According to the national court, however, that plan has not been implemented, with the
         result that, although it has rights, Centro Europa has never been in a position to broadcast for lack of radio frequencies.
      
Centro Europa brought an action before the Tribunale amministrativo regionale (Regional Administrative Court) del Lazio
         (Italy) seeking, inter alia, a declaration that it was entitled to the allocation of frequencies and to compensation for the
         damage suffered.
      
That court dismissed that application by judgment of September 2004.
      
According to the decision making the reference, in the appeal brought by Centro Europa against that judgment before the
         Consiglio di Stato (Council of State) (Italy), the defendants in the main proceedings invoke against it, inter alia, Law No
         112/2004.
      
While stating, in that decision, that it restricted its examination to Centro Europa 7’s application for damages and did not
         intend to rule at that stage on the application for the grant of radio frequencies, the Consiglio di Stato observes that the
         failure to allocate radio frequencies to Centro Europa was caused by essentially legislative factors.
      
It notes that Article 3(2) of Law No 249/enabled the ‘de facto users’ of radio frequencies, authorised to carry on their
         activity under the earlier system, to continue broadcasting until new rights were granted or applications for new rights were
         rejected and, in any event, not after April 1998.
      
It notes, also, that Article 3(7) of Law No 249/authorised the continuation of those broadcasts by referring back to
         the Autorità to fix a deadline, on the sole condition that the programmes are broadcast simultaneously on terrestrial radio
         frequencies and by satellite or cable. In the absence of a date fixed by the Autorità, the Corte costituzionale set December
         as the date by which the programmes broadcast by the channels in breach of the threshold would have to be broadcast only
         by satellite or cable, so that, according to the national court, the radio frequencies to be allocated to Centro Europa would be freed up.
      
According to the national court, that deadline was, however, not complied with following the intervention of the national
         legislature, as Article of Decree-Law No 352/2003, now Law No of February 2004, extended the activities of the channels
         in breach of the threshold pending the completion of an inquiry by the Autorità into the development of digital channels,
         then by virtue of Law No 112/2004, in the light of, inter alia, Article 23(5) thereof.
      
Law No 112/extended, by a general authorisation mechanism, the possibility for the channels in breach of the threshold
         to continue to broadcast on the terrestrial radio frequencies until the national allocation plan for radio frequencies for
         digital television was implemented, with the result that those channels were not required to free up the radio frequencies
         intended for allocation to the rights holders.
      
According to the national court, that Law therefore had the effect of blocking the radio frequencies intended for allocation
         to the rights holders and of preventing operators other than those de facto broadcasting on terrestrial frequencies from participating
         in the digital television experimentation.
      
Since Centro Europa disputed the compatibility of Decree-Law No 352/and Law No 112/with Community law, the Consiglio
         di Stato asks whether the Italian legislation, starting from Law No 249/1997, is compatible with the Treaty provisions on
         freedom to provide services and on competition, Articles and 9(1) of the Framework Directive, Articles 5, and of the
         Authorisation Directive and the principle of pluralism of information sources, part of Article of the ECHR, as a general
         principle of Community law.
      
In those circumstances, the Consiglio di Stato decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to the
         Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1. Does Article of the ECHR, as referred to in Article of the [EU] Treaty, guarantee pluralism in the broadcasting sector,
         thus requiring the Member States to secure pluralism and competition in the sector based on an antitrust system which, in
         step with technological development, secures network access and a multiplicity of operators and renders duopolistic market
         behaviour unlawful?
      
2. Do the provisions of the … Treaty which secure freedom to provide services and competition, on the interpretation provided
         by the Commission in the interpretative communication of April on grants of rights under Community law, require the
         principles governing that matter to be capable of ensuring equal non-discriminatory treatment, as well as transparency, proportionality
         and respect for the rights of individuals; and are those provisions and principles of the Treaty infringed by Article 3(7)
         of Italian Law No 249/1997, and by Article of Decree-Law [No 352/2003], inasmuch as those provisions enabled individuals
         operating networks in breach of the limits laid down by competition law to continue to operate, thereby excluding operators,
         such as the appellant undertaking, which, though in possession of the relevant rights granted following a regular competitive
         procedure, were unable to carry on the activity in respect of which such rights were granted because of a failure to allocate
         frequencies owing to their insufficient number or scarcity as a result of the continued exercise of rights by the owners of
         networks in breach of the limits on concentrations under antitrust law?
      
3. With effect from July 2003, does Article of [the Authorisation Directive] render that directive directly effective
         in the internal legal order and oblige a Member State which has granted broadcasting rights (right to install networks or
         provide electronic communication services or the right to use frequencies) to bring them into line with Community rules; and
         does that entail the need actually to allocate the frequencies necessary for carrying on the activity in question?
      
4. Do Article of [the Framework Directive] and Article of the Authorisation Directive providing for transparent and non-discriminatory
         public procedures (Article 5) conducted on the basis of objective, transparent, non-discriminatory and proportionate criteria
         (Article 9) preclude a system providing for general authorisation under national law (Article 23(5) of Law No 112/2004); by
         permitting the continued operation, under that system of networks in breach of limits and not selected under a competitive
         procedure, do those provisions ultimately impinge on the Community-law rights under (Article 17(2) of the … Authorisation
         Directive) of other undertakings which are prevented from operating even though they have been successful in competitive procedures?
      
5. Do Article of the [Framework Directive], the second subparagraph of Article 5(2) and Article 7(3) of the Authorisation
         Directive, and Article of the [Competition Directive], require the Member States to arrange for the cessation, at least
         as from July (see Article of the Authorisation Directive), of a situation of de facto use of frequencies (use of
         facilities without grant of rights or authorisations issued following a selection procedure), on the basis of the broadcasting
         system already in place, so that broadcasting cannot be undertaken where there is no proper planning in regard to matters
         concerning the airwaves and no logical increase in pluralism, in contravention of rights awarded by the Member State following
         a public procedure?
      
6. Is the derogation in the second subparagraph of Article 5(2) of the … Authorisation Directive, and in Article of the
         [Competition Directive], available to be relied on by the Member State solely in order to protect pluralism of information
         and to guarantee the protection of cultural or linguistic diversity and not in favour of operators of networks in breach of
         the antitrust limits laid down in national competition legislation?
      
7. In order to benefit from the derogation under Article of [the Authorisation Directive], does the Member State have to
         indicate the objectives actually pursued by the national derogatory rules?
      
8. May that derogation be applied, in addition to the case of the concessionary of the public broadcasting service (RAI in
         Italy), in favour also of private operators who have been unsuccessful in competitive procedures and to the detriment of undertakings
         who may have duly been granted rights following a competitive procedure?
      
9. Under Community rules (primary and secondary legislation) on workable competition in the broadcasting sector, ought the
         national legislature to have avoided extending the old transitory analogue system on the advent of the terrestrial digital
         system (and the attendant generalised transition to digital)? Only if analogue broadcasting is ended and replaced by the switch
         to digital will it be possible to reallocate frequencies freed for various uses. If terrestrial digital is merely operated
         alongside analogue, there will be an attendant accentuating of the scarcity of available frequencies owing to the existence
         of analogue and digital transmission in parallel (simulcast)?
      
10. Lastly, is the pluralism of sources of information and of competition in the broadcasting sector, which is guaranteed
         by European law, secured by national rules, such as Law No 112/providing for a new limit of per cent of resources
         linked to a new very wide criterion (the ICS – integrated communications system – Article 2(g) and Article of Law No 112/2004)?
         This criterion also brings in activities which do not affect media pluralism, whereas under antitrust law the “relevant market”
         is constructed normally by differentiating the markets in the broadcasting sector by drawing a distinction between pay TV
         and non-pay TV operating via the airwaves (reference is made inter alia to [Commission Decision of March declaring
         a concentration to be compatible with the common market (Case No COMP/JV. – BSKYB/Kirch Pay TV], based on [Council Regulation
         (EEC) No 4064/of December on the control of concentrations between undertakings] Merger Procedure 21/03/and
         [Commission Decision of April declaring a concentration to be compatible with the common market and the EEA Agreement
         (Case No COMP/M. – Newscorp/Telepiù), based on [Regulation No 4064/89].’
      
 The questions 
By its questions, the national court asks the Court, essentially, to rule on the interpretation of the provisions of the Treaty
         on freedom to provide services and competition, the Framework Directive, the Authorisation Directive, the Competition Directive
         and Article of the ECHR, in so far as Article EU refers thereto.
      
 The jurisdiction of the Court and the admissibility of the questions
As a preliminary point, it must be stated, first, that by some of its questions the national court is inviting the Court to
         give a ruling on the compatibility with Community law of certain provisions of the Italian legislation relevant in this case.
         
      
It is not the task of the Court, in preliminary ruling proceedings, to rule upon the compatibility of provisions of national
         law with Community law or to interpret national legislation or regulations (see Case C‑151/Jaeger [2003] ECR I‑8389, paragraph 43, and Case C‑237/Enirisorse [2006] ECR I‑2843, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
The Court has, however, repeatedly held that it is competent to give the national court full guidance on the interpretation
         of Community law in order to enable it to determine the issue of compatibility for the purposes of the case before it (see,
         inter alia, Case C‑292/Hünermundand Others [1993] ECR I‑6787, paragraph 8, and Enirisorse, paragraph 24).
      
It is therefore appropriate for the Court, in the present case, to restrict its analysis to the provisions of Community law
         by providing an interpretation of them which will be of use to the national court, which has the task of determining the compatibility
         of the provisions of national law with Community law, for the purposes of deciding the dispute before it.
      
Secondly, it must be recalled that, according to settled case-law, it is solely for the national court before which the dispute
         has been brought, and which must assume responsibility for the subsequent judicial decision, to determine in the light of
         the particular circumstances of the case both the need for a preliminary ruling in order to enable it to deliver judgment
         and the relevance of the questions which it submits to the Court (Case C‑415/Bosman [1995] ECR I‑4921, paragraph 59, and Case C‑466/Acereda Herrera [2006] ECR I‑5341, paragraph 47).
      
None the less, the Court has no jurisdiction to give a preliminary ruling on a question submitted by a national court where
         it is quite obvious that the ruling sought by that court on the interpretation of a Community rule bears no relation to the
         actual facts of the main action or its purpose, where the problem is hypothetical, or where the Court does not have before
         it the factual or legal material necessary to give a useful answer to the questions submitted to it (Bosman, paragraph 61; Acereda Herrera, paragraph 48; and Joined Cases C‑94/and C‑202/Cipolla and Others [2006] ECR I‑11421, paragraph 25).
      
In that regard, the decision making the reference must set out the precise reasons why the national court was unsure as to
         the interpretation of Community law and why it considered it necessary to refer questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling.
         Against that background, it is essential that the national court provide at the very least some explanation of the reasons
         for the choice of the Community provisions which it requires to be interpreted and of the link it establishes between those
         provisions and the national legislation applicable to the dispute in the main proceedings (order in Case C‑167/Grau Gomis and Others [1995] ECR I‑1023, paragraph 9; Joined Cases C‑453/03, C‑11/04, C‑12/and C‑194/ABNA and Others [2005] ECR I‑10423, paragraph 46; Joined Cases C‑338/04, C‑359/and C‑360/Placanica and Others [2007] ECR I‑1891, paragraph 34; and Case C‑295/Asemfo [2007] ECR I‑2999, paragraph 33). 
      
It must be stated, however, that as regards its tenth question, the national court does not give any indication as to the
         Community provisions which it requires to be interpreted or any explanation of the link it establishes between those provisions
         and the dispute in the main proceedings or the subject-matter of that dispute.
      
The tenth question is for that reason inadmissible.
      
Thirdly, the need to provide an interpretation of Community law which will be of use to the national court makes it necessary
         that the referring court should define the factual and legislative context of the questions it is asking or, at the very least,
         explain the factual circumstances on which those questions are based (see Joined Cases C‑320/to C‑322/Telemarsicabruzzo and Others [1993] ECR I‑393, paragraph 6; Case C‑341/Bettati [1998] ECR I‑4355, paragraph 67; Case C‑67/Albany International [1999] ECR I‑5751, paragraph 39; and Cipolla and Others, paragraph 25).
      
Those requirements are of particular importance in the area of competition, which is characterised by complex factual and
         legal situations (see Telemarsicabruzzo and Others, paragraph 7; Bettati, paragraph 68; and Albany International, paragraph 39).
      
In this case, as the Advocate General notes in point of his Opinion, it seems that, by asking for an interpretation of
         the provisions of the Treaty on competition in its second question, the referring court has in mind, essentially, Article 86(1)
         EC, read in conjunction with Article EC.
      
In accordance with the Court’s case‑law, a Member State infringes the prohibitions laid down by those two provisions where
         the undertaking in question, merely by exercising the special or exclusive rights conferred on it, is led to abuse its dominant
         position or where such rights are liable to create a situation in which that undertaking is led to commit such abuses (Joined
         Cases C‑180/to C‑184/Pavlov and Others [2000] ECR I‑6451, paragraph 127; Case C‑475/Ambulanz Glöckner [2001] ECR I‑8089, paragraph 39; and Case C‑451/Servizi Ausiliari Dottori Commercialisti [2006] ECR I‑2941, paragraph 23).
      
However, the decision making the reference does not contain any indication regarding, inter alia, the definition of the relevant
         market, the calculation of the market shares held by the various undertakings operating on that market, and the supposed abuse
         of a dominant position.
      
Consequently, it must be held that, in so far as it relates to the Treaty provisions on competition, the second question is
         inadmissible (see, to that effect, Case C‑134/Viacom Outdoor [2005] ECR I‑1167, paragraphs to 29).
      
The ninth question must be regarded as being inadmissible on the same grounds.
      
Fourthly, it is necessary to determine whether the Court has jurisdiction in the present case to give a ruling on Article EC, since it is common ground that all aspects of the main proceedings are confined within only one Member State.
      
National legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which applies without distinction to Italian nationals
         and to nationals of other Member States, is generally likely to fall within the scope of the provisions on freedom to provide
         services established by the Treaty only to the extent to which it applies to situations related to intra-Community trade (see,
         to that effect, Case 286/Oosthoek’s Uitgeversmaatschappij [1982] ECR 4575, paragraph 9, and Case C‑6/Anomar and Others [2003] ECR I‑8621, paragraph 39).
      
It is possible, in the main proceedings, that undertakings established in Member States other than the Italian Republic have
         been or would be interested in providing the services concerned (see, to that effect, Case C‑87/Commission v Belgium [1996] ECR I‑2043, paragraph 33, and Case C‑458/Parking Brixen [2005] ECR I‑8585, paragraph 55).
      
The finding of a link with intra-Community trade will be presumed if the market in question has a certain cross-border interest
         (Case C‑507/Commission v Ireland [2007] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 29), which it is for the national court to determine.
      
In any event, it is necessary to answer the second question referred to the Court in this case since it relates to Article EC.
      
Such a reply might be useful to the national court if its national law were to require that an Italian national must be allowed
         to enjoy the same rights as those which a national of another Member State would derive from Community law in the same situation
         (Case C‑448/Guimont [2000] ECR I‑10663, paragraph 23; Joined Cases C‑515/99, C‑519/to C‑524/and C‑526/to C‑540/Reisch and Others [2002] ECR I‑2157, paragraph 26; Anomar and Others, paragraph 41; Servizi Ausiliari Dottori Commercialisti, paragraph 29; and Cipolla and Others, paragraph 30).
      
Consequently, the Court has jurisdiction to give a ruling on the interpretation of Article EC.
      
The second question is therefore admissible in so far as it relates to Article EC.
      
 The second, fourth and fifth questions
The second, fourth and fifth questions all relate, essentially, to whether the provisions of Article EC or the NCRF preclude,
         in television broadcasting matters, national legislation the application of which means that it is impossible for an operator
         holding rights to broadcast without the allocation of broadcasting radio frequencies.
      
It is true that, in respect of the second question, the Court can answer from the point of view of Article EC only in so
         far as that question relates to Italian legislation, namely Article 3(7) of Law No 249/1997, which pre-dates the application
         of the NCRF, as is clear from Article 28(1) of the Framework Directive, Article 18(1) of the Authorisation Directive and Article of the Competition Directive.
      
Likewise, the fourth and fifth questions refer only to the NCRF, since they concern national legislation subsequent to the
         date of application of the NCRF, namely the provisions of Law No 112/2004.
      
First, however, the second question also relates to Italian legislation subsequent to the applicability of the NCRF, namely
         Article of Decree-Law No 352/2003.
      
Secondly, as pointed out by the Commission in its observations to the Court, the NCRF implemented provisions of the Treaty,
         in particular those on freedom to provide services, in the area of electronic communications networks and services, as defined
         in Articles 2(a) and (c) of the Framework Directive, Article 2(1) of the Authorisation Directive and points and of Article of the Competition Directive.
      
The second, fourth and fifth questions must therefore be dealt with together, since the answers relating to the NCRF are relevant
         only from its date of application, as set out in Article 28(1) of the Framework Directive, Article 18(1) of the Authorisation
         Directive and Article of the Competition Directive.
      
In order to provide an answer which is of use to the national court, it should be recalled that the Treaty does not require
         national monopolies having a commercial character to be abolished completely, but requires them to be adjusted in such a way
         as to ensure that no discrimination regarding the conditions under which goods are procured and marketed exists between nationals
         of Member States (Case C‑189/Franzén [1997] ECR I‑5909, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
However, Article EC precludes the application of any national rules which have the effect of making the provision of services
         between Member States more difficult than the provision of services purely within one Member State (Joined Cases C‑544/and C‑545/Mobistar and Belgacom Mobile [2005] ECR I‑7723, paragraph 30).
      
In the area of electronic communications networks and services, those principles were implemented by the NCRF.
      
Article of the Framework Directive places on the Member States the obligation to ensure that the national regulatory authorities
         take all reasonable measures aimed at promoting competition in the provision of electronic communications services, ensuring
         that there is no distortion or restriction of competition in the electronic communications sector and removing remaining obstacles
         to the provision of those services at European level.
      
Likewise, Article 2(2) of the Competition Directive requires the Member States to take all measures necessary to ensure that
         any undertaking is entitled to provide electronic communications services or to establish, extend or provide electronic communications
         networks.
      
Article 3(1) of the Authorisation Directive also enjoins the Member States to ensure the freedom to provide electronic communications
         networks and services and prohibits them from preventing an undertaking from providing those networks or services, except
         where this is necessary for the reasons set out in Article 46(1) EC.
      
For that purpose, Article 3(2) of the Authorisation Directive states that the provision of electronic communications networks
         or electronic communications services may be subject only to a general authorisation.
      
On that point, it must be stated that, in the area of television broadcasting, freedom to provide services, as enshrined in
         Article EC and implemented in this area by the NCRF, requires not only the grant of broadcasting authorisations, but also
         the grant of broadcasting radio frequencies.
      
An operator cannot exercise effectively the rights which it derives from Community law in terms of access to the television
         broadcasting market without broadcasting radio frequencies.
      
To that end, Article 9(1) of the Framework Directive provides that the ‘Member States shall ensure the effective management
         of radio frequencies for electronic communication services in their territory’.
      
Similarly, Article 5(1) of the Authorisation Directive states that, where possible, Member States may not, in particular where
         the risk of harmful interference is negligible, make the use of radio frequencies subject to the grant of individual rights
         of use but are to include the conditions for usage of such radio frequencies in the general authorisation.
      
Moreover, point of Article of the Competition Directive prohibits the Member States from granting exclusive or special
         rights of use of radio frequencies for the provision of electronic communications services.
      
In the present case, the national court questions the Court on the criteria applied for the grant of radio frequencies for
         the purpose of operating on the analogue television broadcasting market.
      
The national court is not questioning the Court on the criteria which have been applied, pursuant to Law No 249/1997, for
         the grant of rights to operate on the analogue television broadcasting market. Nor are those criteria disputed by Centro Europa
         7, either before the national court or in the observations it has submitted to the Court, since Centro Europa was granted
         rights in accordance with those criteria.
      
There is therefore no need for the Court to give a ruling on those criteria.
      
The national court has doubts as to the compatibility of Law No 249/with Community law only in so far as Article 3(7)
         of that Law set up transitional arrangements in favour of the incumbent networks, which had the effect of preventing operators
         without radio frequencies, such as Centro Europa 7, from accessing the market in question.
      
The national court is also questioning the Court on the criteria applied, pursuant to Law No 112/2004, for granting rights
         to operate on the digital and analogue television broadcasting market, only in so far as those criteria consolidated the transitional
         arrangements structured in favour of the existing networks in Article of Decree-Law No 352/2003, which had the effect of
         precluding the grant to operators of radio frequencies for the purpose of operating on the analogue television broadcasting
         market, even though they had been granted rights under Law No 249/1997.
      
In that regard, the successive application of the transitional arrangements structured in favour of the incumbent networks
         in Article 3(7) of Law No 249/and Article of Decree-Law No 352/had the effect of preventing operators without
         broadcasting radio frequencies from accessing the market in question.
      
The view must also be taken that, by issuing a general authorisation to operate on the broadcasting services market only to
         the incumbent networks, Article 23(5) of Law No 112/consolidated the restrictive effect confirmed in the preceding paragraph.
      
First, by limiting de facto the number of operators able to broadcast on the market in question, those measures are and/or
         were likely to hinder the provision of services in the area of television broadcasting.
      
Secondly, those measures have and/or have had the effect of freezing the structures on the national market and protecting
         the position of the operators already active on that market.
      
Consequently, Article EC and, from the date on which they became applicable, Article 9(1) of the Framework Directive, Article 5(1)
         of the Authorisation Directive and point of Article of the Competition Directive preclude such measures unless they are
         justified.
      
In that respect, it is clear from the case-law of the Court that a licensing system which restricts the number of operators
         in the national territory is capable of being justified by general-interest objectives (see, to that effect, Placanica and Others, paragraph 53), on condition that the restrictions resulting from them are appropriate and do not go beyond what is necessary
         to attain those objectives.
      
Thus, the NCRF expressly allows the Member States, under Article 1(3) of the Framework Directive, to adopt or maintain, in
         compliance with Community law, provisions pursuing general-interest objectives, in particular relating to audio‑visual policy.
      
Likewise, the first subparagraph of Article 5(2) of the Authorisation Directive allows the Member States to grant rights to
         the use of radio frequencies on an individual basis with a view to complying with the objective of the efficient use of radio
         frequencies, as referred to by the Framework Directive.
      
However, as the Advocate General stated in points and of his Opinion, in order for such arrangements, which generally
         adversely affect Article EC and the NCRF, to be justified they must not only comply with general-interest objectives but
         also be structured on the basis of objective, transparent, non‑discriminatory and proportionate criteria (see, to that effect,
         Placanica and Others, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Accordingly, Article 9(1) of the Framework Directive provides that the Member States are to ensure that the allocation and
         assignment of radio frequencies by the national regulatory authorities are based on objective, transparent, non‑discriminatory
         and proportionate criteria.
      
Furthermore, where it is necessary to grant individual rights to the use of radio frequencies, those rights must be granted,
         under the second subparagraph of Article 5(2) of the Authorisation Directive, ‘through open, transparent and non‑discriminatory
         procedures’.
      
Likewise, pursuant to Article 7(3) of the Authorisation Directive, ‘[w]here the granting of rights of use for radio frequencies
         needs to be limited, Member States shall grant such rights on the basis of selection criteria which must be objective, transparent,
         non-discriminatory and proportionate’.
      
That requirement is backed up by point of Article of the Competition Directive, under which ‘the assignment of radio frequencies
         for electronic communication services shall be based on objective, transparent, non‑discriminatory and proportionate criteria’.
      
In the main proceedings, according to the information supplied by the national court, under Law No 249/the allocation
         of radio frequencies to a limited number of operators was not carried out in accordance with such criteria. 
      
First, those radio frequencies were allocated de facto to the incumbent networks under the transitional arrangements adjusted
         in Article 3(7) of Law No 249/1997, even though some of those networks had not been granted rights under that Law.
      
Secondly, operators such as Centro Europa were not allocated radio frequencies even though they had been granted rights
         under that Law.
      
Consequently, irrespective of the objectives pursued by Law No 249/with regard to the system for the grant of radio frequencies
         to a limited number of operators, the view must be taken that Article EC precluded such a system.
      
The same conclusion must be drawn as regards the system for the grant of radio frequencies to a limited number of operators
         under Law No 112/2004, in the sense that that scheme was not implemented on the basis of objective, transparent, non‑discriminatory
         and proportionate criteria, in breach of Article EC and, from the date on which they became applicable, Article 9(1) of
         the Framework Directive, the second subparagraph of Article 5(2) and Article 7(3) of the Authorisation Directive and point
         of Article of the Competition Directive.
      
Under Law No 112/2004, radio frequencies were granted to the incumbent operators and the latter were authorised to broadcast
         under the transitional arrangements adjusted in Article of Decree-Law No 352/2003, which merely extended the transitional
         arrangements set up by Law No 249/1997.
      
In any event, the restrictions established above cannot be justified by the need to ensure a swift transformation to digital
         television broadcasting.
      
Irrespective of whether such an objective may constitute a general-interest objective capable of justifying such restrictions,
         it is clear, as the Commission rightly pointed out in the observations which it submitted to the Court, that the Italian legislation,
         in particular Law No 112/2004, does not merely allocate to the incumbent operators a priority right to obtain radio frequencies,
         but reserves them that right exclusively, without restricting in time the privileged position assigned to those operators
         and without providing for any obligation to relinquish the radio frequencies in breach of the threshold after the transfer
         to digital television broadcasting.
      
Having regard to all of the foregoing considerations, the answer to the second, fourth and fifth questions, taken together,
         must be that Article EC and, from the date on which they became applicable, Article 9(1) of the Framework Directive, Article 5(1),
         the second subparagraph of Article 5(2) and Article 7(3) of the Authorisation Directive and Article of the Competition Directive
         must be interpreted as precluding, in television broadcasting matters, national legislation the application of which makes
         it impossible for an operator holding rights to broadcast in the absence of broadcasting radio frequencies granted on the
         basis of objective, transparent, non-discriminatory and proportionate criteria.
      
 The first and third questions
By its first question, the national court asks the Court, essentially, to state whether the provisions of Article of the
         ECHR, in so far as Article EU refers thereto, preclude, in television broadcasting matters, national legislation the application
         of which makes it impossible for an operator holding rights, such as Centro Europa 7, to broadcast without the grant of broadcasting
         radio frequencies.
      
By its third question, the national court questions the Court in regard to the obligation, arising from the possible direct
         effect of Article of the Authorisation Directive from the date on which it became applicable, on the Member State which
         has granted rights for television broadcasting activity, to bring those rights into line with Community law and, therefore,
         to allocate to Centro Europa the broadcasting radio frequencies necessary for it to carry on that activity.
      
By those questions, the national court is thus seeking to determine whether there are infringements of Community law for the
         purpose of ruling on an application for compensation for the losses flowing from such infringements.
      
It follows from the answer to the second, fourth and fifth questions that Article EC and, from the date on which they became
         applicable, Article 9(1) of the Framework Directive, Article 5(1), the second subparagraph of Article 5(2) and Article 7(3)
         of the Authorisation Directive and Article of the Competition Directive must be interpreted as precluding, in television
         broadcasting matters, national legislation the application of which makes it impossible for an operator holding rights to
         broadcast in the absence of broadcasting radio frequencies granted on the basis of objective, transparent, non-discriminatory
         and proportionate criteria.
      
That answer, by itself, thus enables the national court to rule on the application made by Centro Europa for compensation
         for the losses suffered.
      
Consequently, regard being had to the Court’s answer to the second, fourth and fifth questions, it is not necessary to rule
         on the first and third questions.
      
 The sixth, seventh and eighth questions
By its sixth, seventh and eighth questions, the national court questions the Court, essentially, in regard to the conditions
         for the application by the Member States of the derogation laid down in the second subparagraph of Article 5(2) of the Authorisation
         Directive and Article of the Competition Directive.
      
It follows from the answer to the fourth and fifth questions that, from the date on which they became applicable, the second
         subparagraph of Article 5(2) of the Authorisation Directive and Article of the Competition Directive must be interpreted
         as precluding, in television broadcasting matters, national legislation the application of which makes it impossible for an
         operator holding rights to broadcast in the absence of broadcasting radio frequencies granted on the basis of objective, transparent,
         non-discriminatory and proportionate criteria.
      
Accordingly, it follows from that reply that compliance with objective, transparent, non-discriminatory and proportionate
         criteria constitutes a necessary condition for the application of the derogation laid down in the second subparagraph of Article 5(2)
         of the Authorisation Directive and Article of the Competition Directive.
      
There is therefore no need to rule on any other potential conditions for the application of that derogation, such as those
         referred to in the sixth, seventh and eighth questions.
      
Consequently, having regard to the Court’s answer to the fourth and fifth questions, taken together with the second question,
         there is no need to give a ruling on the sixth, seventh and eighth questions.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby rules:
Article EC and, from the date on which they became applicable, Article 9(1) of Directive 2002/21/EC of the European Parliament
            and of the Council of March on a common regulatory framework for electronic communications networks and services (Framework
            Directive), Article 5(1), the second subparagraph of Article 5(2) and Article 7(3) of Directive 2002/20/EC of the European
            Parliament and of the Council of March on the authorisation of electronic communications networks and services (Authorisation
            Directive), and Article of Commission Directive 2002/77/EC of September on competition in the markets for electronic
            communications networks and services must be interpreted as precluding, in television broadcasting matters, national legislation
            the application of which makes it impossible for an operator holding rights to broadcast in the absence of broadcasting radio
            frequencies granted on the basis of objective, transparent, non-discriminatory and proportionate criteria.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 