
Case C-276/Mamate El Youssfi
v
Office national des pensions (ONP)
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Tribunal du travail de Verviers)
(Article 104(3), first subparagraph, of the Rules of Procedure – Euro-Mediterranean Agreement EC-Morocco – Article – Principle of non-discrimination in matters of social security − Statutory Guaranteed Income for Elderly Persons)
Order of the Court (Fifth Chamber), April Summary of the Order
International agreements – Agreements concluded by the Community – Euro-Mediterranean Association Agreement EC-Morocco – Social
            security for migrant workers 
(Euro-Mediterranean Association Agreement EC-Morocco, Art. 65(1), first subpara.)
The first subparagraph of Article 65(1) of the Euro-Mediterranean Agreement EC-Morocco, which prohibits in the area of social
         security all discrimination based on the nationality of Moroccan nationals in relation to nationals of the host Member State,
         must be interpreted as precluding the host Member State from refusing to grant the statutory Guaranteed Income for Elderly
         Persons to a Moroccan national who has reached the age of and resides legally in the territory of that State as long as
         she comes within the scope of that provision:
      
- either because she herself has been employed in the Member State concerned,
- or she is a member of the family of a worker of Moroccan nationality who is or has been employed in that Member State.
(see para. 73, operative part)
  
  
ORDER OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
April (*)
      
(Article 104(3), first subparagraph, of the Rules of Procedure – Euro‑Mediterranean Agreement EC-Morocco – Article – Principle of non‑discrimination in matters of social security – Statutory Guaranteed Income for Elderly Persons)
In Case C‑276/06,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, by the Tribunal du Travail [Labour Court], Verviers (Belgium), made
         by decision of June 2006, received at the Court on June 2006, in the proceedings
      
Mamate El Youssfi
v
Office National des Pensions (ONP),
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
composed of R. Schintgen (Rapporteur), President of Chamber, A. Tizzano and A. Borg Barthet, Judges,
Advocate General: M. Poiares Maduro,
Registrar: R. Grass,
the Court, proposing to give its decision by reasoned order in accordance with the first subparagraph of Article 104(3) of
         its Rules of Procedure,
      
after hearing the Advocate General,
makes the following
Order
The reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 41(1) of the Cooperation Agreement between the
         European Economic Community and the Kingdom of Morocco, signed in Rabat on April and approved on behalf of the Community
         by Council Regulation (EEC) No 2211/of September (OJ L 264, p. 1, hereinafter referred to as the ‘Cooperation Agreement’),
         the first subparagraph of Article 65(1) of the Euro-Mediterranean Agreement establishing an association between the European
         Communities and their Member States, of the one part, and the Kingdom of Morocco, of the other part, signed in Brussels on
         February and approved on behalf of the Communities by Decision No 2000/204/EC, ECSC of the Council and the Commission
         of January (OJ L 70, p. 1, hereinafter referred to as the ‘Association Agreement’), Article of Regulation (EC)
         No 883/of the European Parliament and of the Council of April on the coordination of social security systems
         (OJ L 166, p. 1) read in conjunction with Council Regulation (EC) No 859/of May extending the provisions
         of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/and Regulation (EEC) No 574/to nationals of third countries who are not already covered
         by those provisions solely on the ground of their nationality (OJ L 124, p. 1), Article of the European Convention
         for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms signed in Rome on November (hereinafter referred to as
         the ‘ECHR’) and Article of the First Protocol to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
         Freedoms (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Additional Protocol’).
      
That reference was submitted in the context of proceedings between Mrs El Youssfi and the Belgian Office National des Pensions
         (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Office’) arising from the latter’s refusal to award her the Statutory Guaranteed Income to
         Elderly Persons provided for under national rules.
      
 Legal background
 Community rules
 The Cooperation Agreement
According to Article 41(1) of the Cooperation Agreement, which is contained in Title III thereof, dealing with cooperation
         in the field of labour:
      
‘Subject to the provisions of the following paragraphs, workers of Moroccan nationality and any members of their families
         living with them shall enjoy, in the field of social security, treatment free from any discrimination based on nationality
         in relation to nationals of the Member States in which they are employed.’
      
Article 41(2) to (4) contain provisions dealing with the adding together of periods of insurance, employment or residence
         completed by such workers in the various Member States, family allowances for members of their families who are resident in
         the Community and the transfer to Morocco of pensions or annuities in respect of old age, death, industrial accident, occupational
         disease, or invalidity.
      
 The Association Agreement
Chapter I, entitled ‘Workers’, of Article 65(1) of the Association Agreement, which is contained in Title VI thereof, dealing,
         in particular, with cooperation in social matters, provides as follows:
      
‘Subject to the provisions of the following paragraphs, workers of Moroccan nationality and any members of their families
         living with them shall enjoy, in the field of social security, treatment free from any discrimination based on nationality
         relative to nationals of the Member States in which they are employed.
      
The concept of social security shall cover the branches of social security dealing with sickness and maternity benefits, invalidity,
         old-age and survivors’ benefits, industrial accident and occupational disease benefits and death, unemployment and family
         benefits.
      
…’
Article 65(2) to (4) contains provisions similar to those set out in paragraph of this order.
Article of that agreement is worded as follows:
‘The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to nationals of the Parties residing or working illegally in the territory
         of their host countries.’
      
In accordance with Article thereof, the Association Agreement entered into force on March 2000.
Article 96(2) provides that upon its entry into force, the Association Agreement is to replace the Cooperation Agreement.
 Regulation (EEC) No 1408/According to Article 2(1) thereof, Council Regulation (EEC) No 1408/of June on the application of social security
         schemes to employed persons, to self-employed persons and to members of their families moving within the Community as amended
         and updated by Council Regulation (EC) No 118/of December (OJ L 28, p. 1, hereinafter referred to as ‘Regulation
         No 1408/71’) ‘shall apply to employed or self-employed persons who are or have been subject to the legislation of one or more
         Member States and who are nationals of one of the Member States or who are stateless persons or refugees residing within the
         territory of one of the Member States, as well as to the members of their families and their survivors’.
      
Article 3(1) of Regulation No 1408/71, entitled ‘Equality of treatment’, provides as follows:
‘Subject to the special provisions of this Regulation, persons resident in the territory of one of the Member States to whom
         this Regulation applies shall be subject to the same obligations and enjoy the same benefits under the legislation of any
         Member State as the nationals of the State.’
      
Article of that Regulation defines the scope ratione materiae of that regulation in the following terms:
‘1.      This Regulation shall apply to all legislation concerning the following branches of social security:
(a)      sickness and maternity benefits;
(b)      invalidity benefits, including those intended for the maintenance or improvement of earning capacity;
(c)      old-age benefits;
(d)      survivors’ benefits;
(e)      benefits in respect of accidents at work and occupational diseases;
(f)      death grants;
(g)      unemployment benefits;
(h)      family benefits.
2.      This Regulation shall apply to all general and special social security schemes, whether contributory or non-contributory …
2a.      This Regulation shall also apply to special non-contributory benefits which are provided under legislation or schemes other
         than those referred to in paragraph or excluded by virtue of paragraph 4, where such benefits are intended:
      
(a)      either to provide supplementary, substitute or ancillary cover against the risks covered by the branches of social security
         referred to in paragraph 1(a) to (h);
      
or
(b)      solely as specific protection for the disabled.
…’.
Article 10a(1) of Regulation No 1408/provides as follows:
‘Notwithstanding the provisions of Article and Title III, persons to whom this Regulation applies shall be granted the
         special non-contributory cash benefits referred to in Article 4(2a) exclusively in the territory of the Member State in which
         they reside, in accordance with the legislation of that State, provided that such benefits are listed in Annex IIa. Such benefits
         shall be granted by and at the expense of the institution of the place of residence.’
      
In the part entitled ‘A. Belgium’, paragraph (b), Annexe IIa refers to ‘[g]uaranteed income for elderly persons …’.
The procedure for implementing Regulation No 1408/was laid down in Regulation No 574/of the Council of March 1972,
         as amended by Regulation No 118/97.
      
 Regulation No 859/The 12th recital in the preamble to Regulation No 859/states that:
‘The provisions of Regulation … No 1408/and Regulation … No 574/are not applicable in a situation which is confined
         in all respects within a single Member State. This concerns, inter alia, the situation of a third country national who has
         links only with a third country and a single Member State.’
      
According to Article of the same regulation:
‘Subject to the provisions of the Annex to this Regulation, the provisions of Regulation … No 1408/and Regulation … No
         574/shall apply to nationals of third countries who are not already covered by those provisions solely on the ground of
         their nationality, as well as to members of their families and to their survivors, provided they are legally resident in the
         territory of a Member State and are in a situation which is not confined in all respects within a single Member State.’
      
 Regulation No 883/Article of Regulation No 883/2004, entitled ‘Equality of treatment’ provides that:
‘Unless otherwise provided for by this Regulation, persons to whom this Regulation applies shall enjoy the same benefits and
         be subject to the same obligations under the legislation of any Member State as the nationals thereof’.
      
According to Article 87(1) of Regulation No 883/2004, ‘[n]o rights shall be acquired under this Regulation for the period
         before its date of application’.
      
Article 90(1) of the same regulation provides that ‘Council Regulation … No 1408/shall be repealed from the date of application
         of this Regulation’.
      
Article of Regulation No 883/provides as follows:
‘This Regulation shall enter into force on the 20th day after its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union.
      
It shall apply from the date of entry into force of the Implementing Regulation.’
It is not disputed that no such implementing regulation has yet been adopted.
 The ECHR
Article of the ECHR is drafted in the following terms:
‘The enjoyment of the rights and freedoms set forth in this Convention shall be secured without discrimination on any ground
         such as sex, race, colour, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, association with a national
         minority, property, birth or other status’.
      
Article 1of the Additional Protocol provides that:
‘Every natural or legal person is entitled to the peaceful enjoyment of his possessions. …’
 National rules
The purpose of the Belgian Law of March instituting the Income Guarantee for Elderly Persons (Moniteur belge of March 2001, p. 10244, hereinafter referred to as the ‘Law’) is to ensure that elderly people dispose of minimum
         means of subsistence. That law does not make contributions or insurance a prerequisite for entitlement to the benefit which
         it institutes, but the income of the person concerned must be below a certain ceiling.
      
According to Article of that Law, ‘persons aged or above shall be ensured guaranteed income’.
Article of the Law of March provides:
‘Recipients of guaranteed income must have their principal place of residence in Belgium and belong to one of the following
         categories:
      
(1)      Belgian nationals;
(2)      persons to whom Regulation … No 1408/… applies;
(3)      stateless persons to whom the Convention on the Status of Stateless Persons, signed in New York on September 1954, and
         approved by the Law of May 1960, applies;
      
(4)      refugees within the meaning of Article of the Law of December on entry to Belgian territory, residence, establishment
         and the expulsion of foreigners;
      
(5)      nationals of a country with which Belgium has concluded a relevant reciprocal convention or in relation to which it has recognised
         that de facto reciprocity exists;
      
(6)      foreign nationals, provided that entitlement to a retirement or survivor’s pension is conferred upon them under a Belgian
         scheme.
      
…’
 The main proceedings and the question referred to the Court
It is apparent from the file that Mrs El Youssfi, a Moroccan national, born on July and a widow since 1982, currently
         resides in Belgium, on the basis of family reunification, with her son who himself lives in that Member State.
      
It is not disputed that Mrs El Youssfi is legally resident in Belgium.
On August 2005, Mrs El Youssfi applied to the Office to be granted the Guaranteed Income for Elderly Persons provided for
         by the Law of March 2001.
      
By decision of December 2005, that application was rejected on the ground that the plaintiff in the main proceedings had
         not produced any evidence that she fell within one of the categories set out in Article of that law.
      
On March 2006, Mrs El Youssfi lodged an appeal against that decision before the Tribunal du Travail, Verviers.
In support of her application, Mrs El Youssfi contends that she is lawfully resident in Belgium and that that legal status
         entitles her to claim the Guaranteed Income for Elderly Persons provided for by the legislation of the host Member State under
         the same conditions as nationals of that State. The refusal to award her that benefit, which is a property right within the
         meaning of Article of the Additional Protocol infringes the prohibition of discrimination based on nationality set out,
         in particular, in the Cooperation and Association Agreements, and in Article of the ECHR.
      
The Office and the Public Attorney attached to the national court argue that the right to the benefit claimed by Mrs El Youssfi,
         being a personal right, depends of her being ‘subject to the legislation of a Member State’ and that she cannot rely on Community
         law, since she has not moved within the European Union.
      
In those circumstances, the Tribunal du Travail, Verviers, decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following question
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling::
      
‘Is a refusal to grant statutory Guaranteed Income to Elderly Persons on the ground that:
(a)      Regulation … No 1408/… does not apply to the applicant;
(b)      the applicant is not a recognised stateless person or a refugee;
(c)      the applicant is not a national of a country with which Belgium has concluded a reciprocal convention on guaranteed income
         or in relation to which it has recognised that de facto reciprocity exists; or that
      
(d)      the applicant is not entitled to any retirement or survivor’s pension under a Belgium scheme,
the result of:
(1)      too restrictive an interpretation of Regulation ... No 883/... (replacing Regulation ... No 1408/…), in particular
         in the light of Article of the ECHR, Article of the First Protocol thereto and Regulation ... No 859/…;
      
or, if that is not the case,
(2)      an interpretation of Regulation ... No 883/that is incompatible with the Cooperation Agreement ..., as supplemented by
         the [Association] Agreement …?’
      
 The national court’s question
In accordance with the first subparagraph of Article 104(3) of the Rules of Procedure, when the answer to a question asked
         by way of reference for a preliminary ruling can be clearly deduced from the existing case-law, the Court can at any moment
         after hearing the Advocate General rule by way of a reasoned order which includes a reference to the relevant case-law. The
         Court considers that that is so in the present case.
      
 Preliminary observations
It is clear, first of all, that the national court’s question is intended to elicit an interpretation of Regulation No 1408/71,
         notwithstanding the fact that the question refers to regulation No 883/‘replacing Regulation ... No 1408/71’.
      
It is true that, in accordance with Article thereof, Regulation No 883/entered into force on the 20th day after its
         publication in the Official Journal, but it is applicable only from the date on which the implementing regulation enters into
         force. Since no regulation implementing Regulation No 883/has yet been adopted, it necessarily follows that the provisions
         of Regulation No 1408/remain applicable (see the judgment in Case C‑205/Nemec [2006] ECR I‑0000, paragraphs and 32).
      
It should also be made clear that the Community rules concerning the co-ordination of national social security systems do
         not apply to situations which are confined in all respects within a single Member State, which is in particular the case where
         the situation of the person concerned has factors linking it solely with a non-member country and one single Member State
         (see, in particular, the judgment in Joined Cases C‑95/to C‑98/and C‑180/Khalil and Others [2001] ECR I‑7413, paragraphs and 71).
      
That interpretation is valid both for Article EC and for Regulation No 1408/71, in particular Article thereof.
Similarly, Article of Regulation No 859/2003, to which the national court’s question refers, provides that the provisions
         of Regulations Nos 1408/and 574/‘shall apply to nationals of third countries who are not already covered by those provisions
         solely on the ground of their nationality, as well as to members of their families and to their survivors, provided they are
         legally resident in the territory of a Member State and are in a situation which is not confined in all respects within a
         single Member State’.
      
The 12th recital in the preamble to Regulation No 859/states that Regulations Nos 1408/and 574/‘are not applicable
         in a situation which is confined in all respects within a single Member State. This concerns, inter alia, the situation of
         a third country national who has links only with a third country and a single Member State’.
      
It the light of the information available to the Court concerning the main proceedings, that condition, which requires a link
         between a national of a non-member country and at least two member states, does not seem to be fulfilled by a person such
         as Mrs El Youssfi since it appears that she left Morocco directly for Belgium in order to live, on the basis of family reunification,
         with her son resident in that Member State.
      
It is for the national court to verify that situation of fact.
Subject to that reservation, Mrs El Youssfi cannot take advantage of the principle of equal treatment in the field of to social
         security laid down in Article 3(1) of Regulation No 1408/71, read together with regulation No 859/2003, which would make it
         impossible to refuse to award her a benefit such as the Guaranteed Income for Elderly Persons on the basis solely of the nationality
         of the applicant (see, by analogy, paragraphs to of this order).
      
Under those circumstances, the Court must consider the question raised in regard to the relevant provisions of the agreements
         concluded between the Community and the Kingdom of Morocco.
      
According to its wording, the national court’s question deals with the Co-operation Agreement, ‘supplemented by’ the Association
         Agreement.
      
However, having regard, on the one hand, to the provisions of Article of the Association Agreement, according to which,
         from the date on which it enters into force, that is to say, March 2000, it replaces the Cooperation Agreement and, on the
         other to the fact that Mrs El Youssfi applied for the Guaranteed Income for Elderly Persons on August 2005, only the Association
         Agreement can be applicable ratione temporis to the facts in the main proceedings (see, by analogy, the order in Case C‑336/Echouikh [2006] ECR I‑5223, paragraph 36).
      
In order to provide the national court with a useful reply, the Court must consider the question whether the first paragraph
         of Article 65(1) of the Association Agreement has direct effect and may therefore be relied on by an individual before a national
         court, the scope of the principle of non-discrimination laid down in that provision and the conditions fixed therein in regard
         to the scope of its application, both ratione materiae and ratione personae.
      
 The direct effect of the first subparagraph of Article 65(1) of the Association Agreement
It is sufficient to point out that the Court’s case-law has already decided that the first subparagraph of Article 65(1) of
         the Association Agreement has direct effect, with the result that the persons to whom it applies are entitled to rely on it
         before national courts (order in Echouikh, cited above, paragraphs to 42, and the case-law cited in paragraph concerning Article 41(1) of the Cooperation Agreement,
         which is drafted in the same terms as the first subparagraph of Article 65(1)).
      
 The scope of the principle of non-discrimination laid down in the first subparagraph of Article 65(1) of the Association Agreement
As the Court decided in paragraphs to of the order in Echouikh, cited above, and as is clear from the case-law concerning Article 41(1) of the Cooperation Agreement, which may be applied
         by analogy to the first subparagraph of Article 65(1) of the Association Agreement, the prohibition of any discrimination
         based on nationality, in the field of social security, as between Moroccan migrant workers and members of their families living
         with them, on the one hand, and nationals of the Member States in which they work or have worked, on the other, means that
         persons to whom that provision applies must be treated as if they were nationals of the Member States concerned.
      
That principle thus implies that persons covered by that provision of the Association Agreement may claim social security
         benefits on the same basis as nationals of the host Member State and the legislation of that State cannot impose on them more
         or stricter conditions than those applicable to nationals of that State (order in Echouikh, cited above, paragraph 56).
      
It is thus contrary to the abovementioned principle of non-discrimination to apply to persons referred to in the first subparagraph
         of Article 65(1) of the Association Agreement not only the requirement that they have the nationality of the Member State
         concerned but also any other condition which nationals are not required to fulfil (order in Echouikh, cited above, paragraph 57).
      
In this case, it appears, on the one hand, that a person such as the plaintiff in the main proceedings fulfils the conditions
         as to age and residence laid down in the legislation of the Member State concerned in order to obtain the Guaranteed Income
         for Elderly Persons. On the other, a national of the host Member State in a comparable position to Mrs El Youssfi would be
         entitled to that benefit inasmuch as the condition laid down in Article 4(6) of the Law to the effect that there must
         be entitlement to a retirement or survivor’s pension under national rules is applicable only to ‘foreign nationals’. The refusal
         to award Mrs El Youssfi the benefit she applied for is thus based only on the fact that she is not a national of the Member
         State concerned and cannot, under national law, be assimilated to a national of that State, and on the fact that she does
         not fulfil a condition which is not applicable to nationals.
      
Consequently, national legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings appears to be incompatible with the principle
         of non-discrimination laid down in the first subparagraph of Article 65(1) of the Association Agreement by virtue of which
         a Moroccan national cannot be refused a social benefit on grounds linked to the applicant’s nationality.
      
It must also be determined whether a benefit such as that at issue in the main proceedings falls within the concept of ‘social
         security’ within the meaning of the first subparagraph of Article 65(1) of the Association Agreement and whether a person
         in the position of Mrs El Youssfi is covered by that provision.
      
 The scope ratione materiae of the first subparagraph of Article 65(1) of the Association Agreement
It is settled case-law that the term ‘social security’ contained in the first subparagraph of Article 65(1) of the Association
         Agreement must be deemed to bear the same meaning as the identical term used in Regulation No 1408/(order in Echouikh, cited above, paragraphs and and the case-law cited therein concerning Article 41(1) of the Cooperation Agreement).
      
Since the adoption of Council Regulation (EEC) No 1247/of April (OJ L 136, p. 1), non-contributory benefits
         such as the Guaranteed Income for Elderly Persons instituted by the Law were expressly excluded from the scope ratione
         materiae of Regulation No 1408/71, by virtue of Article 4(2a)(a) thereof (see also Article 10a(1) and Annex IIa to the latter
         regulation) if they are intended to provide supplementary, substitute or ancillary cover against the risks arising in the
         branches of social security referred to in Article 4(1)(a) to (h), one of which is old-age benefits (see by analogy the judgment
         in Case C‑103/Krid [1995] ECR I‑719, paragraph 36, dealing with Article 39(1) of the Cooperation Agreement between the European Economic Community
         and the People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria, signed in Algiers on April and approved on behalf of the Community
         by Council Regulation (EEC) No 2210/of September (OJ L 263, p. 1, which is drafted in essentially identical
         terms to those of the first subparagraph of Article 65(1) of the Association Agreement).
      
Moreover, even before the adoption of the abovementioned regulation, the Court had decided that a benefit of the same kind
         as the Guaranteed Income for Elderly Persons fell within the matters covered by Regulation No 1408/by virtue of Article
         4(1) thereof (see the judgment in Krid, cited above, paragraphs to and the case-law cited therein).
      
There is thus no doubt that a benefit such as the Guaranteed Income for Elderly Persons, the purpose of which is to ensure
         the minimum means of subsistence to persons aged at least whose income is below a certain threshold, falls within the concept
         of ‘social security’ within the meaning of the first subparagraph of Article 65(1) of the Association Agreement, even though
         the benefit at issue in the main proceedings also possesses the characteristics of a social assistance measure.
      
It should be added in that context that, contrary to the Office’s contention, the fact that the Law views the benefit
         it institutes as a personal right and not as a derived right, acquired by the plaintiff in the main proceedings in her capacity
         as a member of the family of a migrant worker is irrelevant.
      
The scope ratione personae of the first subparagraph of Article 65(1) of the Association Agreement is not the same as that
         of Regulation No 1408/71, defined in Article thereof, with the result that the case-law in which a distinction is drawn
         between the derived rights and the personal rights of the members of the migrant worker’s family in the context of that regulation
         – which, moreover, has been clarified by the judgment in Cabanis-Issarte (Case C-308/[1996] ECR I‑2097) – cannot be applied in the context of the Association Agreement (see, by way of analogy,
         the judgment in Case C‑126/Hallouzi-Choho [1996] ECR I‑4807, paragraph and the case-law cited therein).
      
 The scope ratione personae of the first subparagraph of Article 65(1) of the Association Agreement
It is clear from the order for reference that the Office accepts that Mrs El Youssfi is lawfully resident in Belgium, with
         the effect that she is not covered by the provisions of Article of the Association Agreement.
      
For the rest, it should be noted that the first subparagraph of Article 65(1) of the Association Agreement applies first of
         all to workers of Moroccan nationality, that concept being given a broad interpretation.
      
It is clear from the case-law of the Court that the concept of ‘worker’ encompasses both active workers and those who have
         left the labour market after reaching the age required for receipt of an old-age pension or after becoming the victims of
         one of the risks creating entitlement to allowances falling under other branches of social security (see the order in Echouikh, cited above, paragraphs and 45).
      
It is in the light of those criteria that the national court must determine if Mrs El Youssfi may herself be regarded in Belgium,
         where she currently lives, as a ‘worker’ within the meaning of the first subparagraph of Article 65(1) of the Association
         Agreement.
      
If that is not the case, it should be pointed out that the aforementioned provision of the Association Agreement also applies
         to members of workers’ families residing with them in the Member State in which they are employed.
      
It should be made clear that the term ‘members of the family’ refers not only to the worker’s spouse and descendants but also
         to persons having a close family relationship with him such as his relatives in the ascending line, including those related
         to him by marriage (see, by analogy, the judgment in Case C‑179/Mesbah [1999] ECR I‑7955, paragraph 46).
      
Since Mrs El Youssfi is a widow, she could be covered by the first subparagraph of Article 65(1) of the Association Agreement
         if it is established that her husband, before his death, was a Moroccan migrant worker in Belgium, where Mrs El Youssfi continues
         to reside (see, by analogy, the judgment in Krid, cited above, paragraphs to 31).
      
In addition, the plaintiff in the main proceedings must also be regarded as a member of the worker’s family within the meaning
         of the abovementioned provision if she resides with her son in Belgium and the latter is both a worker, as defined in paragraph
         of this order, and of Moroccan nationality.
      
It would appear from the documents before the Court that Mrs El Youssfi’s son has taken Belgian nationality.
However, if Mrs El Youssfi’s son has retained Moroccan nationality, it is for the national court to ascertain, on the basis
         of the legislation of the host Member State, if a member of the family of a Moroccan migrant worker who is also a national
         of that State may, under its legislation, rely on the worker’s Moroccan nationality for the purposes of the application of
         the first subparagraph of Article 65(1) of the Association Agreement (see, by analogy, the judgment in Mesbah, cited above, paragraphs and 41).
      
In the light of the foregoing considerations, the reply to the question referred to the Court should be that the first subparagraph
         of Article 65(1) of the Association Agreement must be interpreted as precluding the host Member State from refusing to grant
         the statutory Guaranteed Income for Elderly Persons to a Moroccan national who has reached the age of and resides legally
         in the territory of that State as long as she comes within the scope of that provision
      
–       either because she herself has been employed in the Member State concerned,
–       or she is a member of the family of a worker of Moroccan nationality who is or has been employed in that Member State.
It is for the national court to determine if one or other of those conditions has been fulfilled in this case.
Since the interpretation which this order provides of the first subparagraph of Article 65(1) of the Association Agreement
         is accordance with the requirements of Article of the ECHR and Article of the Additional Protocol, as interpreted, in
         particular, by the European Court of Human Rights in its judgment of September in Gaygusuz v Austria (ECHR 1996‑IV, p. 1129), the Court has thus provided the national court with all the interpretations necessary for it to
         assess whether the national rules at issue in the main proceedings are in accordance with the fundamental rights the observance
         of which the Court ensures, such as those guaranteed by the ECHR and the Additional Protocol (see, in particular, the order
         in Echouikh, cited above, paragraphs and 65).
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fifth Chamber) hereby rules:
The first subparagraph of Article 65(1) of the Euro-Mediterranean Agreement establishing an association between the European
            Communities and their Member States, of the one part, and the Kingdom of Morocco, of the other part, signed in Brussels on
            February and approved on behalf of the Communities by Decision No 2000/204/EC, ECSC of the Council and the Commission
            of January must be interpreted as precluding the host Member State from refusing to grant the statutory Guaranteed
            Income for Elderly Persons to a Moroccan national who has reached the age of and resides legally in the territory of that
            State as long as she comes within the scope of that provision
–       either because she herself has been employed in the Member State concerned,
–       or she is a member of the family of a worker of Moroccan nationality who is or has been employed in that Member State.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 