
Judgment of the Court (Fourth Chamber) of October – Komninou and Others v Commission
(Case C‑167/P)
Appeal – Non-contractual liability of the Community – Complaint under Article EC – Treatment of complainants by the Commission – Principles of sound administration, legitimate expectations and legal certainty – Scope – Article EC – Right of complaint – Scope of the Ombudsman’s findings
1.                     Appeals – Grounds – Inadequate statement of reasons – Reliance by the Court of First Instance on implied reasoning – Lawfulness
            – Limits (Arts 21(2) and (3), EC and EC) (see paras 22-27)
2.                     Citizens of the European Union – Rights of the citizen (Art. 21(2) and (3), EC) (see paras 35-37)
3.                     Appeals – Grounds – Mistaken assessment of the facts – Inadmissibility – Review by the Court of Justice of the assessment
            of the evidence – Possible only where the clear sense of the evidence has been distorted (Art. EC; Statute of the Court
            of Justice, Art. 58) (see paras 40-46)
4.                     Economic and social cohesion – Structural assistance – Community financing granted for national initiatives (Art. EC)
            (see para. 52)
5.                     Community law – Principles – Equal treatment (see para. 57)
Re: 
Appeal brought against the order of the Court of First Instance (Fifth Chamber) of January 2006, 
Komninou and Others
 v
 Commission
 (T‑42/04), in which the Court dismissed as unfounded an application for compensation for the non-material damage allegedly
                  suffered by the applicants following the Commission’s treatment of their complaint concerning Community financing of a biological
                  sewage treatment plant in Preveza in Greece.
               
Operative part
The Court: 
 
Sets aside the order of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities of January 2006, Komninou and Others v
                     Commission (T‑42/04), in so far as the Court failed to rule on the plea alleging breach of Article 21(2) and (3) EC;
                  
 
Dismisses the remainder of the action;
 
Dismisses the application before the Court of First Instance of the European Communities, in so far as it is based on a breach
                     of Article 21(2) and (3) EC;
                  
 
Orders Ermioni Komninou, Grigorios Ntokos, Donatos Pappas, Vassileios Pappas, Aristeidis Pappas, Eleftheria Pappa, Lamprini
                     Pappa, Eirini Pappa, Alexandra Ntokou, Fotios Dimitriou, Zoï Dimitriou, Petros Bolossis, Despoina Bolossi and Konstantinos
                     Bolossis, Thomas Bolossis to pay the costs at first instance. The costs of the proceedings at first instance leading to the
                     order of the Court of First of the European Communities of January 2006, Komninou and Others v Commission (T-42/04), shall
                     be borne in the manner set out in paragraph of the operative part of that order.
                  
Top  
 