
Avis juridique important
|
61988JJudgment of the Court (Second Chamber) of February 1989.  -  Wilhelm Schmitt v Bundesversicherungsanstalt für Angestellte.  -  Reference for a preliminary ruling: Sozialgericht Hamburg - Germany.  -  Article of the EEC Treaty - Possibility of back-paying contributions to a pension insurance scheme.  -  Case 29/88.  
European Court reports Page Pub.RJ Page Pub somm 
Summary
Parties
Operative part
Keywords
++++Social security for migrant workers - Affiliation to a social security scheme - Conditions - Application of national legislation  ( EEC Treaty, Article 51; Regulation No 1408/of the Council )  
Summary
Article of the EEC Treaty and Regulation No 1408/provide only for the aggregation of insurance periods completed in different Member States . They do not, however, regulate the conditions under which those insurance periods are constituted . The conditions governing the right or obligation to become a member of a social security scheme are a matter to be determined by the legislation of each Member State ( see the judgments of July in Case 266/Brunori v Landesversicherungsanstalt Rheinproving (( )) ECR and of April in Case 110/Coonan v Insurance Officer (( )) ECR ). They are not therefore applicable for the purpose of determining the conditions of affiliation to a social security scheme, whether compulsory or voluntary . 
Parties
In Case 29/REFERENCE to the Court under Article of the EEC Treaty by the Sozialgericht ( Social Court ) Hamburg for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings pending before that court between  Wilhelm Schmitt, a retired office worker, residing in Hamburg,  and  Bundesversicherungsanstalt fuer Angestellte ( Federal Insurance Office for Clerical Staff ), Berlin,  on the interpretation of Article of the EEC Treaty,  THE COURT ( Second Chamber ),  composed of : T . F . O' Higgins, President of Chamber, G . F . Mancini and F . A . Schockweiler, Judges,  ( the grounds of the judgment are not reproduced )  in answer to the question submitted to it by the Sozialgericht Hamburg, by order of May 1987, hereby rules :  
Operative part
Article of the EEC Treaty and Regulation No 1408/of the Council of June on the application of social security schemes to employed persons and their families moving within the Community are not applicable for the purpose of determining the conditions of affiliation to a social security scheme, whether compulsory or voluntary . 
Top  
 