
Case C-2/Azienda Agro-Zootecnica Franchini Sarl
and
Eolica di Altamura Srl
v
Regione Puglia
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Tribunale amministrativo regionale per la Puglia)
(Environment – Directive 92/43/EEC – Conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora – Directive 79/409/EEC – Conservation of wild birds – Special areas of conservation forming part of the Natura European Ecological Network – Directives 2009/28/EC and 2001/77/EC – Renewable energy sources – National rules – Prohibition on the location of wind turbines not intended for self‑consumption – No assessment of the environmental implications of the project)
Summary of the Judgment
Environment – Conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora – Directive 92/– Conservation of wild birds
            – Directive 79/– Special areas of conservation forming part of the Natura Network – National rules prohibiting the
            location of wind turbines not intended for self‑consumption on those sites 
(Arts. TFEU and 194(1) TFEU; European Parliament and Council Directives 2001/and 2009/28; Council Directives 79/409,
            Art. 14, and 92/43, Art. 6(3))
Directive 92/on the conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora, Directive 79/on the conservation
         of wild birds, Directive 2001/on the promotion of electricity produced from renewable energy sources in the internal electricity
         market and Directive 2009/on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources and amending and subsequently repealing
         Directives 2001/and 2003/must be interpreted as not precluding legislation which prohibits the location of wind turbines
         not intended for self‑consumption on sites forming part of the Natura European Ecological Network, without any requirement
         for a prior assessment of the environmental impact of the project on the site specifically concerned, on condition that the
         principles of non‑discrimination and proportionality are respected.
      
(see para. 75, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber) 
July (*)
      
(Environment – Directive 92/43/EEC – Conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora – Directive 79/409/EEC – Conservation of wild birds – Special areas of conservation forming part of the Natura European Ecological Network – Directives 2009/28/EC and 2001/77/EC – Renewable energy sources – National rules – Prohibition on the location of wind turbines not intended for self‑consumption – No assessment of the environmental implications of the project)
In Case C‑2/10,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the Tribunale amministrativo regionale per la Puglia (Italy),
         made by decision of September 2009, received at the Court on January 2010, in the proceedings
      
Azienda Agro-Zootecnica Franchini Sarl,
Eolica di Altamura Srl
v
Regione Puglia,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of A. Tizzano, President of the Chamber, J.-J. Kasel, A. Borg Barthet, M. Ilešič (Rapporteur) and E. Levits, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Mazák,
Registrar: A. Impellizzeri, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on February 2011,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Azienda Agro-Zootecnica Franchini Sarl and Eolica di Altamura Srl, by S. Profeta and C. Rucireta, avvocati,
–        the Regione Puglia, by L.A. Clarizio, L. Francesconi and M. Liberti, avvocati,
–        the European Commission, by K. Herrmann and D. Recchia, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on April 2011,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Directive 2009//EC of the European Parliament and
         of the Council of April on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources and amending and subsequently
         repealing Directives 2001/77/EC and 2003/30/EC (OJ L 140, p. 16), Directive 2001/77/EC of the European Parliament and
         of the Council of September on the promotion of electricity produced from renewable energy sources in the internal
         electricity market (OJ L 283, p. 33), Council Directive 92/43/EEC of May on the conservation of natural habitats
         and of wild fauna and flora (OJ L 206, p. 7) (‘the Habitats Directive’) and Council Directive 79/409/EEC of April on the conservation of wild birds (OJ L 103, p. 1) (‘the Birds Directive’). 
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between Azienda Agro-Zootecnica Franchini Sarl (‘Azienda Agro-Zootecnica Franchini’)
         and Eolica di Altamura Srl (‘Eolica di Altamura’), on the one hand, and the Regione Puglia (Apulia Region), on the other,
         concerning the refusal to authorise the location of wind turbines not intended for self‑consumption on land situated within
         the confines of the Alta Murgia national park, a protected area classified as a site of Community importance (‘SCI’) and special
         protection area (‘SPA’) forming part of the Natura European Ecological Network (‘the Natura network’), even though
         no prior assessment had been carried out as to the environmental impact of the project on the particular site concerned. 
      
 Legal context
 European Union legislation
 The Birds Directive 
Article 4(1) and (2) of the Birds Directive requires Member States to classify as special protection areas the territories
         satisfying the ornithological criteria established by those provisions. 
      
Article 4(4) of the Birds Directive provides as follows: 
      
‘In respect of the protection areas referred to in paragraphs and above, Member States shall take appropriate steps to
         avoid pollution or deterioration of habitats or any disturbances affecting the birds, in so far as these would be significant
         having regard to the objectives of this Article. Outside these protection areas, Member States shall also strive to avoid
         pollution or deterioration of habitats.’ 
      
Article of the Birds Directive provides that ‘Member States may introduce stricter protective measures than those provided
         for under this Directive.’ 
      
 The Habitats Directive 
The third recital in the preamble to the Habitats Directive provides as follows: 
      
‘… the main aim of this Directive being to promote the maintenance of biodiversity, taking account of economic, social, cultural
         and regional requirements, this Directive makes a contribution to the general objective of sustainable development; … the
         maintenance of such biodiversity may in certain cases require the maintenance, or indeed the encouragement, of human activities’.
         
      
Article of the Habitats Directive is worded as follows: 
      
‘1.      The aim of this Directive shall be to contribute towards ensuring bio-diversity through the conservation of natural habitats
         and of wild fauna and flora in the European territory of the Member States to which the Treaty applies. 
      
2.      Measures taken pursuant to this Directive shall be designed to maintain or restore, at favourable conservation status, natural
         habitats and species of wild fauna and flora of Community interest. 
      
3.      Measures taken pursuant to this Directive shall take account of economic, social and cultural requirements and regional and
         local characteristics’. 
      
Article 3(1) of the Habitats Directive is worded as follows:
      
‘A coherent European ecological network of special areas of conservation shall be set up under the title Natura 2000. This
         network … shall enable the natural habitat types and the species’ habitats concerned to be maintained or, where appropriate,
         restored at a favourable conservation status in their natural range. 
      
The Natura network shall include the special protection areas classified by the Member States pursuant to [the Birds
         Directive].’ 
      
Article of the Habitats Directive governs the procedure for establishing the Natura network and the designation of
         special areas of conservation by the Member States. 
      
Article of the Habitats Directive, which lays down conservation measures for such areas, provides as follows: 
      
‘…
2.      Member States shall take appropriate steps to avoid, in the special areas of conservation, the deterioration of natural habitats
         and the habitats of species as well as disturbance of the species for which the areas have been designated, in so far as such
         disturbance could be significant in relation to the objectives of this Directive. 
      
3.      Any plan or project not directly connected with or necessary to the management of the site but likely to have a significant
         effect thereon, either individually or in combination with other plans or projects, shall be subject to appropriate assessment
         of its implications for the site in view of the site’s conservation objectives. In the light of the conclusions of the assessment
         of the implications for the site and subject to the provisions of paragraph 4, the competent national authorities shall agree
         to the plan or project only after having ascertained that it will not adversely affect the integrity of the site concerned
         and, if appropriate, after having obtained the opinion of the general public.
      
4.      If, in spite of a negative assessment of the implications for the site and in the absence of alternative solutions, a plan
         or project must nevertheless be carried out for imperative reasons of overriding public interest, including those of a social
         or economic nature, the Member State shall take all compensatory measures necessary to ensure that the overall coherence of
         Natura is protected. It shall inform the Commission of the compensatory measures adopted. 
      
…’
Article of the Habitats Directive provides as follows: 
      
‘Obligations arising under Article 6(2), (3) and (4) of this Directive shall replace any obligations arising under the first
         sentence of Article 4(4) of [the Birds Directive] in respect of areas classified pursuant to Article 4(1) or similarly recognised
         under Article 4(2) thereof, as from the date of implementation of this Directive or the date of classification or recognition
         by a Member State under [the Birds Directive], where the latter date is later.’ 
      
 Directive 2001/Recital in the preamble to Directive 2001/states as follows: 
      
‘The promotion of electricity produced from renewable energy sources is a high [European Union] priority … for reasons of
         security and diversification of energy supply, of environmental protection and of social and economic cohesion. …’ 
      
Article of Directive 2001/states that the purpose of the directive is ‘to promote an increase in the contribution of
         renewable energy sources to electricity production in the internal market for electricity and to create a basis for a future
         Community framework thereof’. 
      
Article of Directive 2001/77, entitled Administrative procedures’, provides in paragraph as follows: 
      
‘Member States or the competent bodies appointed by the Member States shall evaluate the existing legislative and regulatory
         framework with regard to authorisation procedures or the other procedures laid down in Article of Directive 96/92/EC, which
         are applicable to production plants for electricity produced from renewable energy sources, with a view to: 
      
–        reducing the regulatory and non-regulatory barriers to the increase in electricity production from renewable energy sources,
         
      
–        streamlining and expediting procedures at the appropriate administrative level, and 
–        ensuring that the rules are objective, transparent and non-discriminatory, and take fully into account the particularities
         of the various renewable energy source technologies’. 
      
 Directive 2009/Article of Directive 2009/28, entitled ‘Administrative procedures, regulations and codes’, provides in paragraph as follows:
         
      
‘Member States shall ensure that any national rules concerning the authorisation, certification and licensing procedures that
         are applied to plants and associated transmission and distribution network infrastructures for the production of electricity,
         heating or cooling from renewable energy sources, and to the process of transformation of biomass into biofuels or other energy
         products, are proportionate and necessary. 
      
Member States shall, in particular, take the appropriate steps to ensure that: 
…
(c)      administrative procedures are streamlined and expedited at the appropriate administrative level; 
(d)      rules governing authorisation, certification and licensing are objective, transparent, proportionate, do not discriminate
         between applicants and take fully into account the particularities of individual renewable energy technologies; 
      
…
(f)      simplified and less burdensome authorisation procedures, including through simple notification if allowed by the applicable
         regulatory framework, are established for smaller projects and for decentralised devices for producing energy from renewable
         sources, where appropriate.’ 
      
Article of Directive 2009/repealed, with effect from April 2010, Article 2, Article 3(2) and Articles to of Directive
         2001/77. Directive 2001/will be repealed in its entirety with effect from January 2012. 
      
Article 27(1) of Directive 2009/provides as follows: 
      
‘Without prejudice to Article 4(1), (2) and (3), Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative
         provisions necessary to comply with this Directive by December 2010.
      
…’
 National legislation
Directive 2001/was transposed into Italian law by Decreto Legislativo dicembre No (Legislative Decree No of December 2003) (GURI No of January 2004, Ordinary Supplement to GURI No 17), as amended by legge dicembre 2007,
         No (Law No of December 2007) (GURI No of December 2007, Ordinary Supplement to GURI No 285), Article of which transposes Article of Directive 2001/77, concerning authorisation procedures for plants producing energy from renewable
         sources. 
      
Article of Legislative Decree No 387, entitled ‘Streamlining and simplification of authorisation procedures’, provides
         as follows: 
      
‘…
The construction and operation of plants producing electricity from renewable sources … shall require a single authorisation,
         issued by the region or the provinces to which powers have been delegated, in compliance with the regulations in force concerning
         environmental protection and the conservation of the landscape and historical and artistic heritage, which, where appropriate,
         shall constitute a derogation from urban development legislation …
      
…
Pursuant to the Guidelines [for the conduct of the procedure referred to in paragraph 3], the regions may identify areas and
         sites which are not suitable for certain types of installation …’. 
      
Article 1(1226) of Finance Law No of December (Legge Finanziaria per 2007) (GURI No of December 2006, Ordinary
         Supplement to GURI No 244) confers upon the Minister for the Environment and the Protection of the Land and Sea the power
         to lay down by decree minimum uniform criteria on the basis of which the regions are required to adopt conservation measures.
         
      
By Decree of the Ministry of the Environment and the Protection of the Land and Sea of October entitled ‘Minimum uniform
         criteria for establishing conservation measures in relation to special areas of conservation (SACs) and special protection
         areas (SPAs)’ (GURI No of November 2007) (‘the Decree of October 2007’), the regions and autonomous provinces were
         placed under an obligation to prohibit the construction of new wind power plants not intended for self‑consumption in all
         SPAs. 
      
Article 5(1) of the Decree of October 2007, entitled ‘Minimum uniform criteria for establishing conservation measures for
         all SPAs’, provides as follows: 
      
‘In relation to all SPAs, the regions and autonomous provinces shall introduce, by means of the measure referred to in Article
         3(1) of this Decree, the following prohibitions:
      
…
(1)      the construction of new wind power plants, except for plants for which, at the date of adoption of the present measure, the
         authorisation procedure has already commenced as a result of the submission of the project. The competent organisms must evaluate
         the implications of the project, taking into account the biological cycles of the species in respect of which the site was
         designated, following consultation with the INFS (National Institute for Wild Fauna). Replacement and modernisation efforts,
         including technological efforts, which do not entail an increase in the impact on the site in the light of the SPA’s conservation
         objectives, as well as installations intended for self‑consumption with a total capacity not exceeding kW shall also be
         exempted …’. 
      
 Legislation of the Regione Puglia
Article of Regional Law No of October laying down rules for the production of energy from renewable sources and
         the reduction of polluting emissions, and environmental rules (‘Regional Law No 31’) provides as follows: 
      
‘…
(6)      In accordance with Articles and of [the Habitats Directive], together with Articles and of the implementing regulation
         provided for by Decree No of the President of the Republic of September 1997, as amended …, it is forbidden to locate
         wind turbines not intended for self-consumption in SCIs and SPAs forming part of the … Natura network … 
      
(8)      The prohibition laid down in [paragraphs] and above extends to a 200-meter buffer zone’. 
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
Eolica di Altamura states that it acquired the rights from the company Alburni Srl relating to a project for the construction
         of a wind farm not intended for self‑consumption on land belonging to Azienda Agro-Zootecnica Franchini and situated within
         the confines of the Alta Murgia National Park, a protected area classified as SCI and SPA ‘pSIC/ZPS IT Murgia Alta’.
         
      
Both the application seeking prior confirmation that there was no objection to the project on the part of the entity responsible
         for the park and the application for environmental compatibility submitted to the Regione Puglia were rejected by decision
         of September of the entity responsible for the park and by decision of July of the Regione Puglia respectively.
         
      
The reasons given for the Regione Puglia’s refusal made reference to the relevant regional provisions under which, first,
         the SCIs and SPAs provided for by the Habitat and Birds Directives were regarded as ‘totally inappropriate’ for the purpose
         of choosing the location of wind turbines and, second, in the absence of a regulatory plan for wind power plants, the SCIs
         and SPAs in question were regarded as ‘unsuitable’. 
      
Azienda Agro-Zootecnica Franchini and Eolica di Altamura brought an action before the Tribunale amministrativo regionale per
         la Puglia (Regional Administrative Court, Apulia) (Italy) against those decisions refusing to grant authorisation and against
         the relevant regulatory provisions of the Regione Puglia.
      
By decision of September 2008, that court upheld the application and, consequently, annulled the regulatory provisions
         by which the Regione Puglia had imposed an absolute prohibition on the construction of wind power plants in the SCIs and SPAs
         provided for by the Habitats and Birds Directives. 
      
However, while the proceedings which concluded with that decision were pending, the Regione Puglia approved Regional Regulation
         No of July 2008, which was similarly directed at conservation measures within the terms of those directives and Decree
         No 357. 
      
In the main proceedings pending before the referring court, Azienda Agro‑Zootecnica Franchini and Eolica di Altamura therefore
         seek annulment of Article 5(1)(n), 5(4) and 5(4a) of Regional Regulation No 15, under which, in essence, it is forbidden to
         construct new wind turbines within a 500-meter buffer zone of any of the SPAs of which the Natura network is composed.
         Those companies allege, inter alia, infringement of the principles laid down in Directive 2001/77.
      
The Regione Puglia contends that the action should be dismissed as inadmissible or unfounded. 
      
During the course of the main proceedings, Regional Law No entered into force. Article 2(6) of that law prohibits the construction
         of new wind power plants not intended for self‑consumption on all Natura network sites, that is to say, including on
         sites of Community importance designated in accordance with the Habitats Directive. 
      
The Tribunale amministrativo regionale per la Puglia takes the view that Article 2(6) of Regional Law No is immediately
         applicable to the wind farm project submitted by Azienda Agro-Zootecnica Franchini and Eolica Altamura. That provision applies
         to the application for authorisation and environmental compatibility submitted by those companies from the date of entry into
         force of Regional Law No (that is to say, as from November 2008), independently of any specific assessment as to environmental
         impact or effect. 
      
In those circumstances, the Tribunale amministrativo regionale per la Puglia decided to stay the proceedings and to refer
         the following question to the Court for a preliminary ruling: 
      
‘Is Article 1(1226) of Law No …, in conjunction with the first paragraph of Article of the … Decree of October and with Article 2(6) of [Regional] Law No …, compatible with [European Union] law, and in particular with the principles
         which may be inferred from Directives 2001/77… and 2009/28… and the [Birds and Habitats Directives], in so far as those provisions
         absolutely prohibit, without distinction, the location of wind turbines not intended for self‑consumption in the SCIs and
         SPAs comprising the “Natura 2000” ecological network, instead of requiring an appropriate environmental impact assessment
         to be carried out to analyse the impact of an individual project on the particular site affected?’ 
      
 The question referred 
As a preliminary point, it must be borne in mind that, although the Court does not, in a reference for a preliminary ruling,
         have jurisdiction to give a ruling on the compatibility of a national measure with European Union law, it does have jurisdiction
         to supply the national court with a ruling on the interpretation of European Union law so as to enable that court to determine
         whether such compatibility exists in order to decide the case before it (see, inter alia, Case C‑124/Borawitz [2000] ECR I‑7293, paragraph 17; Case C‑60/WWF Italia and Others [2006] ECR I‑5083, paragraph 18; and Case C‑439/citiworks [2008] ECR I‑3913, paragraph 21). 
      
From that perspective, the referring court must be regarded as asking the Court, in essence, whether the Habitats and Birds
         Directives and Directives 2001/and 2009/must be interpreted as precluding legislation which prohibits the location of
         wind turbines not intended for self‑consumption on sites forming part of the Natura network without any prior assessment
         of the environmental impact of the project on the specific site concerned. 
      
 The interpretation of the Habitats and Birds Directives 
In order to answer the question referred, it is necessary to examine whether the Birds and Habitats Directives, in particular
         Article 6(3) of the Habitats Directive, preclude legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings. 
      
According to the applicant companies, that type of legislation is at variance with the scheme established by the Habitats
         and Birds Directives. They submit that the protection regime established by those directives does not prohibit all activity
         within the areas forming part of the Natura network but simply makes authorisation of such activities conditional upon
         a prior environmental impact assessment being carried out under Article 6(3) of the Habitats Directive. Legislation such as
         that at issue in the main proceedings, which prohibits in absolute terms the location of new wind turbines on sites forming
         part of that network, without any requirement for a prior assessment of the impact of the project or plan on a particular
         site, would therefore, they submit, have the effect of rendering the scheme established by the Habitats and Birds Directives
         completely redundant. 
      
The European Commission and the Regione Puglia take issue with that line of argument. They maintain that Article 6(3) of the
         Habitats Directives is applicable only if a plan or project is forbidden in an area forming part of the Natura network.
         They observe in that connection that the fact that certain activities may be authorised within sites forming part of that
         network does not, however, mean that such interventions must always be proceeded with. The Commission also points out that
         Article TFEU allows Member States to maintain or introduce, subject to certain conditions, more stringent environmental
         protective measures. 
      
It should be noted, first, that, as observed by the parties to the main proceedings, the system of protection afforded by
         the Habitats and Birds Directives to sites forming part of the Natura network does not prohibit all human activity within
         those sites but simply makes authorisation of such activity conditional upon a prior assessment of the environmental impact
         of the project concerned. Thus, the first sentence of Article 6(3) of the Habitats Directive – applicable, in accordance with
         Article of that directive, to areas classified pursuant to Article 4(1) of the Birds Directive or similarly recognised under
         Article 4(2) thereof – provides that any plan or project not directly connected with or necessary to the management of the
         site but likely to have a significant effect thereon, either individually or in combination with other plans or projects,
         is to be subject to an assessment of its implications for the site in view of the site’s conservation objectives. 
      
Moreover, according to established case‑law, in order for the mechanism for the protection of the environment provided for
         in Article 6(3) of the Habitats Directive to be triggered, there must be a probability or a risk that a plan or project will
         have a significant effect on the site concerned (see, inter alia, Case C‑127/Waddenvereniging and Vogelbeschermingsvereniging [2004] ECR I‑7405, paragraphs and 43, and Case C‑179/Commission v Italy [2007] ECR I‑8131, paragraph 33). 
      
It is therefore clear that the European Union legislature intended to create a protection mechanism which is triggered only
         if a plan or project represents a risk for a site forming part of the Natura network. 
      
It is in the light of those considerations that it is necessary to determine whether the Habitats and Birds Directives preclude
         national and regional legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings. 
      
It is apparent from the file before the Court that that legislation prohibits the construction of new wind turbines not intended
         for self‑consumption in SCIs and SPAs forming part of the Natura Network. That prohibition extends to a 200-meter buffer
         zone. 
      
The effect of that legislation is that any plan or project for a new wind power plant on one of those sites is automatically
         refused, without any requirement for an assessment of the environmental impact of the individual plan or project on the particular
         site. 
      
It is therefore clear that such legislation establishes a system for protecting sites forming part of the Natura network
         which is more stringent than that established by the Habitats and Birds Directives. 
      
Consequently, as the Advocate General observed at point of his Opinion, it is necessary, in order to answer the referring
         court’s question, to determine whether, and if so under what conditions, European Union law permits Member States to introduce
         stricter national protective measures than those laid down by those directives. 
      
It should be noted in this regard that European Union rules do not seek to effect complete harmonisation in the area of the
         environment (see, inter alia, Case C‑318/Fornasar and Others [2000] ECR I‑4785, paragraph 46, and Case C‑6/Deponiezweckverband Eiterköpfe [2005] ECR I‑2753, paragraph 27). 
      
Article of the Birds Directive provides that Member States may introduce stricter protective measures than those provided
         for under that directive. 
      
There is no provision in the Habitats Directive that is equivalent to Article of the Birds Directive. Nevertheless, since
         that directive was adopted on the basis of Article TFEU, it should be noted that Article TFEU provides that Member
         States may adopt more stringent protective measures. Under that provision, such measures are simply required to be compatible
         with the FEU Treaty and notified to the Commission. The Court has thus held that ‘in connection with the Community’s environmental
         policy, to the extent that a measure of domestic law pursues the same objectives as a directive, Article EC makes provision
         for and authorises the minimum requirements laid down by that directive to be exceeded, in the conditions set by that article’
         (see Deponiezweckverband Eiterköpfe, paragraph 58). 
      
It is apparent from both the file submitted to the Court and the parties’ arguments at the hearing that the essential purpose
         of the national and regional legislation at issue in the main proceedings is the conservation of the areas forming part of
         the Natura network, and in particular the protection of the habitats of wild birds against the dangers which wind turbines
         may represent for them. 
      
It follows that legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings which, with a view to protecting wild bird populations
         inhabiting protected areas forming part of the Natura network, imposes an absolute prohibition on the construction of
         new wind turbines in those areas, pursues the same objectives as the Habitats Directive. To the extent that it provides for
         a stricter system of protection than that established by Article of that directive, it therefore constitutes a more stringent
         protective measure within the meaning of Article TFEU. 
      
It is, admittedly, not apparent from the documents submitted to the Court that the Italian Government communicated those measures
         to the Commission in accordance with Article TFEU. Nevertheless, it should be noted that, while that provision requires
         Member States to communicate to the Commission the more stringent protective measures which they intend to maintain or introduce
         in environmental matters, it does not make implementation of the planned measures conditional upon agreement by the Commission
         or its failure to object. In that context, as the Advocate General noted at point of his Opinion, neither the wording nor
         the purpose of the provision under examination therefore provides any support for the view that failure by the Member States
         to comply with their notification obligation under Article TFEU in itself renders unlawful the more stringent protective
         measures thus adopted (see, by analogy, Case 380/Enichem Base and Others [1989] ECR 2491, paragraphs to 23; Case C‑209/Sydhavnens Sten & Grus [2000] ECR I‑3743, paragraph 100; and Case C‑159/Sapod Audic [2002] ECR I‑5031, paragraphs to 63). 
      
The fact none the less remains that the more stringent protective measures put in place by the national and regional legislation
         at issue in the main proceedings must also comply with the other provisions of the FEU Treaty. 
      
The applicants in the main proceedings have submitted in this regard that the objective of developing new and renewable forms
         of energy, as established for European Union policy by Article 194(1)(c) TFEU, should take precedence over the environmental-protection
         objectives pursued by the Habitats and Birds Directives. 
      
Suffice it to observe in that connection that Article 194(1) TFEU states that European Union policy on energy must have regard
         for the need to preserve and improve the environment. 
      
Moreover, a measure such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which prohibits only the location of new wind turbines
         not intended for self-consumption on sites forming part of the Natura network, with the possibility of exemption for
         wind turbines intended for self-consumption with a capacity not exceeding kW, is not, in view of its limited scope, liable
         to jeopardise the European Union objective of developing new and renewable forms of energy. 
      
It must therefore be concluded that the Birds and Habitats Directives, in particular Article 6(3) of the Habitats Directive,
         do not preclude a more stringent national protective measure which imposes an absolute prohibition on the construction of
         wind turbines not intended for self-consumption within areas forming part of the Natura network, without any requirement
         for an assessment of the environmental impact of the individual project or plan on the site concerned forming part of that
         network. 
      
 Interpretation of Directives 2001/and 2009/It is necessary to examine whether Directives 2001/and 2009/must be interpreted as precluding legislation such as that
         at issue in the main proceedings. 
      
As regards, first, Directive 2001/77, Article thereof states that the purpose of the directive is to promote an increase
         in the contribution of renewable energy sources to electricity production in the internal market for electricity and to create
         a basis for a future Community framework thereof. 
      
To that end, Article 6(1) of Directive 2001/requires Member States to evaluate the legislative and regulatory framework
         with regard to administrative procedures, in particular authorisation procedures, which are applicable to production plants
         for electricity produced from renewable energy sources. The objectives of that evaluation procedure are to streamline and
         reduce administrative barriers and to ensure that the rules applicable to that type of production plant are objective, transparent
         and non‑discriminatory. 
      
It is apparent, however, that the referring court entertains doubts as to whether the national and regional legislation at
         issue in the main proceedings complies with those criteria. At the hearing, the applicants in the main proceedings also argued
         that such legislation discriminates against wind turbines by comparison with other industrial activities which are subject
         to the rules requiring prior assessment laid down in Article 6(3) of the Habitats Directive. 
      
In that connection, it should be pointed out, first, that a total ban on the construction of new wind turbines in areas forming
         part of the Natura network, deriving from a legislative provision, is not contrary to the objectives of streamlining
         and reducing administrative barriers and, in principle, constitutes a sufficiently transparent and objective procedure. 
      
Next, as to whether the measure is discriminatory, it should be recalled that the prohibition of discrimination laid down
         in Article 6(1) of Directive 2001/is simply a specific expression of the principle of equality, which is one of the fundamental
         principles of European Union law and requires that comparable situations must not be treated differently and that different
         situations must not be treated in the same way unless such treatment is objectively justified (see, inter alia, Case C‑280/Germany v Council [1994] ECR I‑4973, paragraph 67; Case C‑303/Advocaten voor de Wereld [2007] ECR I‑3633, paragraph 56; and Case C‑127/Arcelor Atlantique et Lorraine and Others [2008] ECR I‑9895, paragraph 23). 
      
In the present case, it is for the referring court to determine whether the difference in treatment between the projects for
         the construction of wind turbines and projects relating to other industrial activities proposed for sites forming part of
         the Natura network may be justified on the basis of objective differences between those two kinds of project. 
      
In that context, the referring court must have regard to the particular features of wind turbines, taking account in particular
         of the dangers which they may represent for birds, such as the risk of collision, disturbances and displacement, barrier effects
         forcing birds to change direction and habitat loss or degradation. 
      
As regards, second, Directive 2009/28, Article 13(1) thereof provides that ‘Member States shall ensure that any national rules
         concerning the authorisation, certification and licensing procedures that are applied to plants and associated transmission
         and distribution network infrastructures for the production of electricity, heating or cooling from renewable energy sources
         … are proportionate and necessary’. In particular, Member States are required to take appropriate steps to ensure that those
         rules are ‘objective, transparent, proportionate, do not discriminate between applicants and take fully into account the particularities
         of individual renewable energy technologies’. 
      
It is true, as pointed out by the Commission in its observations, that the period for transposition of Directive 2009/28,
         which ended on December 2010, had not yet expired at the date on which the order for reference was made, that is to say,
         September 2009. 
      
However, as the Court has already held and in so far as Directive 2009/had already entered into force at the time of the
         facts in the main proceedings, the interpretation of that directive sought by the referring court must be regarded as being
         useful to that court (see, to that effect, Joined Cases C‑261/and C‑299/VTB-VAB and Galatea [2009] ECR I‑2949, paragraphs to 41). 
      
First, it follows from the case-law that not only the national provisions specifically intended to transpose a directive but
         also, from the date of that directive’s entry into force, the pre-existing national provisions capable of ensuring that the
         national law is consistent with it must be considered to fall within the scope of that directive (see, to that effect, Case
         C‑81/Cordero Alonso [2006] ECR I‑7569, paragraph 29). 
      
Second, in any event, it follows from established case-law that, during the period prescribed for transposition of a directive,
         the Member States to which it is addressed must refrain from taking any measures liable seriously to compromise the attainment
         of the result prescribed by that directive (Case C‑129/Inter‑Environnement Wallonie [1997] ECR I‑7411, paragraph 45; Case C‑14/ATRAL [2003] ECR I‑4431, paragraph 58; and Case C‑144/Mangold [2005] ECR I‑9981, paragraph 67). 
      
For those reasons, contrary to the Commission’s submission, it is necessary to reply to the part of the referring court’s
         question concerning the interpretation of Directive 2009/28, in particular in the light of the principle of proportionality
         which Article of that directive introduces with regard to administrative procedures for the authorisation of plants producing
         renewable energy. 
      
In this regard, the principle of proportionality referred to in Article of Directive 2009/28, which is one of the general
         principles of European Union law, requires that measures adopted by Member States in this field do not exceed the limits of
         what is appropriate and necessary in order to attain the objectives legitimately pursued by the legislation in question; when
         there is a choice between several appropriate measures recourse must be had to the least onerous, and the disadvantages caused
         must not be disproportionate to the aims pursued (see, inter alia, Case C‑331/Fedesa and Others [1990] ECR I‑4023, paragraph 13, and Joined Cases C‑133/93, C‑300/and C‑362/Crispoltoni and Others [1994] ECR I‑4863, paragraph 41). 
      
It is for the referring court to determine whether the national measure at issue is proportionate. That court must take account
         in particular of the fact that the legislation at issue in the main proceedings is confined to wind power plants and does
         not extend to other forms of renewable energy production, such as photovoltaic plants. Moreover, the prohibition applies solely
         to new wind turbines for commercial purposes, as wind power plants intended for self-consumption and having a capacity not
         exceeding kW are excluded from the scope of that prohibition. 
      
It follows from all of the foregoing that the Habitats and Birds Directives and Directives 2001/and 2009/must be interpreted
         as not precluding legislation which prohibits the location of wind turbines not intended for self-consumption on sites forming
         part of the Natura network, without any requirement for a prior assessment of the environmental impact of the project
         on the site specifically concerned, on condition that the principles of non‑discrimination and proportionality are respected.
         
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
Council Directive 92/43/EEC of May on the conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora, Council Directive
            79/409/EEC of April on the conservation of wild birds, Directive 2001/77/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
            of September on the promotion of electricity produced from renewable energy sources in the internal electricity market
            and Directive 2009/28/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of April on the promotion of the use of energy
            from renewable sources and amending and subsequently repealing Directives 2001/77/EC and 2003/30/EC must be interpreted as
            not precluding legislation which prohibits the location of wind turbines not intended for self‑consumption on sites forming
            part of the Natura European Ecological Network, without any requirement for a prior assessment of the environmental impact
            of the project on the site specifically concerned, on condition that the principles of non‑discrimination and proportionality
            are respected.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 