
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-28/Epikouriko Kefalaio
v
Ipourgos Anaptixis
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Simvoulio tis Epikratias)
(Insurance – Articles and of First Directive 73/239/EEC – Articles and of First Directive 79/267/EEC – Proceedings for the liquidation of an insurance undertaking following the withdrawal of authorisation – Respective priority of salary claims and insurance claims)
Summary of the Judgment
Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Freedom to provide services – Direct insurance – Directives 73/and 79/– Obligation on insurance undertakings to establish sufficient technical provisions and an adequate solvency margin
            for their entire business – National legislation granting salary claims a priority in respect of assets representing technical
            provisions which takes precedence over the priority of insurance claims – Compatibility with Community rules
(Council Directives 73/239, Arts and 16, and 79/267, Arts and 18)
Articles and of First Directive 73/on the coordination of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating
         to the taking-up and pursuit of the business of direct insurance other than life assurance and Articles and of First
         Directive 79/on the coordination of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the taking-up and pursuit
         of the business of direct life assurance, which oblige insurance undertakings to establish sufficient technical provisions
         and an adequate solvency margin for their entire insurance business, do not preclude national legislation under which, if
         an insurance company is the subject of insolvency proceedings, is put into liquidation or is otherwise in a state of insolvency,
         the assets representing the technical provisions may be allocated to payment of salary claims before payment of insurance
         claims, where that legislation accords to insurance claims a priority whose scope encompasses in any event, in addition to
         the assets representing the technical provisions, other assets of the undertaking and may, by virtue of a ministerial decision,
         have been extended to all the available assets of the undertaking.
      
While the coordination of national provisions relating to the financial guarantees required of insurance undertakings that
         is achieved, in particular, by the Community provisions referred to above is intended to ensure adequate protection for policyholders
         and third-party beneficiaries in every Member State of the Community, the Community provisions in question none the less cannot
         be interpreted as signifying that the Community legislature meant that, in the event of liquidation of an insurance undertaking,
         the assets representing technical provisions must, in all circumstances, be allocated by way of absolute priority to the payment
         of insurance claims.
      
(see paras 24-26, 28, operative part)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)September 2004(1)
(Insurance  –  Articles and of First Directive 73/239/EEC  –  Articles and of First Directive 79/267/EEC  –  Proceedings for the liquidation of an insurance undertaking following the withdrawal of authorisation  –  Respective priority of salary claims and insurance claims)
 In Case C-28/03,REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article ECfrom the Simvoulio tis Epikratias (Greece), made by order of October 2002, received at the Court on January 2003, in the proceedings
            
Epikouriko Kefalaio 
v
Ipourgos Anaptixis,
 Omospondia Asfalistikon Sillogon Elladas,
THE COURT (First Chamber),,
 composed of: P. Jann, President of the Chamber, A. Rosas, S. von Bahr,  R. Silva de Lapuerta and K. Lenaerts (Rapporteur),
            Judges,
            
 Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed,Registrar:  M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator,
             having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on May 2004,after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
            
–
 Epikouriko Kefalaio, by A. Gratsia-Plati, dikigoros,
            
–
 the Greek Government, by S. Spiropoulos, K. Georgiadis and M. Tassopoulou, acting as Agents,
            
–
 the United Kingdom Government, by P. Ormond, acting as Agent, and K. Smith, barrister,
            
–
 the Commission of the European Communities, by G. Zavvos and M. Shotter, acting as Agents,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on June 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles and of First Council Directive 73/239/EEC
         of July on the coordination of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the taking-up and pursuit
         of the business of direct insurance other than life assurance (OJ L 228, p. 3), as amended by Second Council Directive
         88/357/EEC of June on the coordination of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to direct insurance
         other than life assurance and laying down provisions to facilitate the effective exercise of freedom to provide services and
         amending Directive 73/(OJ L 172, p. 1) and by Council Directive 92/49/EEC of June on the coordination of
         laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to direct insurance other than life assurance and amending Directives
         73/and 88/(third non-life insurance Directive) (OJ L 228, p. 1). It also concerns Articles and of First
         Council Directive 79/267/EEC of March on the coordination of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating
         to the taking-up and pursuit of the business of direct life assurance (OJ L 63, p. 1), as amended by Council Directive
         90/619/EEC of November on the coordination of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to direct life
         assurance, laying down provisions to facilitate the effective exercise of freedom to provide services and amending Directive
         79/(OJ L 330, p. 50) and by Council Directive 92/96/EEC of November on the coordination of laws, regulations
         and administrative provisions relating to direct life assurance and amending Directives 79/and 90/(third life assurance
         Directive) (OJ L 360, p. 1).
         
            
 The reference was made in the course of proceedings between Epikouriko Kefalaio (an additional fund in relation to road-accident
         liability insurance) and the Greek Minister for Development, following the latter’s decision to release part of the guarantee
         fund of the Greek insurance undertaking Intercontinental AE (‘Intercontinental’) in order to pay salary claims.
         
Legal context
Community law
            
 Directives 73/and 79/267, as respectively amended by Directive 92/and Directive 92/96, laid down the principles of
         single authorisation (Articles and of both directives) and of sole responsibility of the Member State in which the insurance
         undertaking’s head office is situated (the home Member State) so far as concerns the financial supervision of that undertaking
         (Article of Directive 73/and Article of Directive 79/267).
         
            
 As provided by Article of Directive 73/and Article of Directive 79/267, the home Member State is to require every
         insurance undertaking to establish sufficient technical provisions in respect of its entire business. The assets representing
         those provisions are subject to measures designed to ensure diversification as to where they are invested. 
         
            
 By virtue of Article of Directive 73/and Article of Directive 79/267, the home Member State is to require every
         insurance undertaking to establish an adequate solvency margin in respect of its entire business and corresponding to its
         free assets. Under Article of Directive 73/and Article of Directive 79/267, Member States may not prescribe any
         rules as to the choice of the assets in excess of those representing the technical provisions.
         
            
 Article of Directive 73/and Article of Directive 79/specify a series of situations in which authorisation may
         be withdrawn by the competent authority of the home Member State and provide that, in such cases, the authority is to take
         all necessary measures to safeguard the interests of the insured and is to restrict the free disposal of the assets of the
         undertaking.
         
            
 On March 2001, Directive 2001/17/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on the reorganisation and winding-up
         of insurance undertakings (OJ L 110, p. 28) was adopted.
         
National law
            
 The directives referred to in paragraph of this judgment were transposed into Greek law by Presidential Decrees No 118/(FEK A, 35) and No 252/(FEK A, 186), which amend Legislative Decree No 400/concerning private insurance business
         (FEK A, 10; ‘the Legislative Decree’).
         
            
 Article 3(1) of the Legislative Decree provides that, in order to conduct business, an insurance undertaking whose head office
         is in Greece must have obtained an authorisation issued by the Minister for Trade. Under Article 3(3) and (5) of the Legislative
         Decree, withdrawal of the authorisation – whether total or partial, definitive or temporary ­– in the cases prescribed by
         the Legislative Decree is to take place by reasoned decision of the Minister for Trade. In accordance with Article 3(7), definitive
         withdrawal of the authorisation entails the automatic withdrawal of the authorisation of establishment and the dissolution
         of the insurance undertaking.
         
            
 As provided by Article of the Legislative Decree, insurance undertakings whose head office is in Greece are required to
         establish sufficient technical provisions in respect of their entire business. Those technical provisions must be represented
         by assets of equivalent value that are expressed in the same currency.
         
            
 By virtue of Article 8(1) of the Legislative Decree, insurance undertakings whose head office is in Greece are required to
         establish a guarantee fund to which assets are allocated, in Greece or in any other Member State of the European Union or
         of the European Economic Area, for the purpose of safeguarding the interests of persons entitled to any benefit under a contract
         of insurance. Under Article 8(1) the guarantee fund is to include the assets covering the technical provisions referred to
         in Article of the Legislative Decree and the assets covering a quarter of the minimum level as referred to in Article 20(2)(A)(e)
         of the Legislative Decree.
         
            
 Article 9(1) of the Legislative Decree provides that, if an insurance undertaking does not comply with the provisions of Articles
         and regarding technical provisions, the Minister for Trade may, having first communicated his intention to the competent
         authorities of any Member States where the undertaking operates with branches or under the freedom to provide services, adopt
         various measures by decision published in the Official Gazette of the Hellenic Republic. He may in this way allocate part or all of the undertaking’s available assets to the guarantee fund, prohibit the free disposal
         of part or all of its assets, temporarily or definitively withdraw operating authorisation for some or all of the classes
         undertaken by it and take any other appropriate measure with the objective of safeguarding the interests of persons insured
         and any other person entitled to an insurance payment.
         
            
 The first subparagraph of Article 10(1) of the Legislative Decree, as amended by Article 35(9) of Law No 2496/(FEK A,
         87), provides:
         ‘Persons entitled to an insurance payment and successors to all or certain of their rights shall have a priority as regards
         the guarantee fund which takes precedence over any other general or specific priority, apart from the priority under Article
         12a(8) and the priority in respect of claims arising from an employment relationship, with the exception of claims of persons
         exercising the right to manage and administer the insurance undertaking.’
         
            
 Article 12a(8) of the Legislative Decree establishes an overriding priority, covering all the assets of the undertaking, in
         favour of the remuneration and expenses of the supervisor of a liquidation or insolvency and of the liquidator and the remuneration
         and expenses of the liquidator of the insurance portfolio.
         
            
 By Presidential Decree No 27/(FEK A, 19), the power to supervise insurance undertakings was transferred to the Minister
         for Development.
         
The main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 Epikouriko Kefalaio is a body set up by Law No 489/(FEK A, 331) membership of which is held by undertakings providing
         civil-liability motor-vehicle insurance in Greece. Its functions include compensating road-traffic accident victims (injured
         parties and their successors) where the undertaking insuring the liability of the person responsible for the accident becomes
         the subject of insolvency proceedings or has its licence withdrawn. After making payment it acquires, under that law, by subrogation
         the priority established by Article of the Legislative Decree in favour of the insured person responsible for the accident.
         
            
 In Intercontinental’s authorisation was withdrawn by the Minister for Trade, who decided that all the movable and immovable
         assets of that undertaking were to be allocated to its guarantee fund.
         
            
 By Decision K3-of November (Official Gazette, volume for public and private limited companies, November 1998,
         p. 8649; ‘the contested decision’), the Minister for Development released property, in the sum of GRD 185, corresponding
         to Intercontinental’s guarantee fund, in order to meet preferentially claims arising from an employment relationship, in accordance
         with the provision referred to in paragraph above.
         
            
 On December Epikouriko Kefalaio, which paid the insurance moneys owed by Intercontinental, brought an action before
         the Simvoulio tis Epikratias for annulment of the contested decision, on the ground that that decision cut into the assets
         capable of covering the claim held by it by subrogation with regard to Intercontinental.
         
            
 The Simvoulio tis Epikratias pointed out that protection of persons insured is a fundamental objective of the Community legislation
         and noted that the obligation on insurance undertakings to establish technical provisions and Article 9(1) of the Legislative
         Decree are designed to achieve that objective. It considered that Article 35(9) of Law No 2496/infringes the Community
         provisions referred to in paragraphs 4, and of the present judgment inasmuch as it provides, in the event of insolvency
         proceedings, liquidation or an analogous state of insolvency, that the priority which the insurance undertaking’s employees
         may assert over the guarantee fund in respect of claims arising from their employment relationship takes precedence over the
         priority which persons insured and their successors may assert over the same guarantee fund. According to the Simvoulio tis
         Epikratias the contested decision must therefore be annulled.
         
            
 However, taking the view that its interpretation left room for reasonable doubt, the Simvoulio tis Epikratias decided to stay
         proceedings and refer the following question to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
         ‘Given the provisions of, in particular, Articles and of … Directive 73/… and Articles and of … Directive
         79/…, may the national legislature provide that, where an insurance company is the subject of insolvency proceedings,
         is put into liquidation or is otherwise in a state of insolvency, claims arising from an employment relationship with it are
         satisfied from the assets which are included in its technical provisions in preference to claims of persons entitled to an
         insurance payment and of successors to all or certain of their rights?’
         
Consideration of the question referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 By its question, the national court asks in essence whether the Community provisions laying down the obligation for insurance
         companies to establish sufficient technical provisions and an adequate solvency margin for their entire business preclude
         national provisions whose effect is that, where an insurance company is the subject of insolvency proceedings, is put into
         liquidation or is otherwise in a state of insolvency, the assets representing the technical provisions are used for payment
         of salary claims in precedence to payment of insurance claims.
         
            
 This question concerns legislation which establishes a priority in favour of insurance claims in the event of liquidation
         of an insurance company. The priority is applicable to the undertaking’s guarantee fund and covers, in addition to the assets
         representing the technical provisions, other assets of that undertaking. It may have been extended by ministerial decision,
         as in the main proceedings, to all the available assets of the undertaking. The priority takes precedence over any other general
         or specific priority, with the exception of the priority for liquidation expenses and that for salary claims other than those
         of persons exercising the right to manage and administer the insurance undertaking. 
         
            
 As the Greek and United Kingdom Governments and the Commission point out, neither the Community provisions relating to the
         obligation on insurance undertakings to establish sufficient technical provisions and an adequate solvency margin for their
         entire insurance business nor any other provision of Directives 73/and 79/contain coordinating rules concerning the
         liquidation of an insurance undertaking (see, to this effect, the second recital in the preamble to Directive 2001/17).
         
            
 It is true that the coordination of national provisions relating to the financial guarantees required of insurance undertakings
         that is achieved, in particular, by the Community provisions referred to in paragraphs and of this judgment is intended
         to ensure adequate protection for policyholders and third-party beneficiaries in every Member State of the Community (see
         the second recital in the preamble to Directive 73/and the first recital in the preamble to Directive 79/267). In particular,
         the obligation imposed on insurance undertakings to establish sufficient technical reserves is designed to ensure that they
         have the financial means to comply with their contractual commitments to policyholders (see Case 205/Commission v Germany [1986] ECR 3755, paragraph 38; see also the ninth recital in the preamble to Directive 73/and the seventh recital in
         the preamble to Directive 79/267, as well as the 12th recital in the preamble to Directive 92/and the 13th recital in the
         preamble to Directive 92/96).
         
            
 None the less, the Community provisions in question cannot be interpreted as signifying that the Community legislature meant
         that, in the event of liquidation of an insurance undertaking, the assets representing technical provisions must, in all circumstances,
         be allocated by way of absolute priority to the payment of insurance claims.
         
            
 Such an interpretation finds no support at all in Directives 73/and 79/267. Furthermore, it is contradicted by Article
         10(1) of Directive 2001/which, in order to ‘ensure an appropriate balance between the protection of insurance creditors
         and other privileged creditors protected by the Member State’s legislation’ (14th recital), allows the Member States to accord
         to certain categories of claims, in particular claims by employees of the insurance undertaking, a priority ranking above
         that of insurance claims, including over the assets representing technical provisions, where the priority of the insurance
         claims is not limited in its scope to the assets representing those provisions.
         
            
 The answer to the question referred for a preliminary ruling must therefore be that Articles and of Directive 73/and Articles and of Directive 79/do not preclude national legislation under which, if an insurance company is the
         subject of insolvency proceedings, is put into liquidation or is otherwise in a state of insolvency, the assets representing
         the technical provisions may be allocated to payment of salary claims before payment of insurance claims, where that legislation
         accords to insurance claims a priority whose scope encompasses in any event, in addition to the assets representing the technical
         provisions, other assets of the undertaking and may, by virtue of a ministerial decision, have been extended to all the available
         assets of the undertaking.
         
Costs
            
 Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable. 
         
 On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) rules as follows:
         Articles and of First Council Directive 73/239/EEC of July on the coordination of laws, regulations and administrative
               provisions relating to the taking-up and pursuit of the business of direct insurance other than life assurance, as amended
               by Second Council Directive 88/357/EEC of June on the coordination of laws, regulations and administrative provisions
               relating to direct insurance other than life assurance and laying down provisions to facilitate the effective exercise of
               freedom to provide services and amending Directive 73/and by Council Directive 92/49/EEC of June on the coordination
               of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to direct insurance other than life assurance and amending Directives
               73/and 88/(third non-life insurance Directive), and Articles and of First Council Directive 79/267/EEC of March on the coordination of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the taking-up and pursuit of the business
               of direct life assurance, as amended by Council Directive 90/619/EEC of November on the coordination of laws, regulations
               and administrative provisions relating to direct life assurance, laying down provisions to facilitate the effective exercise
               of freedom to provide services and amending Directive 79/and by Council Directive 92/96/EEC of November on the
               coordination of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to direct life assurance and amending Directives
               79/and 90/(third life assurance Directive) do not preclude national legislation under which, if an insurance company
               is the subject of insolvency proceedings, is put into liquidation or is otherwise in a state of insolvency, the assets representing
               the technical provisions may be allocated to payment of salary claims before payment of insurance claims, where that legislation
               accords to insurance claims a priority whose scope encompasses in any event, in addition to the assets representing the technical
               provisions, other assets of the undertaking and may, by virtue of a ministerial decision, have been extended to all the available
               assets of the undertaking. Signatures.
      
 –
            
Language of the case: Greek.
Top  
 