
ORDER OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Appeal — Application before the General Court of the European Union signed by a ‘juris kandidat’ — No representation by a lawyer — Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union — Manifest inadmissibility of the action)
In Case C‑101/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, brought on February 2014,
Brown Brothers Harriman & Co., established in New York (United States), represented by P. Leander and T. Kronhöffer, advokater,
      
appellant,
the other party to the proceedings being:
Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM),
defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of M. Ilešič (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, C.G. Fernlund, A. Ó Caoimh, C. Toader and E. Jarašiūnas, Judges,
Advocate General: P. Mengozzi,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed by reasoned order, in accordance with Article of the Rules
         of Procedure of the Court,
      
makes the following
Order
By its appeal, Brown Brothers Harriman & Co. asks the Court to set aside the order of the General Court of the European Union
         in Brown Brothers Harriman v OHIM (TRUST IN PARTNERSHIP), T‑389/13, EU:T:2013:(‘the order under appeal’), whereby the General Court dismissed as being manifestly inadmissible
         its action against the decision of the First Board of Appeal of the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade
         Marks and Designs) (OHIM) of April (Case R 1740/2012-1), concerning the international registration, designating the
         European Union, of the word mark TRUST IN PARTNERSHIP.
      
 Legal context
Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, applicable to the procedure before the General Court
         pursuant to Article of the Statute, provides:
      
‘The Member States and the institutions of the Union shall be represented before the Court of Justice by an agent appointed
         for each case; the agent may be assisted by an adviser or by a lawyer.
      
The States, other than the Member States, which are parties to the Agreement on the European Economic Area [of May (OJ L 1, p. 3, ‘the EEA Agreement’)] and also the EFTA Surveillance Authority referred to in that Agreement shall be
         represented in same manner.
      
Other parties must be represented by a lawyer.
Only a lawyer authorised to practise before a court of a Member State or of another State which is a party to the [EEA] Agreement
         … may represent or assist a party before the Court.
      
…’
The first subparagraph of Article 43(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the General Court provides:
      
‘The original of every pleading must be signed by the party’s agent or lawyer.’
Article 44(3) and (6) of those Rules of Procedure provide:
      
‘3.       The lawyer acting for a party must lodge at the Registry a certificate that he is authorised to practise before a Court of
         a Member State or of another State which is a party to the EEA Agreement.
      
…
6.      If an application does not comply with the requirements set out in paragraphs to of this Article, the Registrar shall
         prescribe a reasonable period within which the applicant is to comply with them whether by putting the application itself
         in order or by producing any of the above-mentioned documents. If the applicant fails to put the application in order or to
         produce the required documents within the time prescribed, the General Court shall decide whether the non-compliance with
         these conditions renders the application formally inadmissible.’
      
 The procedure before the General Court and the order under appeal
The appellant brought its action by application lodged at the Registry of the General Court on July 2013.
      
That application stated that the appellant was represented by Mr T. Kronhöffer and Mr A. Zomorodian, who practise at the same
         law firm established in Stockholm (Sweden).
      
The application was signed by only one of the two representatives, namely Mr Zomorodian.
      
On August 2013, pursuant to Article 44(6) of its Rules of Procedure, the General Court called on the applicant to put the
         action in order by asking it, in particular, to produce its lawyers’ certificates of authorisation to practise, as provided
         for in Article 44(3) of those rules.
      
On August 2013, in response to that request, Mr Kronhöffer and Mr Zomorodian asserted that they were authorised to practise
         as ‘lawyers’ and produced to that effect two certificates concerning them from the Sveriges Advokatsamfund (Swedish Bar Association).
      
The General Court, by the order under appeal, dismissed the action as being manifestly inadmissible. The reasons stated were
         as follows:
      
‘First, it must be held that, pursuant to the third paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice …, parties
         other than the Member States and institutions of the Union must be represented before the Courts of the Union by a lawyer,
         for which the term in Sweden is “advokat”. According to Swedish legislation, the title of “advokat” is reserved to persons
         who have a Master’s qualification in law and have been admitted to the Bar.
      
Moreover, it is clear from the fourth paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice that two cumulative conditions
         must be satisfied in order for a person to be able to validly represent parties other than Member States and institutions
         of the Union before the Courts of the Union; that person must be a lawyer (“advokat”, according to the Swedish version) and
         he must be authorised to practise before a court of a Member State or of a State which is party to the EEA Agreement. Those
         requirements are essential procedural requirements and failure to comply with them will result in the action being inadmissible.
      
The requirement imposed by Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice is based on a view of the lawyer’s role as collaborating
         in the administration of justice and as being required to provide, in full independence and in the overriding interests of
         that cause, such legal assistance as the client needs. The counterpart of that protection lies in the rules of professional
         ethics and discipline which are laid down and enforced in the general interest by institutions endowed with the requisite
         powers for that purpose. Such a conception reflects the legal traditions common to the Member States and is also to be found
         in the Union legal order, as is precisely demonstrated by Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice …
      
In that regard, one of the certificates from the Sveriges Advokatsamfund … shows that Mr Z[o]morodian is a “juris kandidat”
         and that, although not a member of the Swedish Bar, he is authorised, according to Swedish law, to practise before the Swedish
         courts.
      
It also states that only the members of the Swedish Bar are able to use the title of “advokat”. The title of “juris kandidat”
         is obtained following four and a half years of study. It is only after three years of practising law and following the successful
         completion of the Swedish bar exam that it is possible to apply to become a member of the Swedish Bar, in order to be granted
         the right to practise under the title of “advokat”.
      
It follows from this that Mr Z[o]morodian, not being a member of the Swedish Bar, is not a lawyer (advokat) within the meaning
         of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice. Therefore, even if he can, under Swedish law, represent parties in the
         context of proceedings before Swedish courts, he does not satisfy the first of the two cumulative conditions of the fourth
         paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, and he is therefore not authorised to represent the applicant
         before the General Court …
      
Secondly, it must be borne in mind that, according to the first subparagraph of Article 43(1) of the Rules of Procedure, the
         original of every pleading must be signed by the party’s agent or lawyer.
      
That provision must be interpreted as requiring the original of the application initiating proceedings to be signed by hand
         by the lawyer instructed by the applicant. …
      
… [T]he handwritten signature of the lawyer or agent representing a party, on the original of every procedural document, constitutes
         the sole means of ensuring that responsibility for such a document is assumed by a person entitled to represent the party
         before the Courts of the Union, in accordance with Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice …
      
In the present case, it must be stated that the application initiating proceedings was signed by only Mr Z[o]morodian. As
         a consequence, the production of the certificate … which proves that Mr Kronhöffer has been a member of the Swedish Bar since
         August … has no effect on the admissibility of the action, given that he did not sign the document in question.’
      
 The forms of order of the appellant
By its appeal, the appellant asks the Court to set aside the order under appeal and to refer the case back to the General
         Court.
      
 Consideration of the appeal
Under Article of its Rules of Procedure, where an appeal is, in whole or in part, manifestly inadmissible or manifestly
         unfounded, the Court may at any time, acting on a proposal from the Judge-Rapporteur and after hearing the Advocate General,
         decide by reasoned order to dismiss that appeal in whole or in part.
      
In support of its appeal, the appellant puts forward, essentially, three grounds of appeal. The first ground concerns a claimed
         infringement of Article of the Statute of the Court. By its second ground, the appellant claims that the General Court
         erred in law by holding that an application must be signed by two lawyers. Last, by its third ground, the appellant claims
         that General Court disregarded the principle of proportionality by not accepting that there was excusable error or that there
         were unforeseeable circumstances.
      
 The first ground of appeal
By its first ground, the appellant claims that the General Court erred in holding that Mr Zomorodian is not a ‘lawyer’ within
         the meaning of Article of the Statute of the Court. While accepting that, in Sweden, the title ‘advokat’ (advocate) is
         exclusively reserved for someone admitted to the Bar, the appellant argues that all lawyers within a law firm, whether advocates
         or associate lawyers, act according to the rules of the Bar and are entitled to practise before the Swedish courts.
      
However, as the General Court correctly stated in paragraph of the order under appeal, a person may not validly represent
         the parties covered by the third subparagraph of Article of the Statute of the Court unless that person satisfies two cumulative
         conditions, namely, first, that the person is a lawyer and, second, that the person is authorised to practise before a court
         of a Member State or another State which is party to the EEA agreement (see, inter alia, orders in Comunidad Autónoma de Valencia v Commission, C‑363/P, EU:C:2008:99, paragraph 21, and Interspeed v Commission, C‑471/P, EU:C:2013:418, paragraph 9).
      
It is not disputed that, at the time of proceedings before the General Court, Mr Zomorodian had not been admitted to the Bar
         and therefore did not hold the title of ‘advokat’. Accordingly, that representative of the appellant failed to demonstrate
         that he satisfied the first of the abovementioned two cumulative conditions (see, by analogy, order in Comunidad Autónoma de Valencia v Commission, EU:C:2008:99, paragraphs and 23).
      
Consequently, the General Court was entitled to hold, and did not thereby err in law, that Mr Zomorodian was not a ‘lawyer’,
         within the meaning of Article of the Statute of the Court.
      
The first ground of appeal must therefore be rejected as being manifestly unfounded.
      
 The second ground of appeal
By its second ground, the appellant claims that the General Court erred in law by holding that an application must be signed
         by two lawyers.
      
It is clear that this ground of appeal is based on a misreading of the order under appeal. Far from ruling that both Mr Zomorodian
         and Mr Kronhöffer should have signed the application, the General Court stated that an action brought by a party covered by
         the third paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice is inadmissible where the application was signed
         only by a person who is not a lawyer.
      
The reasoning of the General Court on that point is, moreover, confirmed by the Court’s case-law to the effect that the requirement
         of signature by a lawyer authorised to practise before a court or tribunal of a Member State or another State which is a party
         to the EEA Agreement is an essential procedural condition which is not one of the requirements which can be rectified, after
         expiry of the time-limit for bringing an action, under Article 44(6) of the Rules of Procedure of the General Court, and the
         consequence of failure to comply with it is that the action is rendered inadmissible (see, to that effect, the orders in Diy-Mar Insaat Sanayi ve Ticaret and Akar v Commission, C‑163/P, EU:C:2007:717, paragraphs 25, and 37, and Interspeed v Commission, EU:C:2013:418, paragraph 10).
      
Consequently, the second ground must also be rejected as being manifestly unfounded.
      
 The third ground of appeal
By its third ground, the appellant claims that the General Court disregarded the principle of proportionality by concluding,
         from the mere fact that Mr Kronhöffer failed to sign the application, that the action must be dismissed as being inadmissible.
         According to the appellant, even if Mr Zomorodian was not a ‘lawyer’ within the meaning of Article of the Statute of the
         Court of Justice, the General Court should have declared the action to be admissible, having regard to the existence of excusable
         error or unforeseeable circumstances.
      
In that regard, it must be borne in mind that the strict application of procedural rules serves the requirements of legal
         certainty and the need to avoid any discrimination or arbitrary treatment in the administration of justice (see, inter alia,
         the judgments in Bell & Ross v OHIM, C‑426/P, EU:C:2011:612, paragraph 43, and Gbagbo and Others v Council, C‑478/P to C‑482/P, EU:C:2013:258, paragraph 71).
      
Consequently, where those employed to represent an applicant fail to comply with an essential procedural condition, the consequence
         must be that the action is inadmissible, unless it is established that abnormal circumstances, unforeseeable and outside their
         control, made compliance impossible (see, to that effect, the order in Zuazaga Meabe v OHIM, C‑325/P, EU:C:2005:28, paragraph 25, and Gbagbo and Others v Council, EU:C:2013:258, paragraph 72).
      
Since in this case it has not been established that there were such circumstances, the third ground of appeal is also manifestly
         unfounded.
      
In the light of the foregoing, this appeal must be dismissed.
      
 Costs
Under Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court, applicable to the procedure on appeal pursuant to Article 184(1)
         of those rules, a decision as to costs is to be given in the order which closes the proceedings.
      
Since the appellant has been unsuccessful, it must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby orders:
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
2.      Brown Brothers Harriman & Co. shall pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 