
Case C-73/Planzer Luxembourg Sàrl
v
Bundeszentralamt für Steuern
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Finanzgericht Köln)
(Sixth VAT Directive – Article 17(3) and (4) – Refund of VAT – Eighth VAT Directive – Refund of VAT to taxable persons not established inside the country – Articles 3(b) and 9, second paragraph – Annex B – Certificate of status as a taxable person – Legal scope – Thirteenth VAT Directive – Refund of VAT to taxable persons not established in Community territory – Article 1(1) – Concept of ‘business’)
Opinion of Advocate General Trstenjak delivered on April Judgment of the Court (Fourth Chamber), June Summary of the Judgment
1.     Tax provisions – Harmonisation of laws – Turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax – Refund of the tax to taxable
            persons not established in the territory of the country 
(Council Directive 79/1072, Arts 3(b), 9, second para., and Annex B)
2.     Tax provisions – Harmonisation of laws – Turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax – Refund of the tax to taxable
            persons not established in the territory of the Community
(Council Directive 86/560, Art. 1(1))
1.     Articles 3(b) and 9, second paragraph, of the Eighth Directive 79/on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States
         relating to turnover taxes – Arrangements for the refund of value added tax to taxable persons not established in the territory
         of the country must be interpreted as meaning that the certificate in accordance with the specimen in Annex B to that directive
         does in principle allow the presumption that the person concerned is not only subject to VAT in the Member State whose tax
         authorities issued it, but also that he is established in that Member State in one way or another, whether by having his business
         there or a fixed establishment from which operations are carried out.
      
The tax authorities of the Member State in which refund of input VAT is applied for are, in principle, bound in fact and in
         law by the information contained in that certificate.
      
Those provisions do not, however, imply that the tax authorities of the refunding Member State are prohibited, where they
         have doubts as to the economic reality of the establishment whose address is given in that certificate, from verifying that
         reality by having recourse to the administrative measures made available for that purpose by Community legislation on VAT.
      
If the information obtained shows that the address given in the certificate of status as a taxable person does not correspond
         either to the place of business of the person concerned, or to a fixed establishment from which he carries out his operations,
         the tax authorities of the refunding Member State are entitled to refuse the refund applied for by that person, without prejudice
         to any possible legal action by the latter.
      
(see paras 40-41, 49-50, operative part 1)
2.     Article 1(1) of the Thirteenth Directive 86/on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover
         taxes – Arrangements for the refund of value added tax to taxable persons not established in Community territory must be interpreted
         as meaning that the place of a company’s business is the place where the essential decisions concerning its general management
         are taken and where the functions of its central administration are exercised.
      
Determination of a company’s place of business requires a series of factors to be taken into consideration, foremost amongst
         which are its registered office, the place of its central administration, the place where its directors meet and the place,
         usually identical, where the general policy of that company is determined. Other factors, such as the place of residence of
         the main directors, the place where general meetings are held, the place where administrative and accounting documents are
         kept, and the place where the company’s financial, and particularly banking, transactions mainly take place, may also need
         to be taken into account.
      
Thus, a fictitious presence, such as that of a ‘letter box’ or ‘brass plate’ company, cannot be described as a place of business
         for the purposes of Article 1(1) of the Thirteenth Directive.
      
(see paras 61-63, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
June *(1)
      
(Sixth VAT Directive – Article 17(3) and (4) – Refund of VAT – Eighth VAT Directive – Refund of VAT to taxable persons not established inside the country – Articles 3(b) and 9, second paragraph – Annex B – Certificate of status as a taxable person – Legal scope – Thirteenth VAT Directive – Refund of VAT to taxable persons not established in Community territory – Article 1(1) – Concept of ‘business’)
In Case C‑73/06,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, by the Finanzgericht Köln (Germany), made by decision of January
         2006, received at the Court on February 2006, in the proceedings
      
Planzer Luxembourg Sàrl
v
Bundeszentralamt für Steuern,
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts (Rapporteur), President of Chamber, E. Juhász, R. Silva de Lapuerta, J. Malenovský and T. von Danwitz,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Planzer Luxembourg Sàrl, by P. Widdau, Steuerberater,
–       the German Government, by M. Lumma and U. Forsthoff, acting as Agents,
–       the French Government, by G. de Bergues and J.‑C. Gracia, acting as Agents,
–       the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, assisted by S. Fiorentino, avvocato dello Stato,
–       the Luxembourg Government, by S. Schreiner, acting as Agent,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by D. Triantafyllou, acting as Agent,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on April 2007,
gives the following
Judgment
The reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 3(b) and  the second paragraph of Article of, and Annex B to, the Eighth Council Directive 79/1072/EEC of December on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member
         States relating to turnover taxes – Arrangements for the refund of value added tax to taxable persons not established in the
         territory of the country (OJ L 331, p. 11; ‘the Eighth Directive’), and also the interpretation of Article 1(1) of the
         Thirteenth Council Directive 86/560/EEC of November on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating
         to turnover taxes – Arrangements for the refund of value added tax to taxable persons not established in Community territory
         (OJ L 326, p. 40; the Thirteenth Directive’).
      
The reference was made in a dispute between Planzer Luxembourg Sàrl, a company incorporated under Luxembourg law, and the
         Bundeszentralamt für Steuern (the German tax authority) concerning the latters rejection of applications for refund of value
         added tax (‘VAT’) paid by the company on fuel supplies in Germany.
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
 The Sixth Directive
Article of the Sixth Council Directive 77/388/EEC of May on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States
         relating to turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax: uniform basis of assessment (OJ L 145, p. 1; ‘the Sixth
         Directive’) in the version applicable at the time of the facts, provides in paragraphs (2) and (3):
      
‘2. In so far as the goods and services are used for the purposes of his taxable transactions, the taxable person shall be
         entitled to deduct from the tax which he is liable to pay:
      
(a)      [VAT] due or paid in respect of goods or services supplied or to be supplied to him by another taxable person in the territory
         of the country;
      
…
3. Member States shall also grant to every taxable person the right to a deduction or refund of the [VAT] referred to in paragraph
         in so far as the goods and services are used for the purposes of:
      
(a)      transactions relating to the economic activities as referred to in Article (2) carried out in another country, which would
         be eligible for deduction of tax if they had occurred in the territory of the country;
      
…’
The conditions and detailed rules for the right to refund under Article 17(3) of the Sixth Directive vary according to whether
         the foreign taxpayer, the recipient of the goods or services used for the purposes of his taxable transactions, is established
         in another Member State or outside the European Community. The first scenario falls under the Eighth Directive and the second
         falls under the Thirteenth Directive.
      
 The Eighth Directive
Article of the Eighth Directive provides:
‘For the purposes of this Directive, “a taxable person not established in the territory of the country” shall mean a person
         ... who ... has had in that country neither the seat of his economic activity, nor a fixed establishment from which business
         transactions are effected, nor, if no such seat or fixed establishment exists, his domicile or normal place of residence,
         and who ... has supplied no goods or services deemed to have been supplied in that country ...’
      
Article of the same directive provides:
‘Each Member State shall refund to any taxable person who is not established in the territory of the country but who is established
         in another Member State, subject to the conditions laid down below, any [VAT] charged in respect of services or movable property
         supplied to him by other taxable persons …’
      
Under Article 3(b) of the Eighth Directive, a taxable person established in another Member State is required, in order to
         receive refund, to ‘produce evidence, in the form of a certificate issued by the official authority of the State in which
         he is established, that he is a taxable person for the purposes of [VAT] in that State’. 
      
According to Article of the Eighth Directive, Member States may not, in addition to the obligations laid down by that directive,
         such as by Article thereof, impose on taxable persons referred to in Article of that directive ‘any obligation ... other
         than the obligation to provide, in specific cases, the information necessary to determine whether the application for refund
         is justified’.
      
According to the second paragraph of Article of the Eighth Directive, ‘[t]he certificates referred to in Article 3(b) ...
         establishing that the person concerned is a taxable person, shall be modelled on the specimens contained in Annex B.’
      
According to those specimens, the certificate that the person concerned is a taxable person must indicate, in particular,
         the name and forenames or company name of the applicant, the nature of that persons business, the address of that persons
         establishment and the VAT identification number, or, in appropriate cases, the reason why the applicant does not have such
         an identification number.
      
 The Thirteenth Directive
Article of the Thirteenth Directive provides:
‘For the purposes of this Directive:
(1)      A taxable person not established in the territory of the Community shall mean a taxable person as referred to in Article (1) of [the Sixth Directive] who, during the period referred to in Article (1) of this Directive, has had in that territory
         neither his business nor a fixed establishment from which business transactions are effected, nor, if no such business or
         fixed establishment exists, his permanent address or usual place of residence, and who, during the same period, has supplied
         no goods or services deemed to have been supplied in the Member State referred to in Article …
      
...’
According to Article 2(1) of the Thirteenth Directive:
‘Without prejudice to Articles and 4, each Member State shall refund to any taxable person not established in the territory
         of the Community, subject to the conditions set out below, any [VAT] charged in respect of services rendered or moveable property
         supplied to him in the territory or the country by other taxable persons or charged in respect of the importation of goods
         into the country, in so far as such goods and services are used for the purposes of the transactions referred to in Article
         17(3) (a) and (b) of [the Sixth Directive] …’
      
Article 3(1) of the Thirteenth Directive provides:
‘The refunds referred to in Article 2(1) shall be granted upon application by the taxable person. Member States shall determine
         the arrangements for submitting applications, including the time limits for doing so, the period which applications should
         cover, the authority competent to receive them and the minimum amounts in respect of which applications may be submitted.
         They shall also determine the arrangements for making refunds, including the time limits for doing so. They shall impose on
         the applicant such obligations as are necessary to determine whether the application is justified and to prevent fraud, in
         particular the obligation to provide proof that he is engaged in an economic activity in accordance with Article 4(1) of [the
         Sixth Directive]. The applicant must certify, in a written declaration, that, during the period prescribed, he has not carried
         out any transaction which does not fulfil the conditions laid down in point of Article of this Directive.’
      
According to Article of the Thirteenth Directive:
‘1. For the purposes of this Directive, eligibility for refunds shall be determined in accordance with Article of [the
         Sixth Directive] as applied in the Member State where the refund is paid.
      
2. Member States may, however, provide for the exclusion of certain expenditure or make refunds subject to additional conditions.
…’
 National law
The procedure for the refund of VAT paid in Germany by a taxable person established abroad is governed by the combined provisions
         of Paragraph 18(9) of the Law on Turnover Tax (Umsatzsteuergesetz 1993, BGBl. I, p. 565; ‘the UstG’) and Paragraph
         of the VAT Implementing Regulation (Umsatzsteuer-Durchführungsverordnung 1993, BGBl. I, p. 600; ‘the UstDV’).
      
By virtue of the seventh sentence of Paragraph 18(9) of the UStG, taxable persons who are not established in Community territory
         are not entitled to a refund of input tax in relation to the supply of fuel.
      
 Factual background to the dispute and the questions referred
The applicant in the main proceedings runs a haulage business and has its registered office in Frisange (Luxembourg).  Its
         sole shareholder is the company Planzer Transport AG (‘P AG’), which is established in Dietikon (Switzerland).
      
The applicant’s directors are two employees of P AG, one of whom lives in Switzerland and the other in Italy.
At the applicant’s registered office, a certain Henri Deltgen (‘D’) runs the firm of Helvetia House, from which the applicant
         has rented its business premises.  In his capacity as representative of the sole shareholder in the applicant, D arranged
         for the applicant’s incorporation.
      
Thirteen other companies, including three subsidiaries of Swiss haulage businesses, also have their registered offices at
         the same address as the applicant.
      
In April and May 1998, the applicant applied to the German tax authority for the refund of VAT which it had paid on fuel
         purchases in Germany.   The applications were in respect of DEM 004.for and DEM 670.for 1997.  Each of those
         applications was accompanied by a certificate issued by the Luxembourg tax authority in accordance with the specimens in Annex
         B to the Eighth Directive.
      
According to that certificate, the applicant is liable to VAT under a Luxembourg identification number.
Having been informed by the foreign department of its central information office that the applicant did not have any telephone
         line at the address stated in the certificate, the German tax authority took the view that the applicant had not established
         that the place of its management was in Luxembourg.  By two decisions respectively dated January and October 1998,
         it rejected the applicant’s applications for refund on the ground that the conditions for refund under Paragraph 18(9) of
         the UstG and Paragraph of the UstDV were not fulfilled.
      
The applicant lodged objections against those decisions, producing an additional certificate according to which it was ‘a
         commercial company within the meaning of the German/Luxembourg double taxation agreement’ and was liable to ‘Luxembourg direct
         taxation’.  It argued that its two managers, D and another person also responsible for its administration and accounting,
         carried on their activities in Luxembourg, that five employees worked part-time as drivers at its registered office, that
         it had a telephone line, as was apparent from its letter heading, that goods vehicles registered in Luxembourg were used for
         the transport of air freight, and that invoices were drawn up at its registered office.
      
By decisions of July 1999, the German tax authority dismissed those objections on the ground that the place from which the
         applicant’s business was managed was in Switzerland rather than in Luxembourg.
      
The applicant brought an action against those dismissal decisions. By a judgment of October 2001, the Finanzgericht Köln
         (Cologne Finance Court) upheld that action, taking the view that Luxembourg constituted the main starting-point of the transactions
         carried out by the applicant vis-à-vis its Swiss parent company, and that the applicant’s registered office was undeniably
         in Luxembourg.
      
By a judgment of May 2003, the Bundesfinanzhof (Federal Finance Court) annulled that judgment on the ground that the Finanzgericht
         Köln had wrongly assumed, on the basis of the location of its registered office, that the applicant was established in Luxembourg.
         Taking the view that interpretation of the concepts of establishment and place of business used in German VAT legislation
         were a matter of Community law, the Bundesfinanzhof identified a series of criteria which, in its view, might be relevant
         in that respect: identification of the applicant in its own name in the Luxembourg telephone directory; leasing of offices
         and conclusion of contracts in its own name; place and period of activity of any workers employed in the applicant’s service;
         the place where invoices relating to its transactions vis-à-vis its parent company were drawn up; place of registration of
         goods vehicles; place where goods vehicles were parked when not in use; existence of VAT declarations in Luxembourg; issuing
         by the Luxembourg tax authorities of documents concerning the applicant. It then referred the case back to the Finanzgericht
         Köln for the latter to make the necessary factual findings.
      
In its order for reference, the Finanzgericht Köln states the following in that regard:
‘1. In the years and the claimant, initially on the basis of an agreement on freight charges of January and
         on its own letterheading, made out several invoices to P AG for freight charges which the latter then also settled by bank
         transfer. It also invoiced P AG in parallel for charges for the use of semi-trailers. By December it had already,
         through its employee Robert Surber and with effect from January 1996, concluded a written lease with the firm of Helvetia
         House – Henri Deltgen for office space at Rue de Luxembourg A in Frisange. It also paid the heating costs for the premises.
         It could be reached on the telephone number for Helvetia House, although it was entered in the telephone book under the name
         of D, and it also used that number on its letterheading. In the period from to it had also registered goods vehicles
         with the Ministerium für Transportwesen (Ministry of Transport) in its own name and had received a corresponding operating
         permit from the Luxembourg Ministry for the Middle Classes and Tourism. According to the list of personnel produced by it,
         on the date of reference of June it had been employing seven members of staff most of whom had been working for it
         since or had otherwise been taken on to replace former members of staff who had also been employed since 1996. The claimant
         had concluded corresponding written contracts of employment with them. Finally, it was also registered for turnover tax purposes
         with the Luxembourg tax administration’s Bureau d’Imposition under no. and had the VAT identification number
         LU 16487850. It also filed turnover tax returns and received turnover tax assessments. It was also registered for direct tax
         under tax no. 1995/2408/871.
      
2. The defendant’s enquiries of the Luxembourg tax authority on July had the following result …: the applicant had
         leased its premises from Helvetia House and had also had the latter render some secretarial and accounting services on its
         behalf.  The applicant did not have any equipment or other property at the registered office, nor were its officials permanently
         present in Luxembourg. Nor were there any storage premises or parking spaces for goods vehicles there. However, the lorry
         drivers were registered in Luxembourg and the goods vehicles were also registered there. In the year the claimant declared
         turnover in the sum of  EUR 129.in Luxembourg.
      
3. In the oral proceedings on January the Senate also established in this context that both of the applicant’s directors
         were present in Luxembourg either to days a week (Surber) or to days a month (Gemple). Major management decisions
         (such as the purchase of goods vehicles, engagement of staff) were taken there and the administration was also located there
         (bookkeeping, invoicing, pay administration). Operations (arrangements and organisation regarding haulage trips, contact with
         customers) were nevertheless carried out by P AG from Switzerland. Under those arrangements the claimant rendered the corresponding
         haulage services using the aforementioned goods vehicles owned by it. Services were supplied 100% to P AG and the claimant
         accounted to it for the services concerned from Luxembourg.
      
4. In answer to the question whether the applicant rendered haulage services within the territory of the country (Germany),
         the applicant produced certification as to the application of the zero-rating rule under the deduction procedure (Paragraph
         52(4) UStDV 1993) in relation to both of the credit periods in a letter of January ...’
      
Emphasising that the central question in the case before it is whether the applicant in the main proceedings is established
         outside Community territory, in which case it is not entitled, given the seventh sentence of Paragraph 18(9) of the UStG,
         to reimbursement of VAT paid on fuel purchases in Germany, the referring court shares the opinion of the Bundesfinanzhof that
         the concept of establishment for the purposes of that provision must be interpreted in accordance with Article 1(1) of the
         Thirteenth Directive.  However, it has doubts as to how correctly to interpret that latter provision.
      
In its view, the first question must be as to the legal scope of the certificate produced by the applicant. Whilst accepting
         that that certificate provides an irrefutable presumption that the person in question is an operator subject to VAT, it nevertheless
         asks whether an irrefutable presumption attaches as regards the establishment of that person in the Member State of the administration
         which issued it (the issuing Member State).
      
If that question calls for a negative answer, it asks whether the term ‘business’ within the meaning of Article 1(1) of the
         Thirteenth Directive refers to the place where the registered office of the company is situated and where essential decisions
         are taken concerning its economic management (which, in this case, the court sees as being in Luxembourg) or the place from
         which its operational activities are carried out (which, in this case, the court sees as being in Switzerland).
      
In those circumstances, the Finanzgericht Köln decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following questions to the Court
         of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Does an undertaking’s certificate according to the specimen form in Annex B to the Eighth Directive have binding effect or
         create an irrefutable assumption that the undertaking is established in the State issuing the certificate?
      
(2)      If the first question should be answered in the negative:
Should the term “business” in Article 1(1) of the Thirteenth Directive be construed as meaning the place where the company
         has its registered office?
      
or should it mean the place where management decisions are taken?
or is the crucial factor the place where decisions vital to normal everyday operations are taken?’
 The questions referred
 The first question
By its first question, the referring court essentially asks whether the certificate according to the specimen form in Annex
         B to the Eighth Directive necessarily proves that the taxable person is established in the issuing Member State.
      
In that respect, it should be noted that the aim of the Eighth Directive is to establish detailed rules for reimbursement
         of VAT paid in a Member State by taxable persons established in another Member State and thus to harmonise the right to refund
         arising from Article 17(3) of the Sixth Directive (see, to that effect, Case C‑136/Monte Dei Paschi Di Siena [2000] ECR I‑6109, paragraph 20, and Case C‑35/Reemtsma Cigarettenfabriken [2007] ECR I-0000, paragraph 26).
      
As is apparent from its second recital, the main aim of that directive is to avoid a taxable person established in a Member
         State being subjected to double taxation by reason of his having to bear the definitive burden of a tax invoiced to him in
         another Member State.  As the Commission of the European Communities has stated, the right of a taxable person established
         in a Member State to obtain refund of VAT paid in another Member State, in the manner governed by the Eighth Directive, is
         the counterpart of such a persons right established by the Sixth Directive to deduct input VAT in his own Member State.
      
It follows from the sixth recital of the Eighth Directive that its other general objective is to combat certain forms of tax
         evasion or avoidance (see, to that effect, Case C‑361/Grandes sources d’eaux minérales françaises [1998] ECR I‑3495, paragraph 28).
      
In order to meet that double objective, the Eighth Directive gives the taxable person a right to reimbursement of the input
         VAT paid in a Member State in which he has neither his business, nor a fixed establishment, nor his permanent address or usual
         place of residence, and where he has not supplied any goods or services (see, to that effect, Case C‑429/Commission v France [2001] ECR I‑637, paragraph 28), subject to the production to the tax authority of the Member State in which that reimbursement
         is applied for (‘the reimbursing Member State’), of a certificate provided by the tax authority of the issuing Member State
         concerning the capacity of the operator seeking that reimbursement as a taxable person liable to VAT.
      
As the Commission has emphasised, the system of reimbursement established by the Eighth Directive thus rests on a mechanism
         of cooperation and mutual trust between the tax authorities of the Member States.
      
In that context, in order to ensure the harmonious functioning of that mechanism, the second paragraph of Article of the
         Eighth Directive provides that the certificate of the capacity as a taxable person provided by the tax authority of the issuing
         Member State must comply with the specimen in Annex B to that directive. According to that specimen, the certificate must
         indicate, in particular, the VAT registration number and the ‘address of the establishment’ of the person concerned. In addition,
         Article 3(b) of that directive provides that that certificate is to be issued by the authority of the State in which the taxable
         person is established.
      
As the Italian Government and the Commission have argued, the certificate in accordance with the specimen in Annex B to the
         Eighth Directive thus permits the assumption that the person concerned is not only liable to VAT in the issuing Member State
         but is also established there in one way or another, whether by having his business there or a fixed establishment from which
         operations are carried out.
      
The tax authorities of the refunding Member State are in principle bound in fact and in law by the information contained in
         that certificate.
      
As the German, French and Italian Governments and the Commission have argued, however, given the differences which exist,
         as regards conditions for refund, between the system established by the Eighth Directive for taxable persons established in
         a Member State other than the refunding State and the system established by the Thirteenth Directive for taxable persons not
         established in Community territory, the issuing of a certificate in accordance with the specimen in Annex B to the Eighth
         Directive cannot prevent the tax authorities of the refunding Member State from seeking assurance as to the economic reality
         of the establishment whose address is mentioned in such a certificate.
      
It should be noted in that respect that taking account of the economic reality constitutes a fundamental criterion for applying
         the common system of VAT (Case C‑260/DFDS [1997] ECR I‑1005, paragraph 23).
      
It is, moreover, settled case-law that Community law cannot be relied on for abusive or fraudulent ends (in the area of VAT,
         see, for example, Case C‑32/Fini H [2005] ECR I‑1599, paragraph 32, and Case C‑255/Halifax and Others [2006] ECR I‑1609, paragraph 68).
      
That would be the case if a taxable person were to attempt to benefit from the refund system under the conditions laid down
         in the Eighth Directive in circumstances where the establishment whose address is given in the certificate in accordance with
         the specimen in Annex B of that directive does not correspond to any economic reality in the issuing Member State and, moreover,
         the person concerned is not established in Community territory, with the result that he falls under not the Eighth, but the
         Thirteenth Directive.
      
Where, however, the tax authorities of the refunding Member State have doubts, as in the case of suspected tax evasion, for
         example, as to the economic reality of the establishment referred to in that certificate, they cannot, given the presumption
         which attaches to that certificate, refuse the taxable person a refund without any further prior verification.
      
In such a case, as the Advocate General has pointed out in paragraph of her Opinion, those authorities have the possibility,
         under Article of the Eighth Directive, to require the taxable person to supply it with the necessary information in order
         to assess whether the application for refund is well founded (see, to that effect, Monte Dei Paschi Di Siena, paragraph 31),
         such as information enabling them in principle to assess the economic reality of the establishment referred to in the certificate
         of status as a taxable person.
      
As the Commission has indicated, those authorities also have at their disposal the Community instruments for cooperation and
         administrative assistance adopted to allow the correct assessment of VAT and counter evasion and avoidance in that area, such
         as the measures provided for by Council Regulation (EC) No 1798/of October on administrative cooperation in the
         field of value added tax and repealing Regulation (EEC) No 218/(OJ L 264, p. 1), and Commission Regulation (EC) No
         1925/of October laying down detailed rules for implementing certain provisions of Council Regulation (EC) No
         1798/(OJ L 331, p. 13).
      
If the information obtained shows that the address given in the certificate of status as a taxable person does not correspond
         either to the place of business of the person concerned, or to a fixed establishment from which he carries out his operations,
         the tax authorities of the refunding Member State are entitled to refuse the refund applied for by that person, without prejudice
         to any possible legal action by the latter (see, to that effect, concerning fraud or abuse, Fini H, paragraphs and 34; by analogy, in the context of Article EC, see Case C‑196/Cadbury Schweppes and Cadbury Schweppes Overseas [2006] ECR I‑7995, paragraph 55).
      
In the light of the above, the answer to the first question must be that Articles 3(b) and 9, second paragraph, of the Eighth
         Directive must be interpreted as meaning that the certificate in accordance with the specimen in Annex B to that directive
         does in principle allow the presumption that the person concerned is not only subject to VAT in the Member State whose tax
         authorities issued it, but also that he is established in that Member State. Those provisions do not, however, imply that
         the tax authorities of the refunding Member State are prohibited, where they have doubts as to the economic reality of the
         establishment whose address is given in that certificate, from verifying that reality by having recourse to the administrative
         measures made available for that purpose by Community legislation on VAT.
      
 The second question
By its second question, the referring court seeks an interpretation of the term ‘business’ used in Article 1(1) of the Thirteenth
         Directive.
      
As a preliminary point, it should be noted that, for the purposes of the Thirteenth Directive, status as a taxable person
         not established in Community territory supposes, in particular, that the taxable person did not, during the period referred
         to in Article 3(1) of that directive, exhibit any of the connecting factors identified in Article 1(1) of that directive.
      
Those connecting factors include, in particular, ‘his business’ and the existence of a ‘fixed establishment from which business
         transactions are effected.’
      
In accordance with well-established case-law in the area of VAT, the term fixed establishment implies a minimum degree of
         stability derived from the permanent presence of both the human and technical resources necessary for the provision of given
         services (Case 168/Berkholz [1985] ECR 2251, paragraph 18; DFDS, paragraph 20; Case C‑190/ARO Lease [1997] ECR I‑4383, paragraph 15). It thus requires a sufficient degree of permanence and a structure adequate, in terms of
         human and technical resources, to supply the services in question on an independent basis (ARO Lease, paragraph 16).
      
Concerning transport activities in particular, that term implies, for the purposes of applying Community legislation on VAT,
         at least an office in which contracts may be drawn up and daily management decisions taken, and a place where the vehicles
         used for the said activities are stored (see, to that effect, ARO Lease, paragraphs and 27, and Case C‑390/Lease Plan [1998] ECR I‑2553, paragraph 26). By contrast, registration of those vehicles in the Member State concerned is not an indicator
         of a fixed establishment in that Member State (see, to that effect, Lease Plan, paragraphs and 27).
      
A fixed installation used by the undertaking only for preparatory or auxiliary activities, such as recruitment of staff or
         purchase of the technical means needed for carrying out the undertaking’s tasks, does not constitute a fixed establishment.
      
In the case at issue in the main proceedings, as appears in paragraph of this judgment, the referring court is of the opinion
         that, taking account of its various factual findings (see paragraph of this judgment), the place from which the transport
         activities of the applicant in the main proceedings are actually carried out is situated in Switzerland.
      
Concerning the concept of business for the purposes of Article 1(1) of the Thirteenth Directive, it should be noted that,
         whilst one and the same place may be both the place of business and a fixed establishment of the undertaking concerned, the
         mere fact that that provision, as indeed Article of the Eighth Directive, distinctly refers to the place of business on
         the one hand and a fixed establishment from which business transactions are effected on the other shows that, in the mind
         of the Community legislature, the first concept is independent in its scope from the second.
      
Thus the fact that, according to the findings of the referring court in the main proceedings, the place from which the applicant’s
         activities are actually exercised is not situated in the issuing Member State does not preclude the possibility of the applicant
         having established its place of business there.
      
With regard to a company, as in the case in the main proceedings, the term business for the purposes of Article 1(1) of the
         Thirteenth Directive refers to the place where the essential decisions concerning the general management of that company are
         adopted and where the functions of its central administration are carried out.
      
Determination of a company’s place of business requires a series of factors to be taken into consideration, foremost amongst
         which are its registered office, the place of its central administration, the place where its directors meet and the place,
         usually identical, where the general policy of that company is determined. Other factors, such as the place of residence of
         the main directors, the place where general meetings are held, the place where administrative and accounting documents are
         kept, and the place where the company’s financial, and particularly banking, transactions mainly take place, may also need
         to be taken into account.
      
Thus, a fictitious presence, such as that of a ‘letter box’ or ‘brass plate’ company, cannot be described as a place of business
         for the purposes of Article 1(1) of the Thirteenth Directive (see, by analogy, Case C‑341/Eurofood IFSC [2006] ECR I‑3813, paragraph 35, and Cadbury Schweppes and Cadbury Schweppes Overseas, paragraph 68).
      
In the light of the above, the answer to the second question must be that Article 1(1) of the Thirteenth Directive must be
         interpreted as meaning that the place of a company’s business is the place where the essential decisions concerning its general
         management are taken and where the functions of its central administration are exercised.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article 3(b) and the second paragraph of Article of the Eighth Council Directive 79/1072/EEC of December on the harmonisation
            of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes – Arrangements for the refund of value added tax to taxable persons
            not established in the territory of the country must be interpreted as meaning that the certificate in accordance with the
            specimen in Annex B to that directive does in principle allow the presumption that the person concerned is not only subject
            to VAT in the Member State whose tax authorities issued it, but also that he is established in that Member State.
Those provisions do not, however, imply that the tax authorities of the Member State in which refund of input VAT is applied
            for are prohibited, where they have doubts as to the economic reality of the establishment whose address is given in that
            certificate, from verifying that reality by having recourse to the administrative measures made available for that purpose
            by Community legislation on VAT.
2.      Article 1(1) of the Thirteenth Council Directive 86/560/EEC of November on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member
            States relating to turnover taxes – Arrangements for the refund of value added tax to taxable persons not established in Community
            territory must be interpreted as meaning that the place of a company’s business is the place where the essential decisions
            concerning its general management are taken and where the functions of its central administration are exercised.
[Signatures]
1* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 