
Case C-145/Levi Strauss & Co.
v
Casucci SpA
(Reference for preliminary ruling from the Cour de cassation (Belgium))
(Trade marks – Directive 89/104/EEC – Article 5(1)(b) – Relevant time for assessing likelihood of confusion between a trade mark and a similar sign – Loss of distinctive character owing to conduct of the proprietor of the trade mark after use of the sign has commenced)
Summary of the Judgment
Approximation of laws – Trade marks – Directive 89/– Rights conferred by a trade mark 
(Council Directive 89/104, Arts 5(1) and 12(2))
Article 5(1) of First Directive 89/on trade marks must be interpreted as meaning that, in order to determine the scope
         of protection of a trade mark which has been lawfully acquired on the basis of its distinctive character, the national court
         must take into account the perception of the public concerned at the time when the sign, the use of which infringes that trade
         mark, began to be used, since genuine and effective protection of the proprietor’s rights will not be safeguarded if the likelihood
         of confusion was assessed at a later date.
      
Where the competent national court finds that the sign in question constituted an infringement of the mark at that time, it
         is for that court to take such measures as prove to be the most appropriate in the light of the circumstances of the case
         in order to safeguard the proprietor’s rights deriving from Article 5(1) of Directive 89/104; such measures may include, in
         particular, an order to cease use of that sign.
      
It is not appropriate, however, to order such measures if it has been established that the trade mark in question has lost
         its distinctive character, in consequence of acts or inactivity of the proprietor, so that it has become a common name within
         the meaning of Article 12(2) of Directive 89/104, and the trade mark has therefore been revoked.
      
(see paras 17-18, 20, 24-25, 37, operative part 1-3)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
April (*)
      
(Trade marks – Directive 89/104/EEC – Article 5(1)(b) – Relevant time for assessing likelihood of confusion between a trade mark and a similar sign – Loss of distinctive character owing to conduct of the proprietor of the trade mark after use of the sign has commenced)
In Case C-145/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Cour de cassation (Belgium), made by decision of March
         2005, received at the Court on March 2005, in the proceedings
      
Levi Strauss & Co.
v
Casucci SpA,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of A. Rosas, President of the Chamber, J. Malenovský (Rapporteur), J.‑P. Puissochet, S. von Bahr and U. Lõhmus, Judges,
Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer,
Registrar:  K. Sztranc, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on November 2005,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Levi Strauss & Co., by T. van Innis, avocat,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by N.B. Rasmussen and D. Maidani, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of First Council Directive 89/104/EEC of December to approximate the laws of the Member States relating to trade marks (OJ L 40, p. 1).
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between Levi Strauss & Co. (‘Levi Strauss’) and Casucci SpA (‘Casucci’) concerning
         sale by the latter of jeans bearing a sign which allegedly infringes a mark owned by Levi Strauss. 
      
 Legal context
The 10th recital in the preamble to Directive 89/is worded as follows:
      
‘... the protection afforded by the registered trade mark, the function of which is in particular to guarantee the trade mark
         as an indication of origin, is absolute in the case of identity between the mark and the sign and goods or services; ... the
         protection applies also in case of similarity between the mark and the sign and the goods or services; ... it is indispensable
         to give an interpretation of the concept of similarity in relation to the likelihood of confusion; ... the likelihood of confusion,
         the appreciation of which depends on numerous elements and, in particular, on the recognition of the trade mark on the market,
         of the association which can be made with the used or registered sign, of the degree of similarity between the trade mark
         and the sign and between the goods or services identified, constitutes the specific condition for such protection ... the
         ways in which likelihood of confusion may be established, and in particular the onus of proof, are a matter for national procedural
         rules which are not prejudiced by the Directive’.
      
Article of that directive provides:
      
‘1.      The registered trade mark shall confer on the proprietor exclusive rights therein. The proprietor shall be entitled to prevent
         all third parties not having his consent from using in the course of trade:
      
 …
(b)      any sign where, because of its identity with, or similarity to, the trade mark and the identity or similarity of the goods
         or services covered by the trade mark and the sign, there exists a likelihood of confusion on the part of the public, which
         includes the likelihood of association between the sign and the trade mark; 
      
…
3.      The following, inter alia, may be prohibited under paragraphs and 2:
(a)      affixing the sign to the goods or to the packaging thereof;
(b)      offering the goods, or putting them on the market or stocking them for these purposes under that sign, or offering or supplying
         services thereunder;
      
(c)      importing or exporting the goods under the sign;
(d)      using the sign on business papers and in advertising.
…’
Article 12(2) of the directive provides:
      
‘2.      A trade mark shall also be liable to revocation if, after the date on which it was registered,
(a)      in consequence of acts or inactivity of the proprietor, it has become the common name in the trade for a product or service
         in respect of which it is registered;
      
…’
 The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling 
In 1980, Levi Strauss obtained registration in the Benelux countries of the graphic mark known as ‘mouette’ (seagull), a design
         represented by a double row of overstitching curving downwards in the middle, placed in the centre of a pentagonal pocket,
         reproduced below,
      
in respect of clothes falling within Class within the meaning of the Nice Agreement concerning the International Classification
         of Goods and Services for the Purposes of the Registration of Marks of June 1957, as revised and amended.
      
Casucci put jeans onto the market in the Benelux countries bearing a sign comprising a double row of overstitching, curving
         upwards in the centre of the back pockets, which has the following form:
      
Considering that Casucci infringed in so doing the rights conferred by the ‘mouette’ trade mark on it, Levi Strauss brought
         an action against Casucci on March before the Tribunal de commerce de Bruxelles (Brussels Commercial Court) seeking
         cessation of all use of the mark in question on the clothes marketed by Casucci and an order for damages against that company.
      
When the first instance court dismissed its application by ruling of October 1999, Levi Strauss brought an appeal before
         the Cour d’appel de Bruxelles (Brussels Court of Appeal). Before that court, it argued that it followed from the case-law
         of the Court of Justice that, first, the likelihood of confusion had to be assessed globally, taking account of the degree
         of similarity between the mark and the sign and between the goods concerned, and, second, the more distinctive the earlier
         mark, the greater that risk would be. It contended that in the present case, besides the fact that the mark and the sign in
         question were visually similar and that the products concerned were identical, it was significant that the ‘mouette’ mark
         was highly distinctive on the basis of its imaginative content and its widespread use over decades. 
      
The Cour d’appel de Bruxelles, however, dismissed Levi Strauss’s application, ruling that there was little similarity between
         the sign in question and the ‘mouette’ mark, and in particular, that that mark could no longer be considered to be a highly
         distinctive mark.  The mark was partially made up of components whose characteristics were now common to the products concerned
         owing to their constant and widespread use, the effect of which was necessarily to weaken significantly that mark’s distinctive
         character since the components of that mark were not inherently distinctive.
      
Levi Strauss brought an appeal before the Cour de cassation (Court of Cassation), contending that Casucci appeared to claim
         that the ‘mouette’ mark was still highly distinctive in and that in – the year in which purchases of other jeans
         were made, the distribution of which had led to the dilution of the mark – it had lost its distinctive character. In this
         context, Levi Strauss argued that the Cour d’appel de Bruxelles should have followed the position taken by the Benelux Court
         of Justice in its judgment in ‘Quick’ of December (A 93/3), according to which, in order to determine whether a mark
         is highly distinctive, the court should place itself at the time when the sign in question had come into use – that time being,
         according to Levi Strauss, – and that it could be otherwise only if the mark concerned had lost its distinctive character
         in full or in part after that time, and only where that loss was fully or partly due to the action or inaction of the proprietor
         of that mark. In the present case, however, the Cour d’appel had placed itself, in order to assess the likelihood of confusion,
         not at the time when the sign in question had begun to be used but at the date it delivered its ruling. Whilst the Cour d’appel
         de Bruxelles considered that the effect of the widespread nature of the components of the mark in question was to weaken substantially
         its distinctive character, it did not find that the substantial weakening of that distinctive character, after the time the
         sign in question had come into use, was due in full or in part to the action or inaction of Levi Strauss. The Cour d’appel
         was thus not entitled to hold that the ‘mouette’ mark was no longer highly distinctive.
      
In those circumstances, the Cour de cassation decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to the
         Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)       For the purposes of determining the scope of protection of a trade mark which has been lawfully acquired on the basis of
         its distinctive character, in accordance with Article 5(1) of Directive 89/104, must the court take into account the perception
         of the public concerned at the time when use was commenced of the mark or similar sign which allegedly infringes the trade
         mark?
      
(2)      If not, may the court take into account the perception of the public concerned at any time after the commencement of the use
         complained of? Is the court entitled in particular to take into account the perception of the public concerned at the time
         it delivers the ruling?
      
(3)      Where, in application of the criterion referred to in the first question, the court finds that the trade mark has been infringed,
         is it entitled, as a general rule, to order cessation of the infringing use of the sign?
      
(4)      Can the position be different if the claimant’s trade mark has lost its distinctive character wholly or in part after commencement
         of the unlawful use, but solely where that loss is due wholly or in part to an act or omission by the proprietor of that trade
         mark?’ 
      
 The questions
 The first and second questions
By these questions, which should be considered together, the national court essentially wishes to know whether, in order to
         determine the scope of protection of a trade mark which has been lawfully acquired on the basis of its distinctive character,
         in accordance with Article 5(1) of Directive 89/104, it must take into account the perception of the public concerned either
         at the time when use was commenced of the sign which infringes the trade mark concerned, at any other time thereafter or at
         the time the national court delivers its ruling.
      
In conferring on the proprietor of a trade mark the right to prevent all third parties from using an identical or similar
         sign, where there is a likelihood of confusion, and in setting out the uses of such a sign which may be prohibited, Article
         of Directive 89/seeks to protect that proprietor from uses of signs likely to infringe that trade mark. 
      
The Court has thus pointed out that, in order to ensure the essential function of a trade mark, which is to guarantee the
         identity of the origin of the marked product or service to the consumer or end-user by enabling him, without any possibility
         of confusion, to distinguish that product or service from others which have another origin, the proprietor must be protected
         against competitors wishing to take unfair advantage of the status and reputation of the trade mark by selling products illegally
         bearing that mark (see Case C-349/Loendersloot [1997] ECR I‑6227, paragraph 22, and Case C‑206/ArsenalFootball Club [2002] ECR I-10273, paragraph 50). That must also be the case where, on the basis of a similarity between the signs and the
         mark in question, there is a likelihood of confusion between them.
      
Member States must take measures which are sufficiently effective to achieve the aim of the directive and they must ensure
         that the rights conferred by it can be effectively relied upon before the national courts by the persons concerned (see Case
         14/von Colson and Kamann [1984] ECR 1891, paragraph 18, and Case 222/Johnston [1986] ECR 1651, paragraph 17).
      
The proprietor’s right to protection of his mark from infringement is neither genuine nor effective if account may not be
         taken of the perception of the public concerned at the time when the sign, the use of which infringes the mark in question,
         began to be used.
      
If the likelihood of confusion were assessed at a time after the sign in question began to be used, the user of that sign
         might take undue advantage of his own unlawful behaviour by alleging that the product had become less renowned, a matter for
         which he himself was responsible or to which he himself contributed.
      
Article 12(2)(a) of Directive 89/provides that a trade mark is liable to revocation if, after the date on which it was
         registered, in consequence of acts or inactivity of the proprietor, it has become the common name in the trade for a product
         or service in respect of which it is registered. Thus, by balancing the interests of the proprietor against those of his competitors
         in the availability of signs, the legislator considered, in adopting this provision, that the loss of that mark’s distinctive
         character can be relied on against the proprietor thereof only where that loss is due to his action or inaction. Therefore,
         as long as this is not the case, and particularly when the loss of the distinctive character is linked to the activity of
         a third party using a sign which infringes the mark, the proprietor must continue to enjoy protection.
      
In the light of all the foregoing, the answer to the first and second questions must be that Article 5(1) of Directive 89/must be interpreted as meaning that, in order to determine the scope of protection of a trade mark which has been lawfully
         acquired on the basis of its distinctive character, the national court must take into account the perception of the public
         concerned at the time when the sign, the use of which infringes that trade mark, began to be used.
      
 The third question
By this question, the national court wishes to know whether, as a general rule, an order for the cessation of the use of the
         sign in question should be made where it has been found that that sign constituted an infringement of the protected mark at
         the time when it began to be used.
      
It follows from Article 5(1) of Directive 89/104, read in the light of the answer to the first and second questions referred
         by the national court, that, where there was a likelihood of confusion between the registered trade mark and a similar sign
         at the time when the sign in question began to be used, the proprietor is to be entitled to prevent all third parties not
         having his consent from using that sign in the course of trade.
      
Directive 89/provides in Article 5(3) for a non-exhaustive list of measures to guarantee the rights of the proprietor
         but does not require that such measures take a particular form, and thus the competent national authorities retain a degree
         of discretion in that regard.
      
However, the requirement of genuine and effective protection of the rights which the proprietor derives from Directive 89/104,
         recalled in paragraph of this judgment, means that the competent national court must take such measures as prove to be
         the most appropriate in the light of the circumstances of the case in order to safeguard the proprietor’s rights and remedy
         infringements of his mark. In this connection, it should be noted in particular that the order to cease use of the sign in
         question is indeed a measure which genuinely and effectively safeguards those rights. 
      
Accordingly, the answer to the third question must be that, where the competent national court finds that the sign in question
         constituted an infringement of the mark at the time when the sign began to be used, it is for that court to take such measures
         as prove to be the most appropriate in the light of the circumstances of the case in order to safeguard the proprietor’s rights
         deriving from Article 5(1) of Directive 89/104; such measures may include, in particular, an order to cease use of that sign.
      
 The fourth question
By its fourth question, the national court is essentially asking whether it is appropriate to order cessation of the use of
         the sign in question if the trade mark has lost its distinctive character, wholly or in part, after that sign has begun to
         be used and that loss is due, wholly or in part, to an act or omission of the proprietor of that mark.
      
While Article of Directive 89/confers certain rights on the proprietor of a trade mark, the directive requires consequences
         to be drawn from the proprietor’s conduct in determining the scope of protection of those rights.
      
Thus, Article 9(1) of the directive provides that where, in a Member State, the proprietor of an earlier trade mark has acquiesced,
         for a period of five successive years, in the use of a later trade mark registered in that Member State while being aware
         of such use, he is in principle no longer entitled on the basis of the earlier trade mark either to apply for a declaration
         that the later trade mark is invalid or to oppose the use of the later trade mark in respect of the goods or services for
         which the later trade mark has been used. By the same token, Article provides that if, following completion of the registration
         procedure, the proprietor has not put the trade mark to genuine use in the Member State concerned in connection with the goods
         or services in respect of which it is registered, or if such use has been suspended during an uninterrupted period of five
         years, that trade mark is to be subject to the sanctions provided for in the directive, unless there are proper reasons for
         non-use. Finally, under Article 12(1) and (2) of Directive 89/104, a trade mark is to be liable to revocation if it has not
         been put to genuine use within a continuous period of five years or if it has become, in consequence of its proprietor’s conduct,
         the common name for a product or service.
      
Those provisions indicate that the purpose of Directive 89/is generally to strike a balance between the interest of the
         proprietor of a trade mark to safeguard its essential function, on the one hand, and the interests of other economic operators
         in having signs capable of denoting their products and services (see, in relation to the requirement of availability of colours
         in the case of registration as a trade mark of a colour per se, Case C-104/Libertel [2003] ECR I‑3793).
      
It follows that the protection of rights that the proprietor of a trade mark derives under the directive in question is not
         unconditional, since in order to maintain the balance between those interests that protection is limited in particular to
         those cases in which the proprietor shows himself to be sufficiently vigilant by opposing the use of signs by other operators
         likely to infringe his mark.
      
The requirement of vigilant conduct is not confined to trade mark protection, in fact, and may apply in other fields of Community
         law where an individual seeks to benefit from a right deriving from that legal order.
      
It was recalled in paragraph of this judgment that a trade mark is liable to revocation if it has become, in consequence
         of acts or inactivity of the proprietor, the common name in the trade for a product or service in respect of which it has
         been registered.
      
Accordingly, where a trade mark has lost its distinctive character in consequence of acts or inactivity of the proprietor
         so that it has become a common name within the meaning of Article 12(2) of Directive 89/104, its proprietor can no longer
         assert the rights conferred on him under Article of that directive.
      
Such inactivity may also take the form of a failure on the part of the proprietor of a mark to have recourse to Article in due time, for the purposes of applying to the competent authority to prevent third parties from using the sign in respect
         of which there is a likelihood of confusion with that mark, since the purpose of such applications is precisely to preserve
         the distinctive character of the mark in question. 
      
Having regard to the considerations set out in paragraphs and of this judgment, it is for the competent national court
         to establish revocation, if appropriate, linked in particular to such a failure, including in the context of proceedings seeking
         protection of the exclusive rights conferred by Article of Directive 89/104, and which may have been brought late by the
         proprietor of the mark. If taking account of revocation for the purposes of Article 12(2) in infringement proceedings were
         solely a matter for the national laws of the Member States, the consequence for trade mark proprietors might be that protection
         would vary depending on the applicable law. The objective of ‘the same protection under the legal systems of all the Member
         States’ set out in the ninth recital in the preamble to the directive, where it is described as fundamental, would not be
         attained (see, on the subject of the onus of proving infringement of the proprietor’s exclusive rights, Case C-405/Class International [2005] ECR I-0000, paragraphs and 74).
      
Accordingly, after revocation in the particular case has been established, the competent national court cannot order cessation
         of the use of the sign in question, even if, at the time when that sign began to be used, there was a likelihood of confusion
         between the sign and the mark concerned.
      
Consequently, the answer to the fourth question must be that it is not appropriate to order cessation of the use of the sign
         in question if it has been established that the trade mark has lost its distinctive character, in consequence of acts or inactivity
         of the proprietor, so that it has become a common name within the meaning of Article 12(2) of Directive 89/and the trade
         mark has therefore been revoked.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article 5(1) of First Council Directive 89/104/EEC of December to approximate the laws of the Member States relating
            to trade marks must be interpreted as meaning that, in order to determine the scope of protection of a trade mark which has
            been lawfully acquired on the basis of its distinctive character, the national court must take into account the perception
            of the public concerned at the time when the sign, the use of which infringes that trade mark, began to be used. 
2.      Where the competent national court finds that the sign in question constituted an infringement of the mark at the time when
            the sign began to be used, it is for that court to take such measures as prove to be the most appropriate in the light of
            the circumstances of the case in order to safeguard the proprietor’s rights deriving from Article 5(1) of Directive 89/104;
            such measures may include, in particular, an order to cease us of that sign. 
3.      It is not appropriate to order cessation of the use of the sign in question if it has been established that the trade mark
            has lost its distinctive character, in consequence of acts or inactivity of the proprietor, so that it has become a common
            name within the meaning of Article 12(2) of Directive 89/104, and the trade mark has therefore been revoked.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 