
Avis juridique important
|
61988JJudgment of the Court (First Chamber) of March 1990.  -  Erich Wittmann GmbH & Co. KG v Hauptzollamt Nürnberg-Fürth.  -  Reference for a preliminary ruling: Finanzgericht München - Germany.  -  Common Customs Tariff - Ear-piercing instruments and stud earrings.  -  Case C-344/88.  
European Court reports Page I-Pub.RJ Page Pub somm 
Summary
Parties
Operative part
Keywords
++++Common Customs Tariff - Tariff headings - Classification of decorative stud earrings and ear-piercing instruments  
Summary
Stud earrings, whether or not put up in sterile packaging, made of gold - or silver-plated steel, consisting of a shank with a decorative head and a "butterfly" fastening, this shank being used to pierce the ear by means of a special device, which secures it in the ear lobe, came within subheading 71.A of the Common Customs Tariff even before the entry into force of Commission Regulation No 3558/which expressly classified them under that subheading .  Subheading 84.E II must be interpreted as including ear-piercing instruments .  
Parties
In Case C-344/REFERENCE to the Court under Article of the EEC Treaty by the Finanzgericht Muenchen ( Finance Court, Munich ), Federal Republic of Germany, for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings pending before that court between  SA Erich Wittmann GmbH & Co . KG  and  Hauptzollamt Nuernberg-Fuerth ( Principal Customs Office, Nuremberg-Fuerth ),  on the interpretation of tariff subheading 84.E ( machines and mechanical appliances ), Heading 82.( other hand tools ), Heading 90.( medical instruments and appliances ), and tariff subheadings 71.A ( imitation jewellery ) and 73.B ( nails, tacks, spiked cramps ) in the Annex to Council Regulation No 3000/of December amending Regulation No 2800/amending Regulation No 950/on the Common Customs Tariff ( Official Journal 1979, L 342, p . ),  THE COURT ( First Chamber )  composed of : Sir Gordon Slynn, President of Chamber, R . Joliet and G . C . Rodríguez Iglesias, Judges,  ( the grounds of the judgment are not reproduced )  in answer to the questions referred to it by the Finanzgericht Muenchen, by order of June 1988, rules as follows :  
Operative part
( ) Subheading 71.A of the Common Customs Tariff must be interpreted as including, even before the entry into force of Commission Regulation No 3558/of December on the classification of goods falling within subheading 76.A of the Common Customs Tariff, stud earrings of the kind referred to in that regulation .  ( ) Subheading 84.E II of the Common Customs Tariff must be interpreted as including ear-piercing instruments .  
Top  
 