
Case C-148/DHL International NV, formerly Express Line NV
v
Belgisch Instituut voor Postdiensten en Telecommunicatie
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the hof van beroep te Brussel)
(Postal services – External procedures for dealing with users’ complaints – Directive 97/67/EC – Article – Scope – Additional to means of redress available under national law and under European Union law – Freedom of action of Member States – Restrictions – Article TFEU – Freedom of establishment)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Freedom to provide services – Postal services – Directive 97/– Obligation for providers of postal services within the scope
            of universal service to establish external procedures for dealing with complaints from users
(European Parliament and Council Directive 97/67, as amended by Directives 2002/and 2008/6, Art. 19)
2.        Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Restrictions – National legislation requiring providers of postal
            services which are outside the scope of the universal service to establish an external procedure for dealing with complaints
            from users
(Art. TFEU)
1.        Directive 97/on common rules for the development of the internal market of Community postal services and the improvement
         of quality of service, in its original version and in the versions as amended by Directive 2002/and by Directive 2008/6,
         must be interpreted as not precluding national legislation which imposes on providers of postal services outside the scope
         of the universal service a mandatory external procedure for dealing with complaints from users of those services.
      
Directive 97/does not carry out a full harmonisation of the complaints procedures for which it provides. In its original
         version, as in its amended versions, it envisages those procedures as a minimum framework that is to be additional to the
         means of redress available under national and European Union law. The Member States therefore have freedom of action to lay
         down exact procedures and choose the system best adapted to their own circumstances, subject to the restrictions and guidelines
         laid down in that directive and designed to extend the complaints procedures to any provider of postal services. 
      
(see paras 35, 40, 47, 52, operative part 1)
2.        Article TFEU must be interpreted as not precluding national legislation which imposes on providers of postal services outside
         the scope of the universal service a mandatory external procedure for dealing with complaints from users of those services.
      
Such legislation does not involve any restriction of freedom of establishment. First, that measure is applied, without discrimination
         on grounds of nationality, to all providers established in Belgium of postal services outside the scope of the universal service.
         Secondly, operators cannot expect Member States not to have structures in place that afford legal protection for the interests
         of their customers and provide out-of-court procedures for settling disputes. Lastly, nearly all Member States have extended
         the external complaints schemes to providers of postal services outside the scope of the universal service. 
      
(see paras 61-62, 64, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
October *(1)
      
(Postal services – External procedures for dealing with users’ complaints – Directive 97/67/EC – Article – Scope – Additional to means of redress available under national law and under European Union law – Freedom of action of Member States – Restrictions – Article TFEU – Freedom of establishment)
In Case C‑148/10,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the Hof van beroep te Brussel (Belgium), made by decision of
         March 2010, received at the Court on March 2010, in the proceedings
      
DHL International NV, formerly Express Line NV,
      
v
Belgisch Instituut voor Postdiensten en Telecommunicatie,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, D. Šváby, R. Silva de Lapuerta (Rapporteur), E. Juhász and J. Malenovský,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: N. Jääskinen,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on March 2011,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        DHL International NV, formerly Express Line NV, by F. Vandendriessche and J. Roets, advocaten,
–        the Belgian Government, by M. Jacobs, acting as Agent, and by F. Petillion, avocat, and J. Jansen, advocaat, 
–        the Polish Government, by M. Szpunar, acting as Agent,
–        the European Commission, by L. Lozano Palacios and P. Van Nuffel, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on May 2011,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Directive 97/67/EC of the European Parliament and of
         the Council of December on common rules for the development of the internal market of Community postal services and
         the improvement of quality of service (OJ L 15, p. 14), and in particular Article of that directive, as amended by
         Directive 2002/39/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of June (OJ L 176, p. 21) and of the same
         directive as amended by Directive 2008/6/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of February (OJ L 52,
         p. 3), and of Article TFEU.
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between DHL International NV, formerly Express Line NV (‘Express Line’), and the
         Belgisch Instituut voor Postdiensten en Telecommunicatie (Belgian Institute for Postal Services and Telecommunications, ‘the
         BIPT’) concerning payment of the fee to the financing of the postal sector ombudsman service which Express Line is required
         to pay.
      
 Legal context
 European Union law
Recitals and in the preamble to Directive 97/read:
      
‘(10) Whereas, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity, a set of general principles should be adopted at Community
         level, whilst the choice of the exact procedures should be a matter for the Member States, which should be free to choose
         the system best adapted to their own circumstances;
      
…
(35)      Whereas the need for improvement of quality of service means that disputes have to be settled quickly and efficiently; whereas,
         in addition to the forms of legal redress available under national and Community law, a procedure dealing with complaints
         should be provided, which should be transparent, simple and inexpensive and should enable all relevant parties to participate’.
      
According to Article 2(1), (14) and (17) of Directive 97/67:
      
‘For the purposes of this Directive, the following definitions shall apply:
(1)      “postal services”: services involving the clearance, sorting, transport and delivery of postal items;
…
(14)      “authorisations”: means any permission setting out rights and obligations specific to the postal sector and allowing undertakings
         to provide postal services and, where applicable, to establish and/or operate postal networks for the provision of such services,
         in the form of a “general authorisation” or “individual licence” as defined below:
      
–        “general authorisation” means an authorisation, regardless of whether it is regulated by a “class licence” or under general
         law and regardless of whether such regulation requires registration or declaration procedures, which does not require the
         undertaking concerned to obtain an explicit decision by the national regulatory authority before exercising the rights stemming
         from the authorisation,
      
–        “individual licence” means an authorisation which is granted by a national regulatory authority and which gives an undertaking
         specific rights, or which subjects that undertaking’s operations to specific obligations supplementing the general authorisation
         where applicable, where the undertaking is not entitled to exercise the rights concerned until it has received the decision
         by the national regulatory authority;
      
…
(17)      “user”: any natural or legal person benefiting from universal service provision as a sender or an addressee’.
Articles and of Directive 97/provide that Member States are to designate one or more providers of a universal service,
         that is to say, a service involving the permanent provision of a postal service of specified quality at all points in their
         territory at affordable prices for all users. As regards those providers which are not designated, Member States may, pursuant
         to Article of Directive 97/67, introduce either general authorisations, for postal services which fall outside the scope
         of the universal service, or authorisation procedures including individual licences, for postal services which fall within
         the scope of the universal service.
      
Furthermore, under Article of Directive 97/67, Member States were generally permitted, to the extent necessary to ensure
         the maintenance of universal service, to reserve services to a universal service provider or providers until December 2010.
         
      
Article of Directive 97/provides:
      
‘Member States shall ensure that transparent, simple and inexpensive procedures are drawn up for dealing with users’ complaints,
         particularly in cases involving loss, theft, damage or non-compliance with service quality standards.
      
Member States shall adopt measures to ensure that those procedures enable disputes to be settled fairly and promptly with
         provision, where warranted, for a system of reimbursement and/or compensation.
      
Without prejudice to other possibilities of appeal under national and Community legislation, Member States shall ensure that
         users, acting individually or, where permitted by national law, jointly with organisations representing the interests of users
         and/or consumers, may bring before the competent national authority cases where users’ complaints to the universal service
         provider have not been satisfactorily resolved.
      
In accordance with Article 16, Member States shall ensure that the universal service providers publish, together with the
         annual report on the monitoring of their performance, information on the number of complaints and the manner in which they
         have been dealt with.’
      
Recital in the preamble to Directive 2002/reads:
      
‘It might be appropriate for national regulatory authorities to link the introduction of licences to requirements that consumers
         of the licensees’ services are to have transparent, simple and inexpensive procedures available to them for dealing with their
         complaints, regardless of whether they relate to the services of the universal service provider(s) or to those of operators
         holding authorisations, including individual licence-holders. It might be further appropriate for these procedures to be available
         to users of all postal services, whether or not they are universal services. Such procedures should include procedures for
         determining responsibility in case of loss of, or damage to, mail items.’
      
Article of Directive 97/67, as amended by Directive 2002/39, provides:
      
‘Member States shall ensure that transparent, simple and inexpensive procedures are drawn up for dealing with users’ complaints,
         particularly in cases involving loss, theft, damage or non-compliance with service quality standards (including procedures
         for determining where responsibility lies in cases where more than one operator is involved).
      
Member States may provide that this principle is also applied to beneficiaries of services which are:
–        outside the scope of the universal service as defined in Article 3, and
–        within the scope of the universal service as defined in Article 3, but which are not provided by the universal service provider.
Member States shall adopt measures to ensure that the procedures referred to in the first subparagraph enable disputes to
         be settled fairly and promptly with provision, where warranted, for a system of reimbursement and/or compensation.
      
Without prejudice to other possibilities of appeal under national and Community legislation, Member States shall ensure that
         users, acting individually or, where permitted by national law, jointly with organisations representing the interests of users
         and/or consumers, may bring before the competent national authority cases where users’ complaints to the universal service
         provider have not been satisfactorily resolved.
      
In accordance with Article 16, Member States shall ensure that the universal service providers publish, together with the
         annual report on the monitoring of their performance, information on the number of complaints and the manner in which they
         have been dealt with.’
      
Recital in the preamble to Directive 2008/reads:
      
‘(42) In line with existing rules in other service areas and in order to increase consumer protection, it is appropriate to
         extend the application of minimum principles concerning complaint procedures beyond universal service providers. With a view
         to increasing the effectiveness of complaint handling procedures, it is appropriate to encourage the use of out-of-court settlement
         procedures as set out in Commission Recommendation 98/257/EC of March on the principles applicable to the bodies responsible
         for out-of-court settlement of consumer disputes [OJ L 115, p. 31] and Commission Recommendation 2001/310/EC of April
         on the principle for out-of-court bodies involved in the consensual resolution of consumer disputes [OJ L 109, p. 56].
         Consumer interests would also be furthered through the enhanced inter-operability between operators resulting from access
         to certain elements of infrastructure and services, and the requirement for cooperation between national regulatory authorities
         and consumer protection bodies.
      
In order to protect the interests of users in the event of theft or loss of, or damage to, postal items, Member States should
         introduce, where warranted, a system of reimbursement and/or compensation.’
      
Article 2(17) of Directive 97/67, as amended by Directive 2008/6, provides:
      
‘For the purposes of this Directive, the following definitions shall apply:
…
(17)      “User”: any natural or legal person benefiting from postal service provision as a sender or an addressee’.
Article of Directive 97/67, as amended by Directive 2008/6, provides:
      
‘1.      Member States shall ensure that transparent, simple and inexpensive procedures are made available by all postal service providers
         for dealing with postal users’ complaints, particularly in cases involving loss, theft, damage or non-compliance with service
         quality standards (including procedures for determining where responsibility lies in cases where more than one operator is
         involved), without prejudice to relevant international and national provisions on compensation schemes. 
      
Member States shall adopt measures to ensure that the procedures referred to in the first subparagraph enable disputes to
         be settled fairly and promptly with provision, where warranted, for a system of reimbursement and/or compensation.
      
Member States shall also encourage the development of independent out-of-court schemes for the resolution of disputes between
         postal service providers and users.
      
2.      Without prejudice to other possibilities of appeal or means of redress under national and Community legislation, Member States
         shall ensure that users, acting individually or, where permitted by national law, jointly with organisations representing
         the interests of users and/or consumers, may bring before the competent national authority cases where users’ complaints to
         undertakings providing postal services within the scope of the universal service have not been satisfactorily resolved.
      
In accordance with Article 16, Member States shall ensure that the universal service providers and, wherever appropriate,
         undertakings providing services within the scope of the universal service, publish, together with the annual report on the
         monitoring of their performance, information on the number of complaints and the manner in which they have been dealt with.’
         
      
 National law
The Law of March on the reform of certain public commercial undertakings (Belgisch Staatsblad of March 1991, p. 6155), as amended by the Royal Decree of June (Belgisch Staatsblad of August 1999, p. 30697), transposed into the Belgian legal system a number of measures, including Directive 97/67.
      
That law designates a universal service provider and reserves to that provider certain postal services. An individual licence
         must be obtained in order to provide a non-reserved postal service which falls within the scope of the universal service.
         The provision of a postal service which falls outside the scope of the universal service is subject to the requirement, inter alia, of a declaration to the BIPT.
      
Article 43b of that law, as amended by the Law of December providing for the establishment of an ombudsman service
         for the postal sector and amending the Law of June concerning electronic communication (Belgisch Staatsblad of January 2007, p. 2965; ‘the Law’), provides:
      
‘1.      An ombudsman service for the postal sector shall be set up within the [BIPT], with responsibility in matters relating to the
         users of the following undertakings: 
      
(1)      [the universal service provider];
(2)      undertakings which provide postal services … and which are subject to a licensing requirement …;
(3)      undertakings which provide postal services … and which are subject to a declaration requirement …
Matters relating to users are matters relating to the interests of users who do not themselves provide postal services. 
…
3.      The ombudsman service for the postal sector shall be responsible for the following tasks:
(1)      examining all user complaints relating to:
(a)      the activities of [the universal service provider] …
(b)      the postal activities of the undertakings referred to in paragraph 1(2) and (3) of the present article.
(2)      For the purposes of this chapter, “postal activities” means:
…
(3)      acting as a mediator in order to facilitate an amicable settlement in disputes between the undertakings referred to in paragraph
         of the present article and users;
      
(4)      making a recommendation to the undertakings referred to in paragraph of the present article in the event that an amicable
         settlement cannot be reached. A copy of the recommendation shall be sent to the complainant;
      
(5)      providing users who contact them verbally or in writing with the best available advice on their rights and interests;
(6)      issuing, at the request of the minister responsible for the postal sector, the minister responsible for consumer protection,
         the [BIPT] or the consultative committee for postal services, opinions in relation to its tasks;
      
(7)      cooperating with:
(a)      other independent sector-specific dispute commissions or independent ombudsmen …;
(b)      foreign ombudsmen or bodies having an equivalent function which act as an appeal body handling complaints falling within the
         area of responsibility of the ombudsman service for the postal sector.
      
Where appropriate, cooperation agreements may be concluded by the minister responsible for consumer affairs.
4.      The complaints of end-users shall be admissible only where the complainant has lodged a complaint in accordance with the internal
         procedure of the undertaking concerned. The complaints of end-users shall be inadmissible where they are lodged anonymously
         or are not lodged in writing with the ombudsman service for the postal sector.
      
…
5.      The ombudsman service for the postal sector may, where a complaint is made to it, investigate on site the books, correspondence,
         minutes and, in general, all the documents and records of the undertaking or undertakings concerned relating directly to the
         subject‑matter of the complaint, with the exception of items covered by the confidentiality of correspondence. It may request
         any explanations or information from the administration and personnel departments of the undertakings concerned and carry
         out all the checks required for its investigation.
      
Information obtained in this way shall be treated as confidential where disclosure might generally cause damage to the undertaking.
Within the bounds of its area of responsibility, the ombudsman service shall not make enquiries at the instance of any authority.
Examination of a complaint shall cease where it is the subject of legal proceedings.
6.      The undertaking concerned shall have a time-limit of working days within which to provide reasons for its decision where
         it fails to follow the recommendation referred to in paragraph 3(4) of the present article. The reasoned decision shall be
         sent to the complainant and to the ombudsman service.
      
After the time-limit referred to in the preceding subparagraph has expired, the ombudsman service shall send a reminder to
         the undertaking concerned. The latter shall have a further time-limit of working days within which to provide reasons for
         its decision where it fails to follow the recommendation referred to in paragraph 3(4) of the present article. The reasoned
         decision shall be sent to the complainant and to the ombudsman service.
      
On failure to meet the time-limit concerned, the undertaking must implement the opinion in respect of specific and personal
         compensation for the complainant. 
      
7.      If a user’s complaint is declared admissible by the postal sector ombudsman service, recovery proceedings shall be suspended
         by the operator for a maximum period of four months from the time the complaint is lodged with the ombudsman service or until
         such time as the ombudsman service for the postal sector has drawn up a recommendation or an amicable settlement can be reached.’
      
Article 45b of the Law governs the financing of the ombudsman service for the postal sector, providing for an annual
         ‘ombudsman fee’ to be paid to the BIPT by those undertakings referred to in Article 43b(1) of that law which have a turnover
         of more than EUR 000. 
      
The amount of the fee payable is determined annually by the BIPT according to a formula which, in essence, takes into account,
         first, the turnover of the undertaking in question for the preceding year from activities which fall within the area of responsibility
         of the ombudsman service and, secondly, the number of complaints against that undertaking which have been dealt with by the
         ombudsman service during the preceding year. Any fees not paid by the due date are automatically to bear interest at the statutory
         rate plus 2%.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Express Line is part of the DHL group of companies, with its principal place of business in Bonn (Germany). Express Line describes
         its activity as consisting, inter alia, of providing express delivery services, that is to say, the transport of documents,
         parcels, pallets and wagon loads by means of individualised air or road transport.
      
At the beginning of 2006, the BIPT gave Express Line and several other undertakings providing courier and express delivery
         services formal notice that they should apply for an individual licence or make a declaration, in accordance with the relevant
         provisions of the Law relating to the provision of services which the BIPT regarded either as non-reserved postal services
         falling within the scope of the universal service, or as postal services falling outside the scope of the universal service.
      
On November 2006, in accordance with the Law, Express Line made in respect of some of its services a declaration relating
         to the provision of postal services falling outside the scope of the universal service. However, it made that declaration
         subject to the express proviso that it did not accept the classification of its express delivery services as ‘postal services’.
      
By letter of July the BIPT informed Express Line that it came within the remit of the ombudsman service and that it
         was therefore regarded as liable for the ombudsman fee, and asked it for information in order to calculate the amount of the
         required fee.
      
Express Line maintained its position by registered letter, denying that it came within the remit of the postal sector ombudsman
         service and was therefore required to pay the fee to finance that service. It claimed that its express delivery services were
         not postal services but transport and logistics services with added value, designed for businesses.
      
On November the BIPT held that Express Line had contravened the Law and gave it formal notice that it should
         supply the information needed for the calculation of the amount of the ombudsman fee it was liable to pay, failing which an
         administrative fine would be imposed. Express Line brought an action against that notice before the national court.
      
It was in those circumstances that the Hof van beroep te Brussel (Court of Appeal, Brussels) (Belgium) decided to stay the
         proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Must the provisions of Directive 97/…, as amended by Directive 2002/…, and in particular, but not exclusively, Article
         thereof, in view inter alia of the amendments introduced by Directive 2008/…, which must be transposed into national
         law by December at the latest, be understood and interpreted as precluding Member States from imposing a mandatory
         external complaints scheme on providers of non‑universal postal services on the ground that:
      
(a)      as regards the applicable complaints procedures for the protection of the users of postal services, the Directive provides
         for full harmonisation; or on the ground that
      
(b)      that obligation was imposed by Directive 2002/… only on the universal service provider and, following Directive 2008/…, is imposed on all universal service providers, even though, according to the wording of the [third] subparagraph of Article
         19(1) of [Directive 97/…, as amended by] Directive 2008/…, Member States may only encourage, but may not impose, the
         development of independent schemes for the resolution of disputes between the providers of postal services, other than universal
         postal services, and end-users?
      
(2)      If the answer to the first question is that the Postal Directive does not, as such, preclude Member States from imposing on
         the providers of non‑universal postal services a mandatory external complaints scheme as envisaged by the first subparagraph
         of Article 19(2) [of Directive 97/67, as amended by Directive 2008/6] for the providers of universal postal services, must
         the principles relating to the free movement of services (Article et seq. EC; now Article et seq. TFEU) be interpreted
         in such a way that restrictions on the free movement of services, introduced by a Member State on grounds of overriding reasons
         in the public interest relating to consumer protection, whereby the providers of non-universal postal services are made subject
         to a mandatory external complaints scheme as provided for in the first subparagraph of Article 19(2) [of Directive 97/67,
         as amended by Directive 2008/6] for the providers of universal postal services, can be considered compatible with the Treaty
         on the Functioning of the European Union even if, in the application of the complaints scheme concerned, no distinction is
         made between the complaints of consumers and those of other end-users, although the vast majority of the users of those services
         (in the present case, express delivery and courier services) are business users?’
      
 Consideration of the questions referred
 Preliminary observations
According to Express Line, first, the national court should have referred an additional question to the Court, but had expressly
         refused to do so, namely whether Article 2(1) of Directive 97/must be interpreted as precluding national legislation which
         regards as postal services not only those services which cover all the activities of clearance, sorting, transport and delivery
         of postal items, but also services covering one or more of such activities.
      
Secondly, the applicant in the main proceedings considers that, since it has withdrawn its pleas relating to European Union
         law in the main proceedings, the present order for reference serves no purpose.
      
In that regard, it should be borne in mind that, in the context of the cooperation between the Court of Justice and the national
         courts provided for by Article TFEU, it is solely for the national court before which the dispute has been brought, and
         which must assume responsibility for the subsequent judicial decision, to determine in the light of the particular circumstances
         of the case both the need for a preliminary ruling in order to enable it to deliver judgment and the relevance of the questions
         which it submits to the Court (see, inter alia, Case C‑306/BIAO [2003] ECR I‑1, paragraph 88; Case C‑217/Confederación Española de Empresarios de Estaciones de Servicio [2006] ECR I‑11987, paragraph 16; and Case C‑260/Pedro IV Servicios [2009] ECR I‑2437, paragraph 28). 
      
The right to determine the questions to be put to the Court thus devolves upon the national court alone and the parties may
         not change their tenor. In addition, to alter the substance of the questions referred for a preliminary ruling, or to answer
         the additional questions mentioned by the applicants in the main proceedings in their observations, would be incompatible
         with the Court’s function under Article TFEU and with its duty to ensure that the governments of the Member States and
         the parties concerned are given the opportunity to submit observations under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice
         of the European Union, bearing in mind that under that provision only the order of the referring court is notified to the
         interested parties (see Case C‑138/Hochtief and Linde-Kca-Dresden [2009] ECR I‑9889, paragraphs and and the case-law cited).
      
Moreover, the Court cannot give a ruling where the procedure before the court making the reference for a preliminary ruling
         has already been terminated (Case C‑343/Lourenço Dias [1992] ECR I‑4673, paragraph 18), nor does Article TFEU entitle the Court to assess the immediacy of the relevance of
         questions referred with regard to the proceedings pending before the national court, even where the domestic law with which
         the case is concerned has been modified (Case 43/Politi [1971] ECR 1039, paragraph 3).
      
In the present case, since the national court has accepted neither the need nor the relevance of a question concerning the
         cumulative or alternative nature of the activities covered by the term ‘postal services’ within the meaning of Article 2(1)
         of Directive 97/67, the Court cannot undertake an analysis in that regard.
      
Further, since the national court has not formally withdrawn its reference for a preliminary ruling, despite the request to
         that effect made by the applicant in the main proceedings, and the main proceedings have not been terminated, it must be held
         that the Court’s answer to the questions referred by that court are still necessary in order to enable the latter to deliver
         judgment. 
      
 The first question
By its first question, the national court asks, in essence, whether Directive 97/67, in the light of the amendments made by
         Directives 2002/and 2008/6, must be interpreted as precluding national legislation which imposes on providers of postal
         services which are outside the scope of the universal service a mandatory external procedure for dealing with complaints from
         users of those services. 
      
As a preliminary point, it should be noted that Article of Directive 97/67, both in its original version and in the version
         as amended by Directives 2002/and 2008/6, lays down two types of procedure for dealing with complaints by users of postal
         services, namely, an internal procedure whereby a complaint is made to the service provider and an external procedure whereby
         a complaint is made to the competent national authority.
      
The national court expresses doubts as to the possibility of imposing a mandatory external complaints procedure on providers
         of postal services which are outside the scope of the universal service, given that, according to that court, Directive 97/carried out full harmonisation as regards complaints procedures and such an obligation was imposed only on universal service
         providers, following the amendments made by Directive 2002/39, and on all other providers of postal services falling within
         the scope of the universal service, following the amendments made by Directive 2008/6.
      
In that regard, it should first be noted that, contrary to the view of the national court, Directive 97/does not carry
         out a full harmonisation of the complaints procedures for which it provides. 
      
As is clear from recital in the preamble to Directive 97/67, that directive constitutes a framework of general principles
         adopted at European Union level, the determination of the exact procedures being a matter for the Member States (Case C‑240/Asempre and Asociación Nacional de Empresas de Externalización y Gestión de Envíos y Pequeña Paquetería [2004] ECR I‑2461, paragraph 30), which must be free to choose the system best adapted to their own circumstances.
      
Further, such absence of full harmonisation is all the more evident in the case of the complaints procedures provided for
         in Directive 97/67. 
      
It is apparent from recital and from Article of Directive 97/67, in its original version and subsequent versions, that
         the complaints procedures, which must be transparent, simple and inexpensive, are on the one hand intended to improve the
         quality of service by providing that any disputes are settled quickly, fairly and efficiently and on the other are in addition
         to the means of legal redress available under national and European Union law.
      
Secondly, the other doubts expressed by the national court as to whether the Law complies with Directive 97/must be
         dismissed because they do not reflect the content of the relevant provisions of that directive, in its original version or
         in its subsequent versions, as regards complaints procedures.
      
Directive 97/has always provided that such procedures are additional to the means of legal redress available under national
         law and, hence, that Member States had freedom of action in that regard. While the amendments made to that directive have
         progressively limited that freedom of action, the restrictions and guidelines thus laid down are designed to extend the complaints
         procedures to any provider of postal services.
      
Thus, first of all, under Article 2(17) and the first and third paragraphs of Article of Directive 97/67, Member States
         were to ensure that internal and external procedures for dealing with complaints were drawn up, by universal service providers,
         relating solely to the provision of universal services. The obligation incumbent on Member States therefore was confined to
         such services and such service providers, and those States still enjoyed freedom of action allowing them to make available
         other means of redress.
      
Then, Directive 2002/added inter alia a fresh paragraph to Article 19, according to which Member States could provide that
         the ‘principle’ of ensuring that procedures for dealing with complaints be drawn up would also be applicable with regard to
         persons benefiting from services which fell outside the scope of the universal service or which fell within the scope of that
         service but were not provided by the universal service provider. 
      
In essence, since the wording of the original version of the third paragraph of Article was not amended, the obligation
         on Member States and their freedom of action, referred to in paragraph above, remained the same in both versions of Directive
         97/67. However, as is apparent from recital in the preamble to Directive 2002/39, the purpose of the amendments incorporated
         into Article of Directive 97/was to encourage Member States to extend the internal complaints procedures for the benefit
         of users of all postal services, whether universal services or not, and irrespective of whether the provider of those services
         is the universal service provider or the holder of an authorisation.
      
Lastly, Directive 2008/amended inter alia Article 2(17) of Directive 97/and the first paragraph of Article of that
         directive, as amended by Directive 2002/39, by providing that all postal service providers must draw up internal procedures
         for dealing with users’ complaints; users being defined as any natural or legal person benefiting from postal service provision.
         
      
The third subparagraph of Article 19(1) of Directive 97/67, as amended by Directive 2008/6, which is a new provision, provides
         that Member States must also encourage the development of independent out-of-court schemes for the resolution of disputes
         between postal service providers and users. The first subparagraph of Article 19(2) also contains a new obligation since it
         extends the external procedure for dealing with users’ complaints to undertakings providing postal services within the scope
         of the universal service.
      
As is apparent from recital in the preamble to Directive 2008/6, those amendments are intended to extend the application
         of the minimum principles laid down for dealing with complaints beyond universal service providers.
      
It follows that Directive 97/67, in its original version and in its amended versions, envisages the complaints procedures
         for which it provides as a minimum framework that is to be additional to the means of redress available under national and
         European Union law, and Member States therefore have freedom of action to lay down exact procedures and choose the system
         best adapted to their own circumstances, subject to the restrictions and guidelines laid down in that directive.
      
Those restrictions and guidelines consist, first, in the obligation to ensure that the universal service provider or universal
         service providers establish internal and external procedures for dealing with users’ complaints, an obligation already laid
         down in the original version of Directive 97/67.
      
Further, Directive 97/imposed the obligation to ensure the establishment of internal procedures by all postal service providers
         and of external procedures by undertakings providing postal services within the scope of the universal service, an obligation
         introduced by Directive 2008/6, in addition to the guidelines already laid down in Directive 2002/39.
      
Lastly, there is an obligation under Directive 97/to encourage the development of independent out-of-court schemes for
         the resolution of disputes between postal service providers and users, an obligation introduced by Directive 2008/6.
      
Therefore, national legislation such as the Law, which imposes on providers of postal services which are outside the
         scope of the universal service a mandatory external procedure for dealing with complaints from users of those services, not
         only is not incompatible with Directive 97/67, in its original version and in its amended versions, but also complies with
         the obligation laid down in that directive, following its amendment by Directive 2008/6, to encourage the development of independent,
         out-of-court schemes for the resolution of disputes between postal service providers and users.
      
Consequently, the answer to the first question referred is that Directive 97/67, in its original version and in the versions
         as amended by Directives 2002/and 2008/6, must be interpreted as not precluding national legislation which imposes on providers
         of postal services which are outside the scope of the universal service a mandatory external procedure for dealing with complaints
         from users of those services.
      
 The second question
By its second question, the referring court asks, in essence, whether Article TFEU must be interpreted as precluding national
         legislation which imposes on providers of postal services which are outside the scope of the universal service a mandatory
         external procedure for dealing with complaints from users of those services. 
      
As a preliminary point, it should be noted that although Express Line is a company incorporated under Belgian law, it is none
         the less part of the DHL group of companies, with its principal place of business in Germany. Moreover, it is not apparent
         from the order for reference or from the facts in the main proceedings that those proceedings relate to a particular provision
         of services between two or more Member States. 
      
In those circumstances, the freedom at issue in the main proceedings is not freedom to provide services but freedom of establishment.
         Consequently, the second question must be construed as asking whether Article TFEU must be interpreted as precluding national
         legislation, such as the Law, which imposes on providers of postal services which are outside the scope of the universal
         service a mandatory external procedure for dealing with complaints from users of those services. 
      
According to the national court, the obligation to submit to such a procedure constitutes a restriction on the freedom of
         establishment of providers of postal services which are outside the scope of the universal service originating in Member States
         other than the Kingdom of Belgium which seek to establish themselves in that Member State. Although that restriction may be
         justified by an overriding reason in the public interest relating to consumer protection, Article TFEU does not allow the
         mandatory imposition of that procedure in the case of disputes concerning postal services such as express delivery services,
         where a large majority of users are business users.
      
In that regard it should be observed that, as noted in paragraph of this judgment, Directive 97/does not carry out a
         full harmonisation of the procedures for dealing with complaints by users of postal services and, consequently, that the Member
         States have freedom of action in that regard, subject to the limits imposed by European Union law.
      
With regard to freedom of establishment for nationals of one Member State on the territory of another Member State, according
         to settled case‑law, such freedom includes the right to take up and pursue activities as self-employed persons and to set
         up and manage undertakings under the conditions laid down for its own nationals by the law of the Member State of establishment
         (see Case C‑247/Gaz de France – Berliner Investissement [2009] ECR I‑9225, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
As regards companies or firms formed in accordance with the law of a Member State and having their registered office, central
         administration or principal place of business within the European Union, that freedom includes, pursuant to Article TFEU,
         the right to exercise their activity in the Member State concerned through a subsidiary, branch or agency (see, inter alia,
         Case C‑307/Saint-Gobain ZN [1999] ECR I‑6161, paragraph 35; Case C‑196/Cadbury Schweppes and Cadbury Schweppes Overseas [2006] ECR I‑7995, paragraph 41; and Case C‑524/Test Claimants in the Thin Cap Group Litigation [2007] ECR I‑2107, paragraph 36). 
      
The Court has held on a number of occasions that Article TFEU precludes any national measure which, even if applicable
         without discrimination on grounds of nationality, is liable to hinder or render less attractive the exercise by Union nationals
         of the freedom of establishment that is guaranteed by the Treaty and that such restrictive effects may arise where, on account
         of national legislation, a company may be deterred from setting up subsidiary bodies, such as permanent establishments, in
         other Member States and from carrying on its activities through such bodies (Case C‑384/Attanasio Group [2010] ECR I‑2055, paragraphs and and the case-law cited). 
      
In the present case, the measure in question does not involve any restriction on freedom of establishment. 
      
First, that measure is applied, without discrimination on grounds of nationality, to all providers established in Belgium
         of postal services which are outside the scope of the universal service. Secondly, as the Advocate General stated in point
         of his Opinion, operators cannot expect Member States not to have structures in place which afford legal protection for
         the interests of their customers and provide out-of-court procedures for settling disputes. Lastly, nearly all Member States
         have extended the external complaints schemes to providers of postal services which are outside the scope of the universal
         service.
      
In those circumstances, it cannot validly be claimed that the mere fact of imposing on providers of postal services which
         are outside the scope of the universal service a mandatory external procedure for dealing with complaints from users of those
         services is liable to hinder or render less attractive the exercise by Union nationals of the freedom of establishment that
         is guaranteed by the Treaty.
      
Consequently, the answer to the second question is that Article TFEU must be interpreted as not precluding national legislation
         which imposes on providers of postal services which are outside the scope of the universal service a mandatory external procedure
         for dealing with complaints from users of those services.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Directive 97/67/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of December on common rules for the development of
            the internal market of Community postal services and the improvement of quality of service, in its original version and in
            the versions as amended by Directive 2002/39/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of June and by Directive
            2008/6/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of February 2008, must be interpreted as not precluding national
            legislation which imposes on providers of postal services which are outside the scope of the universal service a mandatory
            external procedure for dealing with complaints from users of those services.
2.      Article TFEU must be interpreted as not precluding national legislation which imposes on providers of postal services which
            are outside the scope of the universal service a mandatory external procedure for dealing with complaints from users of those
            services.
[Signatures]
Language of the case: Dutch.
      
Top  
 