
Joined Cases C-463/P and C-475/P
Deutsche Post AG
and
Federal Republic of Germany
v
European Commission
(Appeal – State aid – Regulation (EC) No 659/– Article 10(3) – Decision requiring the production of information – Act open to challenge for the purposes of Article TFEU)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Actions for annulment – Actionable measures – Acts intended to have legal effects – Definition – Conditions 
(Art. TFEU)
2.        Actions for annulment – Actionable measures – Measures producing binding legal effects – Commission decision enjoining a Member
            State to provide information in the context of a State aid procedure, taken pursuant to Article 10(3) of Regulation No 659/– Included
(Arts 263, first para., TFEU and 288, fourth para., TFEU; Council Regulation No 659/1999, Art. 10(2) and (3))
3.        Actions for annulment – Actionable measures – Preparatory measures – Not included – Commission decision enjoining a Member
            State to provide information, taken pursuant to Article 10(3) of Regulation No 659/– Measure producing independent legal
            effects – Included
(Arts TFEU and TFEU; Council Regulation No 659/1999, Art. 10(3))
4.        Actions for annulment – Natural or legal persons – Measures of direct and individual concern to them – Commission decision
            enjoining a Member State to provide information concerning a public undertaking, taken pursuant to Article 10(3) of Regulation
            No  659/– Action brought by that undertaking – Whether permissible
(Art. TFEU; Council Regulation No 659/1999, Art. 10(3))
1.        In actions for annulment brought by Member States or institutions, any measures adopted by the institutions, whatever their
         form, which are intended to have binding legal effects are regarded as acts open to challenge, for the purposes of Article
         TFEU.  Moreover, it is open to a Member State to bring an action for annulment of a measure producing binding legal effects
         without having to demonstrate that it has an interest in bringing proceedings.
      
When the action for annulment against an act adopted by an institution is brought by a natural or legal person, the action
         lies only if the binding legal effects of that act are capable of affecting the interests of the applicant by bringing about
         a distinct change in his legal position. When an action for annulment is brought by a non-privileged applicant against a measure
         that was not addressed to it, the requirement that the binding legal effects of the measure challenged must be capable of
         affecting the interests of the applicant by bringing about a distinct change in his legal position overlaps with the conditions
         laid down in the fourth paragraph of Article TFEU.
      
(see paras 36-38)
2.        A Commission decision taken pursuant to Article 10(3) of Council Regulation (EC) No 659/of March laying down
         detailed rules for the application of Article [TFEU] and requiring a Member State to provide it with information concerning
         allegedly unlawful aid is designed to produce binding legal effects and therefore constitutes an act open to challenge for
         the purposes of Article TFEU.  Such an injunction falls within the second stage of the procedure established by Article
         of that regulation in order to allow the Commission to obtain from the Member State concerned the necessary information
         concerning such aid, that stage being represented by the adoption of a decision within the meaning of Article TFEU by
         the Commission.  By providing that an information injunction should take the form of a decision, the EU legislature intended
         to confer a binding character on such a measure.
      
(see paras 41, 43-45)
3.        Intermediate measures whose aim is to prepare the final decision do not, in principle, constitute acts which may form the
         subject-matter of an action for annulment. An action for annulment against measures expressing a provisional opinion of the
         Commission might make it necessary for the Union judicature to arrive at a decision on questions on which the institution
         concerned has not yet had an opportunity to state its position and would as a result anticipate the arguments on the substance
         of the case, confusing different procedural stages both administrative and judicial. To allow such an action would thus be
         incompatible with the system of the division of powers between the Commission and the Union judicature and of legal remedies,
         laid down by the Treaty, and with the requirements of the sound administration of justice and the proper course of the Commission’s
         administrative procedure as well.
      
Nor is an intermediate measure capable of forming the subject-matter of an action if it is established that the illegality
         attaching to that measure can be relied on in support of an action against the final decision for which it represents a preparatory
         step. In such circumstances, the action brought against the decision terminating the procedure will provide sufficient judicial
         protection. If that latter condition is not satisfied, it will be considered that the intermediate measure produces independent
         legal effects and must therefore be capable of forming the subject-matter of an action for annulment. 
      
Such is the case with an injunction, addressed by the Commission to a Member State, to provide information on the revenues
         and costs of a public undertaking in the context of a procedure for finding State aid, pursuant to Article 10(3) of Regulation
         No 659/laying down detailed rules for the application of Article [TFEU].  An action brought against the decision
         terminating the procedure concerning such State aid is not capable of ensuring sufficient legal protection for the applicants
         given that, first, the illegality vitiating the intermediate measure, namely, the disproportionate nature of the injunction
         in that it concerns irrelevant information, could not affect the legality of the Commission’s final decision, since that latter
         decision will not be based on information obtained in response to the said injunction, and, second, refusal by the Member
         State concerned to comply with such an injunction constitutes a failure to fulfil an obligation under the Treaties within
         the meaning of Article TFEU, in the context of which non-performance of such an injunction cannot be justified on the
         basis of its alleged illegality.  Consequently, it is in the context of a distinct procedure, namely, that of an action for
         annulment under Article TFEU, that any challenge to the legality of such an injunction must be made.
      
(see paras 50-60)
4.        In accordance with the fourth paragraph of Article TFEU, a natural or legal person may institute proceedings against a
         decision addressed to another only if the decision is of direct and individual concern to that natural or legal person.  In
         that regard, an injunction, addressed by the Commission to a Member State, to provide information on the revenues and costs
         of a public undertaking in the context of a procedure for finding State aid, pursuant to Article 10(3) of Regulation No 659/laying down detailed rules for the application of Article [TFEU], directly affects that undertaking inasmuch as, first,
         as beneficiary of the measure concerned by the information referred to by the act at issue and as holder of that information,
         it will be obliged to act on the information injunction, and, second, the definitive and exhaustive content of the information
         requested is apparent from the act at issue itself, without leaving any discretion to the Member State concerned.  Such an
         undertaking is, moreover, individually concerned by such an injunction when the information referred to therein concerns only
         that undertaking, in the context of a procedure for examining an alleged State aid measure from which it is alleged to have
         benefited.
      
(see paras 65, 68-70, 74)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Appeals – State aid – Regulation (EC) No 659/– Article 10(3) – Decision requiring the production of information – Act open to challenge for the purposes of Article TFEU)
In Joined Cases C‑463/P and C‑475/P,
TWO APPEALS pursuant to Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, brought, respectively, on
         and September 2010,
      
Deutsche Post AG, established in Bonn (Germany), represented by J. Sedemund and T. Lübbig, Rechtsanwälte,
      
Federal Republic of Germany, represented by T. Henze, J. Möller and N. Graf Vitzthum, acting as Agents,
      
applicants,
the other party to the proceedings being:
European Commission, represented by B. Martenczuk and T. Maxian Rusche, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, J. Malenovsky, R. Silva de Lapuerta, E. Juhász and D. Sváby,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: Y. Bot,
Registrar: B. Fülöp, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on May 2011,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on June 2011,
gives the following
Judgment
By their appeals, Deutsche Post AG (‘Deutsche Post’) and the Federal Republic of Germany seek the annulment, respectively,
         of the orders of the General Court of the European Union of July in Case T-570/Deutsche Post v Commission and Case T-571/Germany v Commission (hereinafter collectively referred to as ‘the contested orders’), whereby the General Court dismissed as inadmissible their
         actions for annulment of the Commission decision of October 2008, requiring the Federal Republic of Germany to provide
         information in the proceedings relating to State aid to Deutsche Post (‘the act at issue’).
      
 Legal context
Article 2(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 659/of March laying down detailed rules for the application of Article
         [TFEU] requires a Member State notifying the European Commission of plans to grant new aid to provide in its notification
         ‘all necessary information in order to enable the Commission to take a decision pursuant to Articles and 7’.
      
Article of Regulation No 659/provides:
      
‘1.      Where the Commission considers that information provided by the Member State concerned with regard to a measure notified pursuant
         to Article is incomplete, it shall request all necessary additional information. ...
      
2.      Where the Member State concerned does not provide the information requested within the period prescribed by the Commission
         or provides incomplete information, the Commission shall send a reminder, allowing an appropriate additional period within
         which the information shall be provided.
      
3.      The notification shall be deemed to be withdrawn if the requested information is not provided within the prescribed period
         ...’
      
Article of Regulation No 659/provides:
      
‘1.      Where the Commission has in its possession information from whatever source regarding alleged unlawful aid, it shall examine
         that information without delay.
      
2.      If necessary, it shall request information from the Member State concerned. Article 2(2) and Article 5(1) and (2) shall apply
         mutatis mutandis.
      
3.      Where, despite a reminder pursuant to Article 5(2), the Member State concerned does not provide the information requested
         within the period prescribed by the Commission, or where it provides incomplete information, the Commission shall by decision
         require the information to be provided (hereinafter referred to as an ‘information injunction’). The decision shall specify
         what information is required and prescribe an appropriate period within which it is to be supplied.’
      
According to Article 13(1) of Regulation No 659/1999:
      
‘The examination of possible unlawful aid shall result in a decision pursuant to Article 4(2), (3) or (4). In the case of
         decisions to initiate the formal investigation procedure, proceedings shall be closed by means of a decision pursuant to Article
         7. If a Member State fails to comply with an information injunction, that decision shall be taken on the basis of the information
         available.’
      
Article 18(3) of Council Regulation (EC) No 1/of December on the implementation of the rules on competition laid
         down in Articles and of the Treaty (OJ L 1, p. 1) provides that ‘[w]here the Commission requires undertakings and
         associations of undertakings to supply information by decision, it shall ... indicate the right to have the decision reviewed
         by the Court of Justice’.
      
 Background to the dispute
On September 2007, the Commission initiated the formal investigation procedure for the purposes of Article 88(2) EC in
         relation to the State aid in favour of Deutsche Post AG [C 36/(ex NN 25/07)]. A summary of that decision was published
         in the Official Journal of the European Union (OJ C 245, p. 21).
      
On July 2008, the Commission sent the Federal Republic of Germany a request for information which included a questionnaire
         on Deutsche Post’s revenue and costs for the period from to 2007. On and August 2008, the Commission sent a reminder
         letter, again asking that State to supply the information requested.
      
In its replies of August, August and September 2008, the Federal Republic of Germany confirmed that it refused to
         send the data relating to Deutsche Post’s products and charges after 1995, taking the view that the Commission’s examination
         should be confined to the period from to and that responding to that questionnaire would require a disproportionate
         investment in terms of time and work.
      
By the act at issue, the Commission required the Federal Republic of Germany, pursuant to Article 10(3) of Regulation No 659/1999,
         to provide, within days, all the information necessary to reply to that questionnaire. The Commission added that, if, despite
         that injunction, the German authorities did not provide the information requested within the prescribed period, it would take
         its decision on the basis of the information available, in accordance with Article 13(1) of Regulation No 659/1999.
      
 The procedure before the General Court and the contested orders
By applications lodged at the Registry of the General Court on December 2008, Deutsche Post (Case T-570/08) and the Federal
         Republic of Germany (Case T-571/08) each brought an action for annulment of the act at issue.
      
By separate documents lodged at the Registry of the General Court on March 2009, the Commission raised, in each of those
         cases, an objection of inadmissibility pursuant to Article 114(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the General Court. The General
         Court upheld that objection, ruling that the act at issue did not constitute an act open to challenge for the purposes of
         Article TFEU.
      
Thus, in paragraphs to of the order in Deutsche Post v Commission, and to of the order in Germany v Commission, the General Court states, first, that it is necessary to look at the substance of a measure rather than its form, in order
         to determine whether it constitutes an act open to challenge for the purposes of Article TFEU and, second, that an intermediate
         measure the aim of which is to prepare the final decision and which does not have legal effects cannot form the subject-matter
         of an action for annulment. The General Court refers to that effect, in particular, to Case 60/IBM v Commission [1981] ECR 2639, paragraphs and 10, and Case C‑521/P Athinaïki Techniki v Commission [2008] ECR I‑5829, paragraph 46).
      
As for the effects of the act at issue, the General Court emphasises, in paragraphs and of the order in Deutsche Post v Commission, and in paragraphs and of the order in Germany v Commission, that no sanction is provided for if the Member State does not comply with an information injunction. Such an injunction
         was designed to ensure compliance with the principle of a fair hearing.
      
In paragraphs and of the order in Deutsche Post v Commission, and in paragraphs and of the order in Germany v Commission, the General Court indicates that the act at issue falls within the context of the administrative procedure for examining
         the aid measure in question, between the decision to open the formal investigation procedure and the final decision. According
         to the General Court, the act at issue does not prejudge the final decision, since the Commission can still plead at that
         stage that no State aid exists, that the aid in question is compatible with the internal market or is not compatible. It follows,
         in the view of the General Court, that the act at issue is an intermediate measure, the aim of which was to prepare the final
         decision of the Commission.
      
In reply to the argument of Deutsche Post and the Federal Republic of Germany, which, with reference to the case-law on the
         admissibility of an action brought against a decision to initiate the formal investigation procedure of Article 88(2) EC (see
         Case C‑400/Italy v Commission [2001] ECR I‑7303), argued that the provisional character of a measure does not necessarily mean that it is not open to challenge,
         the General Court takes the view, in paragraph of the order in Deutsche Post v Commission, and paragraph of the order in Germany v Commission, that the effects of a decision to initiate the formal investigation procedure and those of the act at issue are not comparable.
      
Regarding the alleged deterioration in the procedural position of Deutsche Post and the Federal Republic of Germany in the
         event of non-compliance with the act at issue, the General Court stated, in paragraph of the contested orders, that it
         is the refusal of the German authorities to supply the Commission with the requested information, which was contained in the
         act at issue, and not the act at issue as such which is likely to deprive the persons concerned of the possibility of complaining
         of the insufficiency of the factual basis of the final decision. According to the General Court, if the German authorities
         consider that the information requested by the Commission is not necessary in order to establish the facts or the researches
         requested are too onerous in relation to the desired result, they may choose to ignore the injunction issued to them.
      
The General Court concludes, in paragraph of the order in Deutsche Post v Commission and paragraph of the order in Germany v Commission, that the act at issue was not an act open to challenge for the purposes of Article TFEU.
      
 Forms of order sought and procedure before the Court of Justice
 Case C-463/P Deutsche Post v Commission
Deutsche Post claims that the Court should:
      
–        set aside the order in Deutsche Post v Commission,
      
–        annul the act at issue, and
–        order the Commission to pay the costs.
The Commission contends that the Court should:
      
–        dismiss the appeal, and
–        order Deutsche Post to pay the costs.
 Case C-475/P Germany v Commission
The Federal Republic of Germany claims that the Court should:
      
–        set aside the order in Germany v Commission, and
      
–        order the Commission to pay the costs.
The Commission contends that the Court should:
      
–        dismiss the appeal, and
–        order the Federal Republic of Germany to pay the costs.
By order of December 2010, the President of the Court of Justice decided to join Cases C‑463/P and C‑475/P for the
         purposes of the oral procedure and the judgment.
      
 The appeals
In support of their appeals, Deutsche Post and the Federal Republic of Germany argue that, in the contested orders, the General
         Court committed various errors of law in the interpretation of the concept of an act open to challenge for the purposes of
         Article TFEU. In that respect, they make five pleas in law. The first claims infringement of Article TFEU; the second
         disregard of the case-law whereby, in the area of State aid, preparatory measures may constitute acts open to challenge; the
         third disregard of the legal effects of an injunction to provide information; the fourth infringement of the principle of
         effective legal protection; and, finally, the fifth disregard of the allocation of competences between the Commission and
         the Member States under Articles TFEU et TFEU.
      
As the first four pleas are closely linked, it will be appropriate to examine them together.
      
 Arguments of the parties
The Federal Republic of Germany and Deutsche Post argue that Article 10(3) of Regulation No 659/expressly empower the
         Commission to adopt a formal decision. By virtue of Article TFEU, they argue, such a decision is obligatory and thus constitutes,
         by its nature, an act open to challenge for the purposes of Article TFEU. The General Court erred in law at paragraph
         of the order in Deutsche Post v Commission, and at paragraph of the order in Germany v Commission, by not in any way taking account of the form of the act at issue.
      
According to the Federal Republic of Germany, the fact that the act at issue constituted an intermediate measure in the context
         of the procedure for examining State aid did not prevent it from being an act open to challenge. The interests of the parties
         concerned were not sufficiently protected by the challengeable nature of the final decision.
      
The applicants then maintain that, independently of the form of the act at issue, and contrary to what the General Court held
         at paragraph of the order in Deutsche Post v Commission and at paragraph of the order in Germany v Commission, an injunction to provide information under Article 10(3) of Regulation No 659/produces binding legal effects, which
         have a direct impact on the Member State and the undertaking concerned. According to the Federal Republic of Germany, such
         a decision closed the administrative procedure on State aid inasmuch as it allowed the Commission, in the case where the Member
         State concerned failed to comply with that injunction, to give its decision on the basis of information appearing on the file.
         Moreover, a Member State which failed to perform the obligation under Article 10(3) of Regulation No 659/1999, read in combination
         with Article TFEU and Article 4(3) TEU, could form the subject-matter of proceedings for failure to fulfil obligations
         under Article TFEU.
      
The Commission replies that, in accordance with consistent case-law, only measures the legal effects of which are binding
         on, and capable of affecting the interests of, the applicant by bringing about a distinct change in his legal position are
         acts or decisions which may be the subject of an action for annulment for the purposes of Article TFEU (see, in particular,
         IBM v Commission, paragraph 9; Case C‑308/Netherlands v Commission [1999] ECR I‑6513, paragraph 26; Case C‑443/Spain v Commission [2000] ECR I‑2415, paragraph 27; Case C‑147/Netherlands v Commission [2000] ECR I‑4723, paragraph 25; Case C‑131/P Reynolds Tobacco and Others v Commission [2006] ECR I‑7795, paragraph 54). A ‘decision’ within the meaning of Article TFUE did not necessarily produce such effects.
         According to the Commission, it is not the form of the act or decision in question, but its substance, that determines whether
         it is an act open to challenge. Consequently, it argues, an action for annulment against a decision within the meaning of
         Article TFEU or an act taking another form is possible only where that decision or act involve legal effects vis‑à‑vis
         third parties.
      
The Commission argues that the General Court was right to hold that the act at issue does not produce binding legal effects
         capable of affecting the interests of the applicants.
      
The Commission explains in that respect that, in the context of a proceeding in the matter of State aid, Member States are
         required, under Article 4(3) TEU, to send the Commission all the information it needs in order to judge whether or not a State
         aid measure exists and whether it is compatible with the internal market. The obligation on the Member State to put the requested
         information at the Commission’s disposal thus follows from Article 4(3) TEU, rather than from the information injunction.
      
The information injunction is concerned with compliance with the principle that both parties should be heard in the context
         of the administrative procedure. After the request for information and the reminder provided for in Article 10(3) of Regulation
         No 659/in conjunction with Article 5(2) of that regulation, the Member State has a final opportunity to provide the information
         sought before the Commission makes its decision on the basis of the information which it has.
      
The Commission states that, in State aid law, unlike in competition law, it does not have any power to initiate an investigation
         before the adoption of a final decision. The Commission cannot therefore elucidate the facts without the loyal cooperation
         of the Member States. It is not the information injunction but the refusal by the Member State to comply with that injunction
         which allows the Commission to take a decision on the basis of the information available. Moreover, the fact that the Commission
         considers itself to be sufficiently well-informed and ceases to seek information does not, in itself, produce any legal effect.
         What does, on the contrary, produce such effects is the legal assessment of those facts which it is called upon to make in
         the final decision. Therefore, the information injunction constitutes only a preparatory act which does not affect the legal
         position of the Member State concerned.
      
The Commission adds that the opportunity for the applicants to bring an annulment action against the final decision on the
         compatibility of the aid with the internal market guarantees them sufficient legal protection. Any legal defects vitiating
         the preparatory acts may be relied upon in an action directed against the definitive act for which they represent a preparatory
         step (IBM v Commission, paragraph 12).
      
Finally, the Commission insists that no sanction arises as a result of failure to comply with the information injunction.
         By not complying with the injunction, the Member State implicitly indicates that the information which the Commission has
         is complete and that the Commission may adopt its decision on the basis thereof. The mere possibility that proceedings for
         failure to fulfil obligations might be opened against that Member State is neither a sanction nor a circumstance capable of
         affecting the interests of that State. Since Member States are required, under Article 4(3) TEU, to send the Commission all
         the information which it needs in order to determine whether or not a State aid measure exists and whether it is compatible
         with the internal market, proceedings for failure to fulfil obligations could even be opened in the absence of an information
         injunction. Moreover, the Commission argues, the interests of the Member State are affected only where the Commission decides
         actually to pursue the Member State for infringement of the Treaty.
      
 Findings of the Court
According to consistent case-law, developed in the context of actions for annulment brought by Member States or institutions,
         any measures adopted by the institutions, whatever their form, which are intended to have binding legal effects are regarded
         as acts open to challenge, within the meaning of Article TFEU (see, in particular, Case 22/Commission v Council (‘ERTA’) [1971] ECR 263, paragraph 42; Case C‑316/Parliament v Council [1994] ECR I-625, paragraph 8; Spain v Commission, cited above, paragraph 27; Joined Cases C‑138/03, C‑324/and C‑431/Italy v Commission [2005] ECR I‑10043, paragraph 32; Case C‑301/Italy v Commission [2005] ECR I‑10217, paragraph 19; Case C‑370/Commission v Council [2009] ECR I‑8917, paragraph 42). The case-law further shows that a Member State, such as the applicant in Case C‑475/P,
         may admissibly bring an action for annulment of a measure producing binding legal effects without having to demonstrate that
         it has an interest in bringing proceedings (see, to that effect, Case 45/Commission v Council [1987] ECR. 1493, paragraph and Commission v Council [2009] ECR I-8917, paragraph 16).
      
Where the action for annulment against an act adopted by an institution is brought by a natural or legal person, the Court
         of Justice had repeatedly held that the action lies only if the binding legal effects of that act are capable of affecting
         the interests of the applicant by bringing about a distinct change in his legal position (see, in particular, IBM v Commission, paragraph 9; Athinaïki Techniki v Commission, paragraph 29; Case C‑322/P NDSHT v Commission [2010] ECR I-0000, paragraph 45).
      
It must, however, be emphasised that the case-law cited in the paragraph above was developed in the context of actions brought
         before the EU judicature by natural or legal persons against measures of which they were the addressees. Where, as in the
         case giving rise to the order in Deutsche Post v Commission, an action for annulment is brought by a non-privileged applicant against a measure that has not been addressed to it, the
         requirement that the binding legal effects of the measure being challenged must be capable of affecting the interests of the
         applicant by bringing about a distinct change in his legal position overlaps with the conditions laid down in the fourth paragraph
         of Article TFEU.
      
It must also be noted that, in the contested orders, the General Court allowed the objection of inadmissibility raised by
         the Commission, holding that the act at issue did not constitute an act open to challenge for the purposes of Article TFEU.
      
For the purposes of assessing whether the General Court erred in law by holding, in these orders, that an information injunction
         under Article 10(3) of Regulation No 659/cannot form the subject-matter of an action for annulment, it is therefore necessary,
         having regard to the case-law cited in paragraph of this judgment, to examine whether such an injunction constitutes a
         measure which is intended to produce binding legal effects.
      
In that respect, it should be remembered that Article of Regulation No 659/makes provision for a procedure in two
         stages designed to allow the Commission to obtain from the Member State concerned the necessary information concerning an
         allegedly unlawful State aid measure, so that the Commission can assess the nature of the measure and its compatibility with
         the internal market.
      
As regards the first stage, Article 10(2) of Regulation No 659/provides that the Commission may request the Member State
         concerned to provide it with information concerning the allegedly unlawful aid.
      
In a second stage, if the Member State, despite the reminder issued to it, does not provide the information requested within
         the prescribed period, the Commission, in accordance with Article 10(3) of Regulation No 659/1999, ‘shall by decision require
         the information to be provided’. Consequently, the second stage of the procedure is represented by the adoption of a ‘decision’
         within the meaning of Article TFEU by the Commission, which, moreover, that institution does not deny.
      
In accordance with Article TFEU, a ‘decision shall be binding in its entirety’. By providing that an information injunction
         should take the form of a decision, the EU legislature intended to confer a binding character on such a measure.
      
It follows from the above that a decision taken pursuant to Article 10(3) of Regulation No 659/is intended to produce
         binding legal effects within the meaning of the case-law cited in paragraph of this judgment, and therefore constitutes
         an act open to challenge for the purposes of Article TFEU.
      
The above analysis is corroborated by the case-law concerning decisions to request information taken on the basis of Article
         of Council Regulation No of February 1962, First Regulation implementing Articles [EC] and [EC] (OJ, English
         Special Edition, Series I, Chapter 1959-1962, p. 87), which, like Article of Regulation No 659/1999, provided for a procedure
         in two stages, the second being constituted by the adoption by the Commission of a decision capable of forming the subject-matter
         of an action for annulment (Case 136/National Panasonic v Commission [1980] ECR 2033; Case 374/Orkem v Commission [1989] ECR 3283). Similarly, it is unequivocally apparent from Article 18(3) of Regulation No 1/that a request for information
         taken in the form of a decision constitutes an act open to challenge for the purposes of Article TFEU.
      
The case-law cited by the General Court in the contested orders, according to which it is necessary to look at the substance
         of a measure rather than its form for the purposes of assessing its binding character, does not change that analysis.
      
Moreover, contrary to what the Commission claims, the absence of any sanction laid down by Regulation No 659/in the event
         of a Member State not complying with an information injunction does not constitute a decisive factor in assessing whether
         a measure may form the subject-matter of an action for annulment.
      
By holding in paragraphs 31, and of the order in Deutsche Post v Commission, and in paragraphs 30, and of the order in Germany v Commission, that the act at issue, by reason of its preparatory nature, did not constitute an act open to challenge within the meaning
         of the case-law, the General Court also erred in law.
      
In that regard, admittedly, intermediate measures whose aim is to prepare the final decision do not, in principle, constitute
         acts which may form the subject-matter of an action for annulment (IBM v Commission, paragraph 10; Athinaïki Techniki v Commission, paragraph 42; Case C‑362/P Internationaler Hilfsfonds v Commission [2010] ECR I‑669, paragraph 52). However, the intermediate acts thus referred to are first acts which express a provisional
         opinion of the institution (see, to that effect, IBM v Commission, paragraph 20; Joined Cases C‑133/and C‑150/Nashua Corporation and Others v Commission and Council [1990] ECR I‑719, paragraphs to 10; Case C‑282/P Guérin Automobiles v Commission [1997] ECR I‑1503, paragraph 34; Case C‑147/Netherlands v Commission [2000] ECR I‑4723, paragraph 35).
      
An action for annulment against measures expressing a provisional opinion of the Commission might make it necessary for the
         EU judicature to arrive at a decision on questions on which the institution concerned has not yet had an opportunity to state
         its position and would as a result anticipate the arguments on the substance of the case, confusing different procedural stages
         both administrative and judicial. To allow such an action would thus be incompatible with the system of the division of powers
         between the Commission and the EU judicature and of the remedies laid down by the Treaty, as well as the requirements of the
         sound administration of justice and the proper course of the administrative procedure to be followed in the Commission (IBM v Commission, paragraph 20).
      
However, in this case, an action for annulment directed against the act at issue, whereby the Commission requests information
         from the German authorities on the revenues and costs of Deutsche Post, for the period from to 2007, does not involve
         a risk of confusion of the various stages of the administrative and judicial procedures (IBM v Commission, paragraph 20). Such an action for annulment should not lead the EU judicature to rule on the existence of a State aid measure
         or its possible compatibility with the internal market.
      
Next, the case-law shows that an intermediate measure is also not capable of forming the subject-matter of an action if it
         is established that the illegality attaching to that measure can be relied on in support of an action against the final decision
         for which it represents a preparatory step. In such circumstances, the action brought against the decision terminating the
         procedure will provide sufficient judicial protection (IBM v Commission, paragraph 12; Case 53/AKZO Chemie and AKZO Chemie UK v Commission [1986] ECR 1965, paragraph 19; Case C-400/Italy v Commission [2001] ECR I 7303, paragraph 63).
      
However, if that latter condition is not satisfied, it will be considered that the intermediate measure – independently of
         whether the latter expresses a provisional opinion of the institution concerned – produces independent legal effects and must
         therefore be capable of forming the subject-matter of an action for annulment (AKZO Chemie and AKZO Chemie UK v Commission, paragraph 20; Case C‑170/BEUC v Commission [1991] I‑5709, paragraphs to 11; Case C‑39/P SFEI and Others v Commission [1994] ECR I‑2681, paragraph 28; Case C- 400/Italy v Commission [2001] ECR I-7303, paragraphs to 68; Athinaïki Techniki v Commission, paragraph 54).
      
In this case, it must be held that an information under Article 10(3) of Regulation No 659/produces independent legal
         effects.
      
Indeed, an action brought against the decision terminating the procedure concerning the alleged State aid in favour of Deutsche
         Post is not capable of ensuring sufficient legal protection for the applicants.
      
In that respect it should be noted, first, that if, as the applicants claim in these cases, the injunction is disproportionate
         in that the information requested is not relevant for assessing the State measure in the light of Articles TFEU and TFEU, the illegalities vitiating the intermediate measure would not be capable of affecting the legality of the Commission’s
         final decision, since that latter decision will not be based on information obtained in response to the said injunction.
      
Second, where the Commission requests a Member State, pursuant to Article 10(3) of Regulation No 659/1999, to provide the
         information requested, it adopts a ‘decision’ within the meaning of Article TFEU. It follows that the refusal of the Member
         State concerned to comply with such an injunction constitutes a failure to fulfil an obligation under the treaties within
         the meaning of Article TFEU.
      
In the context of an action for failure to fulfil obligations, a Member State which is the addressee of a decision, such as
         an information injunction, cannot validly justify non-performance of the latter on the basis of its alleged illegality. It
         is in the context of a distinct procedure, namely that of an action for annulment under Article TFEU, that any challenge
         to the legality of such an injunction must be made (see, to that effect, Case C‑261/Commission v France [2001] ECR I‑2537, paragraph 18, Case C‑419/Commission v Greece [2008] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 52).
      
The events of the possible illegality attaching to the intermediate measure are thus not capable of being removed by an action
         brought against the final decision. The failure to fulfil obligations flowing from Article 10(3) of Regulation No 659/on the part of a Member State, which does not take any action in response to an information injunction, may be found independently
         of the outcome of a possible application for annulment brought against the final decision.
      
Finally, this Court must reject the Commission’s argument that the possibility of bringing an action for annulment against
         a decision taken pursuant to Article 10(3) of Regulation No 659/would lead to a situation in which a Member State, which
         refuses to reply to a request for information concerning an aid measure notified or otherwise, would enjoy more extensive
         legal protection where an unnotified aid measure is at issue.
      
It should be noted in that regard that Article 5(3) of Regulation No 659/provides that if the Member State concerned,
         after receiving a reminder, does not provide the requested by an request for information by the Commission concerning a notified
         aid measure, or provides incomplete information, the notification is deemed to be withdrawn. In those circumstances, the withdrawal
         of the notification has the effect that that aid must be regarded as unnotified aid, so that the refusal of the Member State
         concerned to provide the information requested will lead, both in the case of aid initially notified and in the case of aid
         which has never been notified, to the adoption of an act open to challenge, namely a ‘decision’ within the meaning of Article
         10(3) of Regulation No 659/1999.
      
It follows that, by holding that the act at issue could not form the subject-matter of an action for annulment, the General
         Court erred in law. In those circumstances, without it being necessary to examine the fifth plea, the first to fourth pleas
         must be upheld.
      
In Case C‑463/P, however, the Commission asks the Court, in the event that it should hold that the act at issue constitutes
         and act open to challenge for the purposes of Article TFEU, to carry out a substitution of grounds as regards the order
         in Deutsche Post v Commission, in order to indicate that the action formed by Deutsche Post was inadmissible since that undertaking did not have the capacity
         to bring an action for the purposes of the fourth paragraph of Article TFEU. In the objection of inadmissibility raised
         by the Commission in that case, that institution had indeed maintained that the act at issue did not concern Deutsche Post
         either directly or individually.
      
In that respect, it should be recalled that, under the fourth paragraph of Article TFEU, a natural or legal person may
         institute proceedings against a decision addressed to another only if the decision is of direct and individual concern to
         that natural or legal person.
      
Concerning, first, the question whether Deutsche Post is directly concerned by the act at issue, with is addressed to the
         Federal Republic of Germany, it follows from settled case‑law that in order to satisfy that requirement two cumulative criteria
         must be met, namely, first, the contested Community measure must directly affect the legal situation of the individual and,
         second, it must leave no discretion to its addressees, who are entrusted with the task of implementing it, such implementation
         being purely automatic and resulting from EU rules without the application of other intermediate rules (Joined Cases C‑445/P
         and C‑455/P Commission v Ente per le Ville Vesuviane and Ente per le Ville Vesuviane v Commission [2009] ECR I‑7993, paragraph and case-law cited).
      
According to the Commission, that condition is not met in this case, since the act at issue merely requests the Federal Republic
         of Germany to provide certain information. That injunction thus did not give rise to the adoption of a national measure which
         was purely automatic in character and resulted solely from EU rules. It was the conduct of the Federal Republic of Germany
         which would determine whether the latter would turn to Deutsche Post or how it would cause that undertaking to communicate
         the information.
      
In this case, it must be held that the act at issue directly affects Deutsche Post for the purposes of the fourth paragraph
         of Article TFEU.
      
First of all, Deutsche Post, as beneficiary of the measure concerned by the information referred to by the act at issue and
         as holder of that information, will be obliged to act on the information injunction.
      
Moreover, the definitive and exhaustive content of the information requested is apparent from the act at issue itself, without
         leaving any discretion in that respect to the Federal Republic of Germany.
      
As for whether Deutsche Post is individually concerned by the act at issue, it should be recalled that, according to consistent
         case-law of the Court of Justice, persons other than those to whom a decision is addressed may claim to be individually concerned
         only if that decision affects them by reason of certain attributes which are peculiar to them or by reason of circumstances
         in which they are differentiated from all other persons and, by virtue of those factors, distinguishes them individually just
         as in the case of the person addressed (see, among others, Case C‑260/P Sniace v Commission [2007] I‑10005, paragraph and case-law cited).
      
According to the Commission, Deutsche Post was not individually concerned by the act at issue, since the measure was not addressed
         to Deutsche Post and did not impose any burden on it.
      
In that respect, it should be noted that the fact that the act at issue is not addressed to Deutsche Post is irrelevant for
         assessing whether that undertaking is individually concerned by that measure, for the purposes of the fourth paragraph of
         Article TFEU.
      
Next, it must be noted that the information injunction refers to a procedure for examining a State aid measure from which
         Deutsche Post is alleged to have benefited. The information concerned by the act at issue concern only Deutsche Post. The
         latter is thus individually concerned by that measure for the purposes of the case-law cited in paragraph of this judgment.
      
Since Deutsche Post is directly and individually concerned by the act at issue, there is no need, in Case C‑463/P, to carry
         out the substitution of grounds suggested by the Commission.
      
It follows from the foregoing that the appeal must be upheld and the contested orders set aside.
      
 Reference of the cases back to the General Court
Under the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, if the appeal is well
         founded, the Court of Justice may itself give final judgment in the matter, where the state of the proceedings so permits,
         or refer the case back to the General Court for judgment.
      
The Court has the necessary information to give final judgment, in the two cases, on the objection of inadmissibility raised
         by the Commission during the procedure at first instance.
      
For the reasons set out in paragraphs to of this judgment, that objection of inadmissibility, based on the argument
         that the act at issue is not capable of forming the subject-matter of an action for annulment, must be dismissed. Moreover,
         in so far as, in Case T-570/Deutsche Post v Commission, the objection of inadmissibility is also based on the argument that the act at issue did not directly and individually concern
         the applicant, that objection cannot be accepted either for the reasons set out in paragraphs to of this judgment.
      
However, in the circumstances of this case, the Court is not in a position to rule on the substance of the actions brought
         by Deutsche Post and the Federal Republic of Germany.
      
It should be noted in that respect that the arguments presented to the General Court and the findings made by the latter related
         solely to the admissibility of the actions, given that, in the two cases, the General Court upheld the Commission’s plea of
         inadmissibility under Article 114(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the General Court without going into the substance of the
         case or initiating the oral procedure.
      
The cases must therefore be referred back to the General Court for a decision on the applicants’ pleas that the act at issue
         should be annulled.
      
 Costs
Since the cases are being referred back to the General Court, it is appropriate to reserve the costs relating to the present
         appeal proceedings.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby:
1.      Annuls the orders of the General Court of the European Union of July 2010, Deutsche Post v Commission (T‑570/08), and Germany v Commission (T‑571/08).
2.      Dismisses the objections of inadmissibility raised by the European Commission before the General Court of the European Union.
3.      Refers the cases back to the General Court of the European Union for a decision on the pleas of Deutsche Post AG (T‑570/08)
            and the Federal Republic of Germany (T‑571/08) for the annulment of the Commission’s decision of October ordering
            the Federal Republic of Germany to provide information in the proceedings concerning State aid in favour of Deutsche Post
            AG.
4.      Reserves the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 