
Case C-577/Rijksdienst voor Pensioenen
v
Elisabeth Brouwer
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Arbeidshof te Antwerpen)
(Equal treatment for men and women in matters of social security – Directive 79/7/EEC – Frontier workers – Calculation of pensions)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Social policy – Equal treatment for men and women in matters of social security – Directive 79/(Council Directive 79/7, Art. 4(1))
2.        Preliminary rulings – Interpretation – Temporal effects of judgments by way of interpretation
(Art. EC)
1.        Article 4(1) of Directive 79/on the progressive implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women in
         matters of social security precludes national legislation under which, for the years to 1994, the calculation of old-age
         and retirement pensions for female frontier workers, concerning equal work or work of equal value, was based on notional and/or
         flat-rate daily wages lower than those for male frontier workers.
      
(see para. 31, operative part)
2.        The Court may, exceptionally, taking account of the serious difficulties which its judgment may create as regards events in
         the past, be moved to restrict the opportunity for all persons concerned of relying on the interpretation the Court gives
         to a provision of European Union law in response to a reference for a preliminary ruling. However, the financial consequences
         that might ensue for a Member State from a preliminary ruling do not in themselves justify limiting the temporal effects of
         the ruling.
      
(see paras 33-34)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Equal treatment for men and women in matters of social security – Directive 79/7/EEC – Frontier workers – Calculation of pensions)
In Case C‑577/08,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the arbeidshof te Antwerpen (Belgium), made by decision of December 2008, received at the Court on December 2008, in the proceedings
      
Rijksdienst voor Pensioenen
v
Elisabeth Brouwer,
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of J.‑C. Bonichot, President of Chamber, C. Toader, K. Schiemann (Rapporteur), P. Kūris and L. Bay Larsen, Judges,
Advocate General: N. Jääskinen,
Registrar: R. Şereş, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on March 2010,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        the Belgian Government, by L. Van den Broeck and C. Pochet, and by E. Pools, acting as Agents,
–        the European Commission, by M. van Beek, acting as Agent,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 4(1) of Council Directive 79/7/EEC of December
         on the progressive implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women in matters of social security
         (OJ L 6, p. 24).
      
That question was raised in the course of proceedings between Ms Brouwer against the Rijksdienst voor Pensioenen (National
         Pension Office, ‘the Rijksdienst’) on the allegedly discriminatory calculation of the amount of the retirement pension granted
         to her. 
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
The purpose of Directive 79/is to progressively eliminate discrimination on grounds of sex in matters of social security.
         Under Article 3(1)(a) thereof, it applies to statutory schemes which provide protection against, inter alia, old age. 
      
Pursuant to Article 4(1) of that Directive:
      
‘The principle of equal treatment means that there shall be no discrimination whatsoever on grounds of sex either directly,
         or indirectly by reference in particular to marital or family status, in particular as concerns: 
      
…
–        the calculation of benefits including increases due in respect of a spouse and for dependants and the conditions governing
         the duration and retention of entitlement to benefits.’
      
Article 7(1)(a) of that directive provides that the directive is to be without prejudice to the right of Member States to
         exclude from its scope:
      
‘the determination of pensionable age for the purposes of granting retirement pensions and the possible consequences thereof
         for other benefits’.
      
 National legislation
Article 5(7) of the Royal Decree of December implementing Articles to of the Law of July modernising
         social security and ensuring the viability of the statutory pension schemes, provides:
      
‘A worker of Belgian nationality:
(a)      who was habitually employed as a worker, employee or a mineworker in a country which borders Belgium, provided that he maintained
         his principal residence in Belgium and returned to it in principle every day,
      
(b)      or who was employed in a foreign country as a worker, or employee each time for periods of less than one year by an employer
         established in that country, to perform paid work or work deemed to be of a seasonal nature, provided that he maintained his
         principal residence in Belgium and that his family continued to reside there, 
      
may receive a retirement pension equal to the difference between the amount of the retirement pension which he would have
         received if that activity as an employed worker had been carried out in Belgium and the amount of the pension received for
         the same activity pursuant to the legislation of the country of employment.’
      
Pursuant to Article of the Royal Decree of December concerning general rules for the scheme of retirement and survivor’s
         pensions for employed persons (Moniteur belge of January 1968), the pay that must be taken into account when determining the retirement pension which a worker referred
         to in Article 5(7) of the Royal Decree of December is to receive if that activity is carried out as a worker in Belgium
         or for determining the survivor’s pension is established by the Crown for each calendar year, taking into account the data
         concerning the previous calendar year which appear on the individual account.
      
 The facts of the main proceedings and the question referred
Ms Brouwer, a Belgian national residing in Belgium, worked in the Netherlands as a frontier worker from August to
         December 1998. From January 1999, she ceased working and received benefits as an early retiree in Belgium.
      
Since she was entitled to a full retirement pension in Belgium until her 65th birthday, and the responsibility for payment fell thereafter to the Kingdom of the Netherlands by reason of insurance periods
         completed in that state, in 2003, Ms Brouwer brought a claim for a retirement pension before the Rijksdienst. The pension,
         calculated on the basis of the insurance periods completed pro rata temporis, was fixed at EUR 724.and was granted to
         her from May 2004.
      
The amount of the pension was calculated in accordance with the applicable Belgian legislation, in particular Article 5(7)
         of the Royal Decree of December 1996, on the basis of notional and/or flat-rate daily wages determined annually by Royal
         Decree on the basis of the average pay received by the workers in Belgium during the previous year.
      
On June 2004, Ms Brouwer disputed the amount of the pension granted to her for the period from January to December
         1994, pointing out that the calculation of that amount was based on notional and/or flat-rate wages which, during the period
         in question, were lower for female workers than for their male colleagues.
      
On July 2004, the Rijksdienst informed Ms Brouwer that it maintained its original decision, arguing that  during the period
         in question the average wage in real terms, on the basis of which the retirement pension was calculated, was not the same
         for female and male workers, which entailed a  difference in the amounts of the pensions. However, from 1995, the daily wage
         was the same for male and female workers. This development was prompted by the widespread equality in pay and by the fact
         that women who work increasingly do so for longer periods.
      
Ms Brouwer appealed against the decision of the Rijksdienst to the arbeidsrechtbank te Hasselt (Labour Court, Hasselt). By
         judgment of June 2006, that court annulled the decision and ruled that the Rijksdienst was to recalculate Ms Brouwer’s
         retirement pension on the basis of the notional and/or flat-rate wages which were applied to male frontier workers during
         the period from January to December 1994. 
      
The arbeidsrechtbank te Hasselt held that the constitutional rights of equal treatment and non-discrimination do not preclude
         a difference in treatment between categories of persons provided that the difference is based on an objective criterion, has
         a legitimate aim and is reasonably proportionate to the intended aim. In the present case, those conditions are not fulfilled.
      
According to the arbeidsrechtbank te Hasselt, even if, previously, differences of treatment on grounds of sex arose from the
         factual situation which prevailed at the time and which was characterised by a difference in the level of pay of men and women,
         such a situation is incompatible with Article EC and the obligation thereunder to ensure that the principle of equal pay
         for male and female workers for equal work or work of equal value is applied. Consequently, the Belgian legislature can no
         longer rely on a system in which a lower notional wage is taken into account for a woman when calculating her pension as a
         frontier worker, by arguing that this reflects a situation in which, on average, female workers received lower average pay
         than male workers.
      
The Rijksdienst brought an appeal against the judgment of the June before the arbeidshof te Antwerpen.
      
It is against that background that the arbeidshof te Antwerpen decided to stay proceedings and refer the following question
         to the Court:
      
‘Are the Royal Decrees of 01.12.1969, 18.06.1970, 08.06.1971, 14.09.1972, 31.07.1973, 12.07.1974, 13.02.1975, 28.11.1975,
         26.11.1976, 26.09.1977, 31.07.1978, 31.08.1979, 02.12.1980, 13.01.1982, 14.03.1983, 11.01.1984, 30.11.1984, 24.01.1986, 30.12.1986,
         06.01.1988, 02.12.1988, 30.11.1989, 10.12.1990, 01.06.1993, 08.12.1993, 19.12.and 10.10.enacted pursuant to Article
         of the Royal Decree of December laying down general rules for the retirement and survivor’s pension for employed
         persons (Koninklijk Besluit tot vaststelling van het algemeen reglement betreffende het rust- en overleveringspensioen voor
         werknemers) – which establish lower notional and/or flat-rate daily wages for the calculation of a retirement pension for
         female frontier workers than for male frontier workers – in accordance with Article 4(1) of Directive 79/7/EEC on the progressive
         implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women in matters of social security?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
The European Commission starts from the premiss that the average real wages of workers in Belgium for the years to 1994,
         on the basis of which the retirement pension was calculated, concerned equal work or work of equal value. In the Commission’s
         opinion, since the Belgian authorities did not correct the wage differences existing in practice, those differences also influenced
         the notional and/or flat-rate wages applied to the calculation of the retirement pension. 
      
It argues that such a calculation constitutes direct discrimination within the meaning of Community law, incompatible with
         Article of Directive 79/7.
      
The Belgian Government maintained in its written observations that there was no such discrimination. During the period form
         to 1994, there was a significant difference between the pay of male and female workers, employed in different sectors,
         and often a reduced working plan for women. As a result, the pay to be taken into consideration for the calculation of average
         salaries was different. It is natural therefore that there is a difference in the notional and/or flat-rate daily wages resulting
         in differences in the amounts of the pensions. According to the Belgian Government, since 1995, the daily wage has been the
         same for male and female workers, because wages have been adjusted and women have become more active in professional activities
         traditionally reserved to men.
      
However, it must be noted that, at the hearing, the Belgian Government radically changed its position.
      
First, it acknowledged the unequal treatment and described the steps taken to remedy the situation and to fulfil the requirements
         of Directive 79/7. In particular, a proposal for a Royal Decree was drawn up, which was intended to make the flat-rate daily
         wages for women equal to those for men. The Belgian Government maintained that Article of that proposal provided that those
         who wish to benefit from that equalisation had to make an application in accordance with the general regulation on retirement
         and survivors’ pensions for workers.
      
Second, the Belgian Government requested the Court to limit the temporal effects of its judgment, not as regards payment of
         arrears but only as regards interest due on those arrears. In particular, the Belgian Government requested that entitlement
         be restricted to beneficiaries who had initiated legal proceedings before December 2008, the date on which this reference
         for a preliminary ruling was made by the arbeidshof te Antwerpen.
      
The Belgian Government argued that the two conditions recognised by the Court of Justice’s case law, allowing the limitation
         of the temporal effects of a judgment of the Court, were fulfilled.
      
With regard to the first condition, namely that there was good faith in the case of a misinterpretation of a provision of
         Community law – in the present case, Article 4(1) of Directive 79/– the Belgian Government maintained that it considered
         the differences in pay between men and women to have been justified on objective grounds. In that regard, the Belgian Government
         relied on the fact that no similar cases had been brought before the Belgian courts and that the Commission had not taken
         any infringement actions on that subject against the Belgian state.
      
With regard to the second condition, namely the risk of serious economic repercussions of such a judgment for the Member State
         concerned, the Belgian Government contended that even the payment of arrears without interest represented a very large burden
         on Belgian public finances.
      
 Findings of the Court
It should be noted at the outset that, in proceedings under Article EC, the Court has no jurisdiction to rule on the compatibility
         of a national provision with Community law and that, consequently, the question referred for a preliminary ruling should be
         reformulated and be interpreted as seeking to determine whether Article 4(1) of Directive 79/precludes national legislation
         under which, for the period from to 1994, the calculation of retirement and old-age pensions of female frontier workers
         was based on notional and/or flat-rate wages lower than those of male frontier workers. 
      
In order to answer this question, as the Commission rightly submits, the period from to 1994, at issue in the main proceedings,
         must be divided. In particular, a distinction must be drawn between the period from December 1984, the date by which Directive
         79/was to have been transposed into national law, to December 1994, and the period from January to December
         1984.
      
With regard to the period from January to December 1984, the compatibility of the national legislation at issue
         could be examined only as regards Article of the EC Treaty (Articles to of the EC Treaty have been replaced by
         Articles EC to EC), since Directive 79/was not adopted until and the period prescribed for its transposition
         was fixed at December 1984. However, provisions such as those at issue in the main proceedings, relating to statutory pension
         schemes were outside the scope of that article and could not therefore be considered to be contrary to it (see, to that effect,
         Case 80/Defrenne [1971] ECR 445, paragraph 7).
      
With regard to the period from December to December 1994, it should be noted that the Kingdom of Belgium, as it
         acknowledged itself at the hearing, had failed to fulfil its obligations arising under Directive 79/regarding the calculation
         of retirement pensions in applying, until January 1995, a discriminatory method of calculation, which was based on higher
         notional and/or flat-rate daily wages for male frontier workers than for female frontier workers, for equal work or work of
         equal value.
      
In view of the foregoing, it must be concluded that Article 4(1) of Directive 79/precludes national legislation under which,
         for the period from to 1994, the calculation of retirement and old-age pensions of female frontier workers was based
         on notional and/or flat-rate wages lower than those of male frontier workers.
      
With regard to the Belgian Government’s request to limit the temporal effects of the judgment in the event that the Court
         should find the existence of discrimination, the Court makes the following findings.
      
The Court may, exceptionally, taking account of the serious difficulties which its judgment may create as regards events in
         the past, be moved to restrict the possibility for all persons concerned of relying on the interpretation which the Court
         gives to a provision of European Union law in response to a reference for a preliminary ruling (see Case C‑262/Barber [1990] ECR I‑1889, paragraph 41).
      
It is, however, settled case-law that the financial consequences which might ensue for a Member State from a preliminary ruling
         do not in themselves justify limiting the temporal effects of the ruling (Case C‑184/Grzelczyk [2001] ECR I‑6193, paragraph 52; Case C‑209/Bidar [2005] ECR I‑2119, paragraph 68; and Case C‑423/Richards [2006] ECR I‑3585, paragraph 41).
      
To limit the effects of a judgment solely on the basis of such considerations would considerably diminish the judicial protection
         of the rights which individuals have under Community law (see, to that effect, Case C-35/Commission v France [1998] ECR I-5325, paragraphs 52). 
      
In addition to the existence of a risk of serious economic repercussions due in particular to the large number of legal relationships
         entered into in good faith on the basis of rules considered to be validly in force, an additional factor to take into account
         to justify the limitation of the temporal effects of the judgment is the existence of significant objective uncertainty regarding
         the implications of Community provisions (see, to that effect, Bidar, paragraph 69, and Richards, paragraph 42).
      
In the present case, the Belgian national authorities cannot rely on the existence of significant objective uncertainty with
         regard to the scope of the obligation to ensure equality of treatment, which follows clearly from Article 4(1) of Directive
         79/7, under which the principle of equal treatment implies that there is to be no discrimination whatsoever on grounds of
         sex either directly, or indirectly, as regards, inter alia, the calculation of benefits.
      
If it is established that it was indeed notional and/or flat-rate wages for equal work or work of equal value which were taken
         into account as a basis for the calculation of retirement pensions, which is a matter for the referring court to verify, the
         Belgian authorities were not entitled to take the view that the fact that the wages of female workers were lower than those
         of male workers resulted from the existence of objective factors and not from simple wage discrimination. 
      
In addition, the fact that the Commission had not initiated any Treaty infringement proceedings in that regard against the
         Kingdom of Belgium cannot be interpreted as the Commission’s tacit consent to the wage discrimination that the Belgian authorities
         tolerated for the period from to in calculating the retirement pensions of female frontier workers. 
      
The finding that the existence of significant objective uncertainty regarding the scope of Article 4(1) of Directive 79/cannot be established in the present case is sufficient to justify not limiting the temporal effects of the present judgment.
         
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby rules:
Article 4(1) of Council Directive 79/7/EEC of December on the progressive implementation of the principle of equal
            treatment for men and women in matters of social security, precludes national legislation under which, for the years to 1994, the calculation of old-age and retirement pensions for female frontier workers, concerning equal work or work of
            equal value, was based on notional and/or flat-rate daily wages lower than those for male frontier workers.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Dutch.
      
Top  
 