
Case C-258/Ladbrokes Betting & Gaming Ltd
and
Ladbrokes International Ltd
v
Stichting de Nationale Sporttotalisator
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden)
(Article EC – Restrictions on the freedom to provide services – Games of chance – Offer of games of chance via the internet – Legislation reserving a licence to a single operator – Refusal to grant an operating licence to an operator who is licensed in other Member States – Justification – Proportionality – Review of each specific measure applying national legislation)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Freedom to provide services – Restrictions – Games of chance
(Art. EC)
2.        Freedom to provide services – Restrictions – Games of chance
(Art. EC)
3.        Freedom to provide services – Restrictions – Games of chance
(Art. EC)
1.        National legislation which seeks to curb addiction to games of chance and to combat fraud, and which in fact contributes to
         the achievement of those objectives, can be regarded as limiting betting activities in a consistent and systematic manner
         even where the holder(s) of an exclusive licence are entitled to make what they are offering on the market attractive by introducing
         new games and by means of advertising. It is for the national court to determine whether unlawful gaming activities constitute
         a problem in the Member State concerned which might be solved by the expansion of authorised and regulated activities, and
         whether that expansion is on such a scale as to make it impossible to reconcile with the objective of curbing such addiction.
      
(see para. 38, operative part 1)
2.        For the purpose of applying legislation of a Member State on games of chance which is compatible with Article EC, the national
         courts are not required to determine, in each case, whether the implementing measure intended to ensure compliance with that
         legislation is suitable for achieving the objective of that legislation and is compatible with the principle of proportionality,
         in so far as that measure is necessary to ensure the effectiveness of that legislation and does not include any additional
         restriction over and above that which arises from the legislation itself. Whether that implementing measure was adopted as
         a result of action by the public authorities to ensure compliance with national legislation or of an application by an individual
         in the context of a civil action to protect his rights under that legislation has no bearing on the outcome of the dispute
         before a national court.
      
(see para. 50, operative part 2)
3.        Article EC must be interpreted as not precluding legislation of a Member State under which exclusive rights to organise
         and promote games of chance are conferred on a single operator, and which prohibits any other operator, including an operator
         established in another Member State, from offering via the internet services within the scope of that regime in the territory
         of the first Member State.
      
Since the internet gaming industry has not been the subject of harmonisation within the European Union, a Member State is
         entitled to take the view that the mere fact that an operator lawfully offers services in that sector via the internet in
         another Member State, in which it is established and where it is in principle already subject to statutory conditions and
         controls on the part of the competent authorities in that State, is not a sufficient assurance that national consumers will
         be protected against the risks of fraud and crime, in the light of the difficulties liable to be encountered in such a context
         by the authorities of the Member State of establishment in assessing the professional qualities and integrity of operators.
         In addition, because of the lack of direct contact between consumer and operator, games of chance accessible via the internet
         involve different and more substantial risks of fraud by operators against consumers compared with the traditional markets
         for such games. In the light of the specific features associated with the provision of games of chance via the internet, that
         restriction may therefore be regarded as justified by the objective of combating fraud and crime.
      
(see paras 54-55, 57-58, operative part 3)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
June (*)
      
(Article EC – Restrictions on the freedom to provide services – Games of chance – Offer of games of chance via the internet – Legislation reserving a licence to a single operator – Refusal to grant an operating licence to an operator who is licensed in other Member States – Justification – Proportionality – Review of each specific measure applying national legislation)
In Case C‑258/08,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden (Netherlands), made by decision
         of June 2008, received at the Court on June 2008, in the proceedings
      
Ladbrokes Betting & Gaming Ltd,
Ladbrokes International Ltd
v
Stichting de Nationale Sporttotalisator,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, P. Lindh, A. Rosas, U. Lõhmus and A. Arabadjiev,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: Y. Bot,
Registrar: R. Şereş, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on November 2009,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Ladbrokes Betting & Gaming Ltd and Ladbrokes International Ltd, by W. Hoyng and M. Meulenbelt, advocaten, instructed by S. Kon
         and M. Evans, Solicitors,
      
–        Stichting de Nationale Sporttotalisator, by E. Pijnacker Hordijk, J. van Manen and M. van Wissen, advocaten,
–        the Netherlands Government, by C. Wissels, M. de Grave and Y. de Vries, acting as Agents,
–        the Belgian Government, by A. Hubert and L. Van den Broeck, acting as Agents, and by P. Vlaemminck, advocaat,
–        the Danish Government, by J. Bering Liisberg and V. Pasternak Jørgensen, acting as Agents,
–        the German Government, by M. Lumma and B. Klein, acting as Agents,
–        the Greek Government, by A. Samoni-Rantou, O. Patsopoulou and M. Tassopoulou, acting as Agents,
–        the Spanish Government, by F. Díez Moreno, acting as Agent,
–        the Austrian Government, by C. Pesendorfer, acting as Agent,
–        the Finnish Government, by A. Guimaraes-Purokoski, acting as Agent,
–        the Norwegian Government, by P. Wennerås and K. Moe Winther, acting as Agents,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by E. Traversa, A. Nijenhuis and S. Noë, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on December 2009,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article EC.
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between the Stichting de Nationale Sporttotalisator, a foundation governed by Netherlands
         law (‘De Lotto’), and Ladbrokes Betting & Gaming Ltd and Ladbrokes International Ltd, companies established in the United
         Kingdom (‘the Ladbrokes companies’), concerning the possibly unlawful conduct of those companies on the Netherlands market
         for games of chance.
      
 Legal context 
Article of the Law on games of chance (Wet op de kansspelen; ‘the Wok’) provides:
      
‘Subject to the provisions of Title Va of this Law, the following are prohibited:
(a)      providing an opportunity to compete for prizes if the winners are designated by means of any calculation of probability over
         which the participants are generally unable to exercise a dominant influence, unless a licence therefor has been granted pursuant
         to this Law;
      
(b)      promoting participation either in an opportunity as referred to under (a), provided without a licence pursuant to this Law,
         or in a similar opportunity, provided outside the Kingdom of the Netherlands in Europe, or to maintain a stock of materials
         intended to publicise or disseminate knowledge of such opportunities; …’
      
Article of the Wok is worded as follows:
      
‘1.      The Minister for Justice and the Minister for Welfare, Public Health and Culture may grant to one legal person with full legal
         capacity a licence, for a period to be determined by them, to organise sports-related prize competitions in the interests
         of bodies operating for public benefit, particularly in the area of sport and physical education, culture, social welfare
         and public health.
      
2.      The proceeds from prize competitions … shall be applied in respect of the interests which the legal person intends to serve
         by organising and operating sports-related prize competitions.
      
3.      At least 47.5% of total proceeds from games of chance organised pursuant to this Title and to Title IVa, to be calculated
         on the basis of a calendar year, shall be allocated to the distribution of prizes. …’
      
Article of the Wok states:
      
1.      The Ministers referred to in Article shall lay down rules concerning licences for the organisation of sports-related prize
         competitions. 
      
2.      Those rules relate, inter alia, to:
a.      the number of competitions to be organised;
b.      the method of determining results and the prize scheme;
c.      the management and covering of organisational costs;
d.      the allocation of revenue from competitions organised;
e.      the constitution and regulations of the legal person;
f.      monitoring of compliance with the legislation by the authorities;
g.      delivery and publication of the report to be drawn up annually by the legal person concerning its activities and financial
         results.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Netherlands legislation in relation to games of chance is based on a system of exclusive licences under which (i) the organisation
         or promotion of games of chance is prohibited unless an administrative licence for that purpose has been issued, and (ii)
         only one licence is granted by the national authorities in respect of each of the games of chance authorised.
      
Furthermore, it is apparent from the case-file in the main proceedings as supplied to the Court by the referring court that
         there is no possibility at all of offering games of chance interactively via the internet in the Netherlands.
      
De Lotto is a non-profit-making foundation governed by private law which holds a licence for the organisation of sports-related
         prize competitions, the lottery and numbers games. Its objects, according to its constitution, are the collection of funds
         by means of the organisation of games of chance and the distribution of those funds among institutions working in the public
         interest, particularly in the fields of sport, physical education, general welfare, public health and culture.
      
The Ladbrokes companies are engaged in the organisation of sports-related prize competitions and are particularly well known
         for their bookmaking business. They offer a number of mainly sports-related games of chance on their internet site. They also
         offer the possibility of participating via a freephone number in the betting activities which they organise. The companies
         do not physically carry on any activity in the Netherlands.
      
De Lotto alleged that the Ladbrokes companies were, via the internet, offering games of chance to persons residing in the
         Netherlands for which they did not have the requisite licence under the Wok, and made an application for interim relief to
         the Rechtbank Arnhem (District Court, Arnhem) for the Ladbrokes companies to be required to put an end to that activity.
      
By judgment of January 2003, the Rechtbank judge hearing the application for interim relief allowed the application and
         ordered the Ladbrokes companies to take steps to block access to their internet site for persons residing in the Netherlands
         and to make it impossible for such persons to participate in telephone betting. Those measures were confirmed by the judgments
         of the Gerechtshof te Arnhem (Regional Court of Appeal, Arnhem) and the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden (Supreme Court) of September
         and February 2005, respectively.
      
On February 2003, De Lotto also issued proceedings against the Ladbrokes companies in a substantive action before the Rechtbank
         Arnhem. In its application, De Lotto sought confirmation of the coercive measures imposed on those companies by the judge
         who had heard the application for interim relief. By decision of August 2005, the Rechtbank allowed De Lotto’s application
         and ordered the Ladbrokes companies, on pain of imposition of a periodic penalty, to maintain the measures blocking access
         to games of chance via the internet or by telephone for persons residing in the Netherlands. That decision was upheld by the
         judgment of the Gerechtshof te Arnhem of October 2006; the Ladbrokes companies therefore appealed in cassation to the referring
         court.
      
The Hoge Raad der Nederlanden took the view that an interpretation of European Union law was required to enable it to determine
         the dispute before it, and decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court of Justice for
         a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Does a restrictive national gaming policy which is aimed at channelling the propensity to gamble and which in fact contributes
         to the achievement of the objectives pursued by the national legislation in question, namely the curbing of gambling addiction
         and the prevention of fraud, inasmuch as, by reason of the regulated offer of games of chance, participation in gambling activities
         occurs on a (much) more limited scale than would be the case if there were no national regulatory system, satisfy the condition
         set out in the case-law of the Court of Justice of the European Communities, particularly in the judgment in Case C‑243/Gambelli and Others [2003] ECR I‑13031, that such restrictions must limit betting activities in a consistent and systematic manner, even where
         the licence-holder/s is/are permitted to make the games of chance which they offer attractive by introducing new games, to
         bring the games which they offer to the notice of a wide public by means of advertising and thereby to keep (potential) gamblers
         away from the unlawful offer of games of chance (see Joined Cases C‑338/04, C‑359/and C‑360/Placanica and Others [2007] ECR I‑1891, paragraph 55, in fine)?
      
(2)      (a)   Assuming that national legislation governing gaming policy is compatible with Article EC, is it for the national courts
         to determine, on every occasion on which they apply that legislation in practice in an actual case, whether the measure to
         be imposed, such as an order that a particular website be made inaccessible to residents of the Member State concerned by
         means of software designed for that purpose, in order to prevent them from participating in the games of chance offered thereon,
         in itself and as such satisfies the condition, in the specific circumstances of the case, that it should actually serve the
         objectives which might justify the national legislation in question, and whether the restriction resulting from that legislation
         and its application on the freedom to provide services is not disproportionate in the light of those objectives?
      
         (b)   In answering Question 2a, does it make any difference if the measure to be implemented is not ordered and imposed in the context
         of the application of the national legislation by the authorities, but in the context of a civil action in which an organiser
         of games of chance operating with the required licence requests imposition of the measure on the ground that an unlawful act
         has been committed in its regard under civil law, inasmuch as the opposing party contravened the national legislation in question,
         thereby gaining an unfair advantage over the party operating with the required licence?
      
(3)      Should Article EC be interpreted in such a way that the application of that article results in the competent authority
         of a Member State being unable, on the basis of the closed licensing system that exists in that State for the provision of
         gaming services, to prohibit a service provider which has already been granted a licence in another Member State for the online
         provision of such services from also offering those services online in the first Member State?’
      
 Consideration of the questions referred
 The first question
By its first question, the national court asks, in essence, whether national legislation such as that at issue in the main
         proceedings, which seeks to curb addiction to games of chance and to combat fraud, and which in fact contributes to the achievement
         of those objectives, can be regarded as limiting betting activities in a consistent and systematic manner even where the holder(s)
         of an exclusive licence are entitled to make what they are offering on the market attractive by introducing new games and
         by means of advertising.
      
Article EC requires the abolition of all restrictions on the freedom to provide services, even if those restrictions apply
         without distinction to national providers of services and to those from other Member States, when they are liable to prohibit,
         impede or render less advantageous the activities of a service provider established in another Member State where it lawfully
         provides similar services. The freedom to provide services is for the benefit of both providers and recipients of services
         (Case C‑42/Liga Portuguesa de Futebol Profissional and Bwin International [2009] ECR I‑0000, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
It is common ground that the legislation of a Member State under which exclusive rights to organise and promote games of chance
         are conferred on a single operator, and which prohibits any other operator, including an operator established in another Member
         State, from offering via the internet services within the scope of that regime in the territory of the first Member State,
         constitutes a restriction on the freedom to provide services enshrined in Article EC (Liga Portuguesa de Futebol Profissional and Bwin International, paragraph 52, and Case C‑203/Sporting Exchange [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 24).
      
However, it is necessary to assess whether such a restriction may be allowed as a derogation expressly provided for by Articles
         EC and EC, applicable in this area by virtue of Article EC, or justified, in accordance with the case-law of the
         Court, by overriding reasons in the public interest (see, to that effect, Liga Portuguesa de Futebol Profissional and Bwin International, paragraph 55).
      
Article 46(1) EC allows restrictions justified on grounds of public policy, public security or public health. A certain number
         of overriding reasons in the public interest which may also justify such restrictions have been recognised by the case-law
         of the Court, including, in particular, the objectives of consumer protection and the prevention of both fraud and incitement
         to squander money on gambling, as well as the general need to preserve public order (Liga Portuguesa de Futebol Profissional and Bwin International, paragraph 56).
      
In that context, moral, religious or cultural factors, as well as the morally and financially harmful consequences for the
         individual and for society associated with betting and gaming, may serve to justify a margin of discretion for the national
         authorities, sufficient to enable them to determine what is required in order to ensure consumer protection and the preservation
         of public order (Gambelli and Others, paragraph 63, and Placanica and Others, paragraph 47).
      
The Member States are free to set the objectives of their policy on betting and gambling according to their own scale of values
         and, where appropriate, to define in detail the level of protection sought. The restrictive measures that they impose must,
         however, satisfy the conditions laid down in the case-law of the Court, in particular as regards their proportionality (see,
         to that effect, Placanica and Others, paragraph 48, and Liga Portuguesa de Futebol Profissional and Bwin International, paragraph 59).
      
Specifically, restrictions based on the reasons referred to in paragraph of the present judgment must be suitable for achieving
         those objectives, inasmuch as they must serve to limit betting activities in a consistent and systematic manner (see, to that
         effect, Gambelli and Others, paragraph 67).
      
According to the case-law of the Court, it is for the national courts to determine whether Member States’ legislation actually
         serves the objectives which might justify it and whether the restrictions it imposes do not appear disproportionate in the
         light of those objectives (Gambelli and Others, paragraph 75, and Placanica and Others, paragraph 58).
      
In the present case, the wording of the first question put by the referring court shows that the objectives of the Wok are
         clearly identified by that court, namely protection of consumers by the curbing of addiction to games of chance and prevention
         of fraud, and that, in the referring court’s view, the national legislation at issue in the main proceedings does in fact
         serve those objectives and does not go beyond what is required in order to achieve them. 
      
The referring court nevertheless has doubts as to the consistent and systematic nature of the national legislation, since
         the legislation pursues the objectives referred to in the preceding paragraph while allowing economic operators who have exclusive
         rights to organise games of chance in the Netherlands, such as De Lotto, to offer new games and to use advertising to make
         what they are offering on the market attractive.
      
As the Court has already held, it is possible that a policy of controlled expansion in the betting and gaming sector may be
         entirely consistent with the objective of drawing players away from clandestine betting and gaming – and, as such, activities
         which are prohibited – to activities which are authorised and regulated. In order to achieve that objective, authorised operators
         must represent a reliable, but at the same time attractive, alternative to a prohibited activity. This may as such necessitate
         the offer of an extensive range of games, advertising on a certain scale and the use of new distribution techniques (Placanica and Others, paragraph 55).
      
While it is true that the grounds of the judgment in Placanica and Others refer solely to the objective of crime prevention in the betting and gaming sector, whereas, in the present case, the Netherlands
         legislation is also designed to curb gambling addiction, the fact remains that those two objectives must be considered together,
         since they relate both to consumer protection and to the preservation of public order (see, to that effect, Case C‑275/Schindler [1994] ECR I‑1039, paragraph 58; Case C‑124/Läärä and Others [1999] ECR I‑6067, paragraph 33; and Case C‑67/Zenatti [1999] ECR I‑7289, paragraph 31).
      
It is for the national court to determine, in the light of the facts of the dispute before it, whether, in so far as the national
         legislation at issue in the main proceedings allows the holders of an exclusive licence to offer new games and to advertise,
         it may be regarded as forming part of a policy of controlled expansion in the betting and gaming sector, aiming, in fact,
         to channel the propensity to gamble into activities that are lawful.
      
If it were established that the Kingdom of the Netherlands is pursuing a policy of substantially expanding betting and gaming,
         by excessively inciting and encouraging consumers to participate in such activities, principally with a view to obtaining
         funds, and that, for that reason, the financing of social activities through a levy on the proceeds of authorised games of
         chance constitutes not an incidental beneficial consequence but the real justification for the restrictive policy adopted
         by that Member State, it would have to be concluded that such a policy does not limit betting and gaming activities in a consistent
         and systematic manner and is not, therefore, suitable for achieving the objective of curbing consumer addiction to such activities.
      
In the context of that assessment, it is, specifically, for the national court to determine whether unlawful gaming activities
         may constitute a problem in the Netherlands and whether the expansion of authorised and regulated activities would be liable
         to solve such a problem.
      
Since the objective of protecting consumers from gambling addiction is, in principle, difficult to reconcile with a policy
         of expanding games of chance characterised, inter alia, by the creation of new games and by the advertising of such games,
         such a policy cannot be regarded as being consistent unless the scale of unlawful activity is significant and the measures
         adopted are aimed at channelling consumers’ propensity to gamble into activities that are lawful.
      
The fact that demand for games of chance in the Netherlands has already increased noticeably, particularly at a clandestine
         level – assuming that is established as De Lotto indicated at the hearing – must be taken into consideration.
      
The national legislation at issue in the main proceedings aims not only to combat fraud and other crimes in the sphere of
         games of chance, but also to safeguard consumer protection. Thus, a fair balance has to be drawn between demand for the controlled
         expansion of authorised games of chance with the aim of making the provision of such games attractive for the public and the
         need to reduce as far as possible consumer addiction to such games.
      
Some of the evidence in the case-file submitted to the Court may be relevant for the purposes of that assessment.
      
According to the terms of the decision in relation to De Lotto’s exclusive licence to organise sports-related prize competitions,
         that ‘foundation shall ensure that marketing and advertising activities are sensible and balanced in content, and shall seek,
         in particular, to combat disproportionate participation in games of chance organised pursuant to the present decision’.
      
Furthermore, by letter of June 2004, the Netherlands Minister for Justice requested that licensees ‘severely restrict the
         amount of advertising and give shape and substance to that restrictive policy on advertising by drawing up a code of conduct
         and on advertising for operators of games of chance that is to be applicable to all of them’. That code came into force in
         the Netherlands on February 2006.
      
That evidence may establish an intention on the part of the national authorities narrowly to circumscribe the expansion of
         games of chance in the Netherlands.
      
However, it is for the national court to determine whether the development of the market for games of chance in the Netherlands
         is such as to demonstrate that the expansion of games of chance is being supervised effectively by the Netherlands authorities,
         both with regard to the scale of advertising undertaken by holders of exclusive licences and with regard to the latter’s creation
         of new games, and, in consequence, to reconcile appropriately the simultaneous achievement of the objectives pursued by the
         national legislation.
      
In the light of the foregoing considerations, the answer to the first question is that national legislation, such as that
         at issue in the main proceedings, which seeks to curb addiction to games of chance and to combat fraud, and which in fact
         contributes to the achievement of those objectives, can be regarded as limiting betting activities in a consistent and systematic
         manner even where the holder(s) of an exclusive licence are entitled to make what they are offering on the market attractive
         by introducing new games and by means of advertising. It is for the national court to determine whether unlawful gaming activities
         constitute a problem in the Member State concerned which might be solved by the expansion of authorised and regulated activities,
         and whether that expansion is on such a scale as to make it impossible to reconcile with the objective of curbing such addiction.
      
 The second question
By its second question, the national court asks, in essence, whether, for the purpose of applying legislation of a Member
         State on games of chance which is compatible with Article EC, it is for the national courts to determine, in each case,
         whether the implementing measure intended to ensure compliance with that legislation is suitable for achieving the objective
         of that legislation and is compatible with the principle of proportionality. The national court also asks whether it makes
         any difference if the measure to be taken is required not by the public authorities but by an individual in the context of
         a civil action.
      
As stated in paragraph of the present judgment, it is for the national courts to determine whether Member States’ legislation
         which restricts a fundamental freedom enshrined in the Treaty is suitable for achieving the public interest objectives that
         might justify it, and whether the restrictions it imposes do not appear disproportionate in the light of those objectives.
      
The wording of the second question is based on the premiss that the Netherlands legislation on games of chance is compatible
         with Article EC.
      
In the case at issue in the main proceedings, the restriction on the freedom to provide services enshrined in Article EC
         derives directly from the provisions of the Wok, in so far as, under the latter, exclusive rights to organise and promote
         games of chance are conferred on a single operator and any other operator, including an operator established in another Member
         State, is prohibited from offering via the internet services within the scope of that regime in the territory of the Member
         State concerned.
      
A measure which implements the national legislation at issue in the main proceedings, such as the injunction which the judge
         who heard the application for interim relief imposed on the Ladbrokes companies in order to block access to their internet
         site for persons residing in the Netherlands and to make it impossible for such persons to participate in telephone betting,
         is an indispensable element of the protection in respect of games of chance that is intended to be provided by the Netherlands
         within its own territory and cannot, therefore, be regarded as an additional restriction over and above that which arises
         directly from the provisions of the Wok.
      
That implementing measure merely ensures the effectiveness of Netherlands legislation concerning games of chance. Without
         such a measure, the prohibition laid down by the Wok would be ineffective, since economic operators who are not licensed by
         the national authorities would be able to provide games of chance on the Netherlands market.
      
Since the implementing measure laid down by the national legislation does not, in itself, impose additional restrictions on
         the market, consideration of its conformity with European Union law is closely linked to the national court’s examination
         of the compatibility of the Wok with Article EC.
      
In those circumstances, contrary to what is submitted by the Ladbrokes companies, there is no further need to consider whether
         the implementing measure is actually justified by an overriding reason in the public interest, whether it is suitable for
         achieving the objectives of limiting addiction to gambling and preventing fraud or whether it does not go beyond what is necessary
         to achieve those objectives.
      
Moreover, whether that implementing measure was adopted as a result of action by the public authorities to ensure compliance
         with national legislation or of an application by an individual in the context of a civil action to protect his rights under
         that legislation has no bearing on the outcome of the dispute before the national court. 
      
The subject-matter of that dispute concerns the application of Article EC, which confers on individuals rights which are
         enforceable by them and which the national courts must protect (see Case 33/van Binsbergen [1974] ECR 1299, paragraph 27, and Case C‑208/ITC [2007] ECR I‑181, paragraph 67).
      
It is for the national courts, irrespective of the procedure by which the matter has been brought before them, to take any
         measures necessary to ensure that economic operators may exercise their freedom to provide services in a Member State and
         in situations falling within the scope of European Union law.
      
It follows from the foregoing observations that the answer to the second question is that, for the purpose of applying legislation
         of a Member State on games of chance which is compatible with Article EC, the national courts are not required to determine,
         in each case, whether the implementing measure intended to ensure compliance with that legislation is suitable for achieving
         the objective of that legislation and is compatible with the principle of proportionality, in so far as that measure is necessary
         to ensure the effectiveness of that legislation and does not include any additional restriction over and above that which
         arises from the legislation itself. Whether that implementing measure was adopted as a result of action by the public authorities
         to ensure compliance with national legislation or of an application by an individual in the context of a civil action to protect
         his rights under that legislation has no bearing on the outcome of the dispute before the national court.
      
 The third question
By its third question, the national court asks, in essence, whether Article EC must be interpreted as precluding legislation
         of a Member State, such as the legislation at issue in the main proceedings, under which exclusive rights to organise and
         promote games of chance are conferred on a single operator, and which prohibits any other operator, including an operator
         established in another Member State, from offering via the internet services within the scope of that regime in the territory
         of the first Member State.
      
That question falls within the same legal framework as the first question referred in the case giving rise to the judgment
         in Sporting Exchange and is identical to it.
      
The Ladbrokes companies submit that they are holders of a licence issued by the authorities of the United Kingdom of Great
         Britain and Northern Ireland which allows them to offer sports-related prize competitions and other games of chance via the
         internet and by telephone, and are subject in the United Kingdom to very strict legislation for the prevention of fraud and
         of addiction to games of chance. They also allege that, where a Member State imposes restrictions relating to the organisation
         of such games, it must take into account the fact that the public interest justifying the restriction in question is already
         protected by the rules laid down by the Member State in which the provider of services is licensed to operate such games.
         There should be no duplication of controls and safeguards.
      
In that regard, it should be noted that the internet gaming industry has not been the subject of harmonisation within the
         European Union. A Member State is therefore entitled to take the view that the mere fact that an operator such as the Ladbrokes
         companies lawfully offers services in that sector via the internet in another Member State, in which it is established and
         where it is in principle already subject to statutory conditions and controls on the part of the competent authorities in
         that State, is not a sufficient assurance that national consumers will be protected against the risks of fraud and crime,
         in the light of the difficulties liable to be encountered in such a context by the authorities of the Member State of establishment
         in assessing the professional qualities and integrity of operators (see, to that effect, Liga Portuguesa de Futebol Profissional and Bwin International, paragraph 69).
      
In addition, because of the lack of direct contact between consumer and operator, games of chance accessible via the internet
         involve different and more substantial risks of fraud by operators against consumers compared with the traditional markets
         for such games (Liga Portuguesa de Futebol Profissional and Bwin International, paragraph 70).
      
The fact that an operator who offers games of chance via the internet does not pursue an active sales policy in the Member
         State concerned, particularly because he is not making use of advertising in that State, cannot be regarded as running counter
         to the considerations set out in the two preceding paragraphs. Those considerations are based solely on the effects of the
         mere accessibility of games of chance via the internet and not on the potentially different consequences of the active or
         passive provision of services by that operator.
      
It follows from this that, in the light of the specific features associated with the provision of games of chance via the
         internet, the restriction at issue in the main proceedings may be regarded as justified by the objective of combating fraud
         and crime (see, to that effect, Liga Portuguesa de Futebol Profissional and Bwin International, paragraph 72).
      
Therefore, the answer to the third question is that Article EC must be interpreted as not precluding legislation of a Member
         State, such as the legislation at issue in the main proceedings, under which exclusive rights to organise and promote games
         of chance are conferred on a single operator, and which prohibits any other operator, including an operator established in
         another Member State, from offering via the internet services within the scope of that regime in the territory of the first
         Member State.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      National legislation, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which seeks to curb addiction to games of chance and
            to combat fraud, and which in fact contributes to the achievement of those objectives, can be regarded as limiting betting
            activities in a consistent and systematic manner even where the holder(s) of an exclusive licence are entitled to make what
            they are offering on the market attractive by introducing new games and by means of advertising. It is for the national court
            to determine whether unlawful gaming activities constitute a problem in the Member State concerned which might be solved by
            the expansion of authorised and regulated activities, and whether that expansion is on such a scale as to make it impossible
            to reconcile with the objective of curbing such addiction.
2.      For the purpose of applying legislation of a Member State on games of chance which is compatible with Article EC, the national
            courts are not required to determine, in each case, whether the implementing measure intended to ensure compliance with that
            legislation is suitable for achieving the objective of that legislation and is compatible with the principle of proportionality,
            in so far as that measure is necessary to ensure the effectiveness of that legislation and does not include any additional
            restriction over and above that which arises from the legislation itself. Whether that implementing measure was adopted as
            a result of action by the public authorities to ensure compliance with national legislation or of an application by an individual
            in the context of a civil action to protect his rights under that legislation has no bearing on the outcome of the dispute
            before the national court. 
3.      Article EC must be interpreted as not precluding legislation of a Member State, such as the legislation at issue in the
            main proceedings, under which exclusive rights to organise and promote games of chance are conferred on a single operator,
            and which prohibits any other operator, including an operator established in another Member State, from offering via the internet
            services within the scope of that regime in the territory of the first Member State. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Dutch.
      
Top  
 