
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-333/Commission of the European CommunitiesvKingdom of Spain
«(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 98/81/EC – Failure to transpose within the prescribed period)»
Opinion of Advocate General Léger delivered on January I - Judgment of the Court (Second Chamber), March I - Summary of the Judgment
Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Examination of merits by the Court – Situation to be taken into consideration – Situation at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion(Art. EC)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)March (1)
((Failure by a Member State to fulfil its obligations – Directive 98/81/EC – Failure to transpose within the prescribed period))
In Case C-333/01, 
            
 Commission of the European Communities,  represented by G. Valero Jordana, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant, 
v
 Kingdom of Spain,  represented by N. Díaz Abad, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
defendant, 
APPLICATION for a declaration that, by failing to adopt, or to notify to the Commission, the laws, regulations and administrative
            provisions necessary to comply with Council Directive 98/81/EC of October amending Directive 90/219/EEC on the contained
            use of genetically modified micro-organisms (OJ L 330, p. 13), the Kingdom of Spain has failed to fulfil its obligations
            under that directive,
            
THE COURT (Second Chamber),,
composed of: R. Schintgen, President of the Chamber, V. Skouris and N. Colneric (Rapporteur), Judges, 
            
Advocate General: P. Léger, Registrar: R. Grass, 
            
having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 2003, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
By application lodged at the Court Registry on September 2001, the Commission of the European Commuities brought an action
         under Article EC for a declaration that, by failing to adopt, or to notify to the Commission, the laws, regulations and
         administrative provisions necessary to comply with Council Directive 98/81/EC of October amending Directive 90/219/EEC
         on the contained use of genetically modified micro-organisms (OJ L 330, p. 13, hereinafter  
         the Directive), the Kingdom of Spain has failed to fulfil its obligations thereunder. 
         
            
Under Article 2(1) of the Directive, Member States were to bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions
         necessary to comply with the Directive not later than months after the date of its entry into force and forthwith to inform
         the Commission thereof.  The Directive entered into force on December 1998. 
         
            
Under Article 2(2) of the Directive, Member States were to communicate to the Commission the text of the main provisions of
         national law which they adopted in the field governed by the Directive. 
         
            
Taking the view that the Directive had not been transposed into Spanish law within the period prescribed, the Commission initiated
         the infringement procedure. On January 2001, having given the Kingdom of Spain formal notice to submit its observations,
         the Commission issued a reasoned opinion calling on that Member State to take the measures necessary to comply with the reasoned
         opinion within two months of its notification. 
         
            
The Spanish authorities replied, on April 2001, that an initial text of a preliminary draft law would be finalised at the
         end of the month of April 2001. 
         
            
Having received no further communication from the Kingdom of Spain regarding the progress of that preliminary draft law, the
         Commission decided to bring the present action. 
         
            
Although the Spanish Government seeks the dismissal of the action, it does not dispute that it has not transposed the Directive
         within the period laid down. 
         
            
It is settled case-law that the question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations must be determined by
         reference to the situation prevailing in the Member State at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion (see,
          
          inter alia , Case C-71/Commission  v  
          Germany  [2001] ECR I-5811, paragraph 29, and Case C-110/Commission  v  
          Austria  [2001] ECR I-7545, paragraph 13). 
         
            
In the present case, the Directive was not transposed within the period laid down by the reasoned opinion.  Accordingly, the
         Commission's action must be considered well founded. 
         
            
It must therefore be held that, by failing to adopt the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply
         with the Directive, the Kingdom of Spain has failed to fulfil its obligations thereunder. 
         
Costs
            
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party's pleadings.  Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Kingdom of Spain has
         been unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs.  
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Second Chamber)
hereby:  
         
1.
 Declares that, by failing to adopt the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Council Directive
               98/81/EC of October amending Directive 90/219/EEC on the contained use of genetically modified micro-organisms, the
               Kingdom of Spain has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive; 
2.
 Orders the Kingdom of Spain to pay the costs. 
Schintgen
Skouris 
Colneric 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on March 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
R. Schintgen  
Registrar
President of the Second Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: Spanish.
Top  
 