
Case C-410/Polska Telefonia Cyfrowa sp. z o.o.
v
Prezes Urzędu Komunikacji Elektronicznej
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Sąd Najwyższy)
(Act concerning the conditions of accession to the European Union – Article – Directive 2002/21/EC – Commission guidelines – No publication in the Official Journal of the European Union in the language of a Member State – Enforceability)
Summary of the Judgment
Accession of new Member States to the Communities – Act of Accession – Commission guidelines adopted pursuant to Directive
            2002/– No publication in the Official Journal in the language of a new Member State, an official language of the European
            Union – Whether this may be relied upon as against individuals
(Act of Accession, Art. 58; European Parliament and Council Directive 2002/21, Arts and 16)
Article of the Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic
         of Cyprus, the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the Republic
         of Poland, the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak Republic to the European Union (Act of Accession 2003) and the adjustments
         to the Treaties on which the European Union is founded must be interpreted as not precluding a national regulatory authority
         (‘NRA’) from referring to the Commission Guidelines of on market analysis and the assessment of significant market power
         under the Community regulatory framework for electronic communications networks and services in a decision by which that authority
         imposes certain regulatory obligations on an operator of electronic communications services, notwithstanding the fact that
         those guidelines have not been published in the Official Journal of the European Union in the language of the Member State in question, even though that language is an official language of the Union.
      
Articles and of Directive 2002/21, on a common regulatory framework for electronic communications networks and services,
         which are expressly addressed to the NRAs, constitute the legal basis for those Guidelines. They do not lay down any obligation
         capable of being imposed, directly or indirectly, on individuals. Accordingly, the fact that those guidelines have not been
         published in the language of a Member State in the Official Journal of the European Union does not prevent the NRA of that Member State from referring to them in a decision addressed to an individual.
      
Article of the Act of Accession does not require the Council, the Commission or the European Central Bank to translate
         into the nine new languages listed in that provision all the acts of the institutions and the European Central Bank adopted
         before the accession of the new Member States. Article 58, which lays down the rules on the use of languages and on the conditions
         concerning the publication of acts adopted by the institutions and the European Central Bank before that accession, merely
         provides that, of those acts, only measures drawn up in languages of the new Member States which constitute official EU languages
         are to be authentic, as from accession, under the same conditions as legislation drawn up in the other official languages
         and are to be published in the Official Journal of the European Union whenever that legislation was to be so published. Accordingly, Article implies that the Member States and the institutions
         are to select acts for publication in the Official Journal and does not rule out the possibility that certain acts may not
         be published. Consequently, Article of the Act of Accession does not require the Polish-language version of the Guidelines
         of to be published in the Official Journal.
      
(see paras 31, 34, 37, 39, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
May (*)
      
(Act concerning the conditions of accession to the European Union – Article – Directive 2002/21/EC – Commission guidelines – No publication in the Official Journal of the European Union in the language of a Member State – Enforceability)
In Case C‑410/09,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, from the Sąd Najwyższy (Poland), made by decision of October 2009,
         received at the Court on the same day, in the proceedings
      
Polska Telefonia Cyfrowa sp. z o.o.
v
Prezes Urzędu Komunikacji Elektronicznej,
intervening party:
Prezes Urzędu Ochrony Konkurencji i Konsumentów,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, President of the Chamber, A. Arabadjiev, A. Rosas, A. Ó Caoimh and P. Lindh (Rapporteur),
         Judges, 
      
Advocate General: P. Cruz Villalón,
Registrar: B. Fülöp, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on November 2010,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Polska Telefonia Cyfrowa sp. z o.o., by M. Korcz and S. Dudzik, radcy prawni,
–        Prezes Urzędu Komunikacji Elektronicznej, by M. Kołtoński and D. Pawłowska, radcy prawni,
–        the Polish Government, by M. Szpunar, acting as Agent,
–        the Czech Government, by M. Smolek, acting as Agent,
–        Ireland, by D. O’Hagan, acting as Agent,
–        European Commission, by G. Braun and K. Mojzesowicz, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article of the Act concerning the conditions of
         accession of the Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Cyprus, the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of
         Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak
         Republic to the European Union and the adjustments to the Treaties on which the European Union is founded (OJ L 236,
         p. 33; ‘the Act of Accession’). 
      
The reference was made in proceedings between Polska Telefonia Cyfrowa sp. z o.o. (‘PTC’) and the Prezes Urzędu Komunikacji
         Elektronicznej (President of the Office for electronic communications; ‘the Prezes’) concerning certain legislative obligations
         imposed on PTC by the Prezes. 
      
 Legal context
 The Act of Accession
Under Article of the Act of Accession:
      
‘From the date of accession, the provisions of the original Treaties and the acts adopted by the institutions and the European
         Central Bank before accession shall be binding on the new Member States and shall apply in those States under the conditions
         laid down in those Treaties and in this Act.’
      
Article of the Act of Accession provides: 
      
‘The texts of the acts of the institutions, and of the European Central Bank, adopted before accession and drawn up by the
         Council, the Commission or the European Central Bank in the Czech, Estonian, Hungarian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Maltese, Polish,
         Slovak and Slovenian languages shall, from the date of accession, be authentic under the same conditions as the texts drawn
         up in the present languages. They shall be published in the Official Journal of the European Union if the texts in the present languages were so published.’
      
 Regulation No 1/Under Article of Council Regulation No of April determining the languages to be used by the European Economic
         Community (OJ, English Special Edition 1952-(I), p. 59), as amended by the Act of Accession (‘Regulation No 1/58’),
         the official languages of the Union are: 
      
‘Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Estonian, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Hungarian, Italian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Maltese,
         Polish, Portuguese, Slovak, Slovenian, Spanish and Swedish.’ 
      
Article of Regulation No 1/provides:
      
‘Regulations and other documents of general application shall be drafted in the official languages.’
Article of that regulation states:
      
‘The Official Journal of the European Union shall be published in the official languages.’
      
Under Article of Regulation No 1/58:
      
‘If a Member State has more than one official language, the language to be used shall, at the request of such State, be governed
         by the general rules of its law.’
      
 Directive 2002/21/EC 
Article 1(1) of Directive 2002/21/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of March on a common regulatory
         framework for electronic communications networks and services (‘Framework Directive’) (OJ L 108, p. 33) reads as follows:
      
‘This Directive establishes a harmonised framework for the regulation of electronic communications services, electronic communications
         networks, associated facilities and associated services. It lays down tasks of national regulatory authorities and establishes
         a set of procedures to ensure the harmonised application of the regulatory framework throughout the [European Union].’
      
Paragraphs to of Article of Directive 2002/21, which concerns the market definition procedure, provide: 
      
‘1.      After public consultation and consultation with national regulatory authorities the Commission shall adopt a recommendation
         on relevant product and service markets (hereinafter “the recommendation”). The recommendation shall identify in accordance
         with Annex I hereto those product and service markets within the electronic communications sector, the characteristics of
         which may be such as to justify the imposition of regulatory obligations set out in the Specific Directives, without prejudice
         to markets that may be defined in specific cases under competition law. The Commission shall define markets in accordance
         with the principles of competition law.
      
The Commission shall regularly review the recommendation.
2.      The Commission shall publish, at the latest on the date of entry into force of this Directive, guidelines for market analysis
         and the assessment of significant market power (hereinafter “the guidelines”) which shall be in accordance with the principles
         of competition law.
      
3.      National regulatory authorities shall, taking the utmost account of the recommendation and the guidelines, define relevant
         markets appropriate to national circumstances, in particular relevant geographic markets within their territory, in accordance
         with the principles of competition law. National regulatory authorities shall follow the procedures referred to in Articles
         and before defining the markets that differ from those defined in the recommendation.’
      
Paragraphs to of Article of Directive 2002/21, which is entitled ‘Market analysis procedure’, provide: 
      
‘1.      As soon as possible after the adoption of the recommendation or any updating thereof, national regulatory authorities shall
         carry out an analysis of the relevant markets, taking the utmost account of the guidelines. Member States shall ensure that
         this analysis is carried out, where appropriate, in collaboration with the national competition authorities.
      
2.      Where a national regulatory authority [“NRA”] is required under Articles 16, 17, or of Directive 2002/22/EC [“the Universal
         Service Directive”], or Articles or of Directive 2002/19/EC [“the Access Directive”] to determine whether to impose, maintain,
         amend or withdraw obligations on undertakings, it shall determine on the basis of its market analysis referred to in paragraph
         of this Article whether a relevant market is effectively competitive.
      
3.      Where an [NRA] concludes that the market is effectively competitive, it shall not impose or maintain any of the specific regulatory
         obligations referred to in paragraph of this Article. In cases where sector specific regulatory obligations already exist,
         it shall withdraw such obligations placed on undertakings in that relevant market. An appropriate period of notice shall be
         given to parties affected by such a withdrawal of obligations.
      
4.      Where an [NRA] determines that a relevant market is not effectively competitive, it shall identify undertakings with significant
         market power on that market in accordance with Article and … shall on such undertakings impose appropriate specific regulatory
         obligations referred to in paragraph of this Article or maintain or amend such obligations where they already exist.
      
5.      In the case of transnational markets identified in the Decision referred to in Article 15(4), the [NRAs] concerned shall jointly
         conduct the market analysis taking the utmost account of the guidelines and decide on any imposition, maintenance, amendment
         or withdrawal of regulatory obligations referred to in paragraph of this Article in a concerted fashion.’
      
Pursuant to Article 15(2) of Directive 2002/21, the Commission adopted guidelines on market analysis and the assessment of
         significant market power under the Community regulatory framework for electronic communications networks and services (OJ
         C 165, p 6; ‘the Guidelines’). 
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
PTC is one of the principal telecommunications operators in Poland. 
      
On July 2006, the Prezes identified PTC as having significant market power in the market for the provision of voice call
         termination services and decided to impose on PTC certain regulatory obligations.
      
PTC’s action contesting the Prezes’ decision was dismissed by the courts, both at first instance and on appeal. In the context
         of an appeal brought before the Sąd Najwyższy (Polish Supreme Court), PTC claims that the Guidelines, on which that decision
         is based, cannot be relied upon against it since they have not been published in Polish in the Official Journal of the European Union. 
      
The Sąd Najwyższy is uncertain as to the inferences to be drawn from that fact. 
      
The Sąd Najwyższy observes that the Court has held that Article of the Act of Accession precludes obligations contained
         in Community legislation which has not been published in the Official Journal of the European Union in the language of a new Member State, where that language is an official language of the European Union, from being imposed
         on individuals in that State, even though those persons could have become acquainted with that legislation by other means
         (Case C‑161/Skoma-Lux [2007] ECR I‑10841, paragraphs to 59, and Case C‑560/Balbiino [2009] ECR I‑4447, paragraph 30). 
      
That case-law leads the Sąd Najwyższy to find that Polish telecommunications undertakings are in a less favourable situation
         than undertakings established in Member States other than the Republic of Poland that are in a position to acquaint themselves
         with the guidelines in the official language of those Member States.
      
The Sąd Najwyższy wonders whether the term ‘obligations contained in Community legislation’, used in paragraph of Skoma-Lux, covers only regulations and decisions which, by their very nature, place obligations on individuals, or whether it also
         covers other acts of EU institutions affecting individuals’ rights or obligations, which are governed by provisions of national
         law implementing provisions of Community directives. In that regard, the Sąd Najwyższy notes that, in Case C‑345/Heinrich [2009] ECR I-1659, the Court appears to have interpreted broadly the concept of ‘Community legislation’, a notion which encompasses
         all acts adopted by the EU institutions. The Sąd Najwyższy also notes that it would appear to follow from Case C‑158/ROM-projecten [2007] ECR I-that it is not only in the case of EU legal measures which impose obligations on individuals that publication
         is compulsory: rather, in order for such publication to be compulsory, it is sufficient for the measure to impose an obligation
         on a Member State to take specific action in relation to individuals.
      
The Sąd Najwyższy observes that the Guidelines give rise to legitimate legal expectations on the part of persons whose
         situation falls within their scope. Moreover, the Commission’s adoption of those guidelines comes about directly as a result
         of an obligation under Article 15(2) of Directive 2002/21. Articles 15(3) and 16(1) of that directive provide that the NRAs
         must take ‘the utmost account’ of the guidelines, both for the definition of the relevant markets and for their analysis.
      
In those circumstances, the Sąd Najwyższy decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following question to the Court
         for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Can the Guidelines, of which, under Article 16(1) of Directive 2002/21, the NRA should take the utmost account when
         carrying out an analysis of the relevant markets, be applicable to individuals established in a given Member State, where
         those guidelines have not been published in the Official Journal of the European Union in the language of that State, but that language is an official language of the European Union?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
By its question, the referring court asks, in essence, whether Article of the Act of Accession must be interpreted
         as precluding an NRA of a Member State from referring to the Guidelines in a decision by which that NRA imposes certain
         regulatory obligations on an operator of electronic communications services, where those guidelines have not been published
         in the Official Journal of the European Union in the language of the Member State in question, but that language is an official language of the European Union.
      
In order to answer this question, it is necessary to bear in mind that a fundamental principle of the EU legal order requires
         that a measure adopted by the public authorities should not be enforceable against those concerned before they have had an
         opportunity to make themselves acquainted with it (Case C-98/Racke [1979] ECR 69, paragraph 15).
      
Furthermore, under Article of the Act of Accession, measures taken by the institutions before the accession are binding
         on the new Member States and are applicable in those States with effect from the accession. On the other hand, their enforceability
         against natural and legal persons in those States is subject to the general conditions governing the implementation of Community
         law in the Member States, as laid down in the original Treaties and, in the case of the new Member States, by the Act
         of Accession itself (Skoma-Lux, paragraph 32).
      
As regards regulations of the Council or the Commission and directives of those institutions, which are addressed to all the
         Member States, it follows from Article 254(2) EC that those measures cannot produce legal effects unless they have been published
         in the Official Journal of the European Union (see, to that effect, Skoma-Lux, paragraph 33). 
      
Moreover, those measures cannot be enforced against natural and legal persons in a Member State before those persons have
         had an opportunity to make themselves acquainted with them through their proper publication in the Official Journal of the European Union (Racke, paragraph 15, and Skoma-Lux, paragraph 37).
      
Those principles must also be observed and have the same consequences where, for its implementation, EU legislation obliges
         Member States to adopt measures imposing obligations on individuals. Accordingly, national measures which, for the purposes
         of implementing EU legislation, impose obligations on individuals must be published in order for the individuals concerned
         to be able to ascertain those obligations (see, to that effect, Case C-313/Mulligan and Others [2002] ECR I-5719, paragraphs and 52). In such circumstances, it must also be possible for the individuals to determine
         the source of the national measures imposing obligations upon them. Accordingly, not only must the national legislation be
         published but also the measure of EU law which, in some circumstances, obliges the Member States to take the measures imposing
         obligations on individuals (see, to that effect, Heinrich, paragraphs to 47). 
      
Furthermore, it follows from Article of the Act of Accession, read in conjunction with Articles 4, and of Regulation
         No 1/58, that the proper publication of an EU regulation, in the case of a Member State whose language is an official language
         of the European Union, must include the publication of that measure, in that language, in the Official Journal of the European Union (Skoma-Lux, paragraph 34).
      
The Court has thus held that, where the language of a new Member State is an official language of the European Union, Article
         of the Act of Accession precludes obligations laid down in EU legislation which has not been published, in that language,
         in the Official Journal of the European Union from being imposed on individuals in that State, even though those persons could have acquainted themselves with that legislation
         by other means (see, to that effect, Skoma-Lux, paragraph 51, and Balbiino, paragraph 30).
      
In the light of the case-law referred to in paragraphs to above, which is based on the principles of legal certainty
         and non-discrimination, it is necessary to determine whether, owing to their content, the Guidelines impose obligations
         on individuals. If that proves to be the case, it will not be possible, unless those guidelines have been published in Polish
         in the Official Journal of the European Union, for them to be relied upon as against individuals in Poland.
      
Articles and of Directive 2002/21, which are expressly addressed to the NRAs, constitute the legal basis for the Guidelines. Those provisions serve as a guide for the NRAs for the purposes of defining and analysing the relevant markets
         in order to determine whether those markets must be made subject to ex ante regulation. According to point thereof, the Guidelines set out the principles for use by NRAs in the analysis of markets
         and effective competition under the regulatory framework for electronic communications. Point of those guidelines also states
         that they are intended to guide NRAs in the exercise of their new responsibilities for defining markets and assessing significant
         market power (Case C‑424/Commission v Germany [2009] ECR I‑11431, paragraphs and 76).
      
In the first three sections of the Guidelines, a summary is set out of the methods and criteria useful in defining the
         market, for assessing significant market power and for designating undertakings as having significant market power. In essence,
         this is a summary of the relevant case-law, supplemented with an overview of three Commission communications published, in
         Polish, in the Official Journal of the European Union: (i) Commission Notice on the definition of relevant market for the purposes of Community competition law (OJ C 372,
         p. 5, and the special Polish edition of the Official Journal of the European Union, Volume 1, Chapter 8, p. 155); (ii) Guidelines on the application of EEC competition rules in the telecommunications sector
         (OJ C 233, p. 2, and the special Polish edition of the Official Journal of the European Union, Volume 1, Chapter 8, p. 43); and (iii) Notice on the application of the competition rules to access agreements in the telecommunications
         sector – framework, relevant markets and principles (OJ 1998, C 265, p. 2, and the special Polish edition of the Official Journal of the European Union, Volume 1, Chapter 8, p. 255).
      
The last three sections are more directly related to the implementation of Directive 2002/21. The fourth section, which is
         entitled ‘Imposition, maintenance, amendment or withdrawal of obligations under the regulatory framework’, is designed to
         provide NRAs with guidance on the measures they should take following the analysis of the competitive nature of the market.
         The fifth and sixth sections concern, respectively, the powers of investigation and cooperation procedures for the purpose
         of market analysis, and the procedures for consultation and publication of proposed NRA decisions. As well as rehearsing the
         relevant provisions of the applicable regulatory framework, those three sections are designed to describe the working of the
         cooperation procedures between the NRAs, the national competition authorities and the Commission.
      
It follows from those factors that the Guidelines do not lay down any obligation capable of being imposed, directly or
         indirectly, on individuals. Accordingly, the fact that those guidelines have not been published in Polish in the Official Journal of the European Union does not prevent the NRA of the Republic of Poland from referring to them in a decision addressed to an individual.
      
Moreover, those guidelines were published in in the ‘C’ series of the Official Journal of the European Union. By contrast with the ‘L’ series of the Official Journal, the ‘C’ series is not intended for the publication of legally binding
         measures, but only of information, recommendations and opinions concerning the European Union. 
      
Nevertheless, PTC submits that, since those guidelines were published in in the Official Journal of the European Union, they must, in accordance with Article of the Act of Accession, also be published in the official languages of the
         new Member States, including Polish.
      
It should be pointed out, however, that Article of the Act of Accession does not require the Council, the Commission
         or the European Central Bank to translate into the nine new languages listed in that provision all the acts of the institutions
         and the European Central Bank adopted prior to the accession of the new Member States. Article 58, which lays down the rules
         on the use of languages and on the conditions concerning the publication of acts adopted by the institutions and the European
         Central Bank prior to that accession, merely provides that, of those acts, only measures which were drawn up in languages
         of the new Member States which constitute official EU languages are to be authentic, as from accession, under the same conditions
         as legislation drawn up in the other official languages and are to be published in the Official Journal of the European Union whenever that legislation was to be so published. Accordingly, Article implies that the Member States and the institutions
         are to select acts for publication in the Official Journal and does not rule out the possibility that certain acts may not
         be published. Consequently, Article of the Act of Accession does not require the Polish-language version of the Guidelines to be published in the Official Journal.
      
It should be noted, moreover, that the Court has already rejected the existence of a general principle of EU law under which
         anything that might affect the interests of an EU citizen must be drawn up in his language in all circumstances (see, to that
         effect, Case C‑361/P Kik v OHIM [2003] ECR I‑8283, paragraphs and 83).
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the question referred is that Article of the Act of Accession must be
         interpreted as not precluding an NRA from referring to the Guidelines in a decision by which that NRA imposes certain
         regulatory obligations on an operator of electronic communications services, notwithstanding the fact that those guidelines
         have not been published in the Official Journal of the European Union in the language of the Member State in question, even though that language is an official language of the European Union.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
Article of the Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic
            of Cyprus, the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the Republic
            of Poland, the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak Republic to the European Union and the adjustments to the Treaties on which
            the European Union is founded must be interpreted as not precluding an NRA from referring to the Commission Guidelines on
            market analysis and the assessment of significant market power under the Community regulatory framework for electronic communications
            networks and services in a decision by which that NRA imposes certain regulatory obligations on an operator of electronic
            communications services, notwithstanding the fact that those guidelines have not been published in the Official Journal of the European Union in the language of the Member State in question, even though that language is an official language of the Union.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Polish.
      
Top  
 