
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-392/Commission of the European CommunitiesvPortuguese Republic
«(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 75/439/EEC – Disposal of waste oils – Incomplete transposition)»
Opinion of Advocate General Stix-Hackl delivered on March I - Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber), April I - Summary of the Judgment
1..
Approximation of laws – Disposal of waste oils – Directive 75/– Obligation on the Member States to adopt legislation under which the issue to operators of the requisite permits is expressly
                     conditional upon compliance with the conditions laid down by the directive  
                  (Council Directive 75/439, as amended by Directive 87/101, Art. 6(2)) 
2..
Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Subject-matter of the dispute – Subject-matter determined in the course of the pre-litigation procedure – Adjustment of the subject-matter because of an amendment to Community law – Permissible – Conditions  (Art. EC) 
3..
Approximation of laws – Disposal of waste oils – Directive 75/– Obligation on the Member States to provide for periodical inspections of operators and the review of permits issued  (Council Directive 75/439, as amended by Directive 87/101, Art. 13) 
4..
Approximation of laws – Disposal of waste oils – Directive 75/– Obligation on the Member States periodically to convey information concerning matters learnt from application of the directive – Scope  (Council Directive 75/439, as amended by Directive 87/101, Art. 17) 
1.
 In order for Article 6(2) of Directive 75/on the disposal of waste oils to be implemented correctly, national legislation
         must expressly require, as a  
          sine qua non   for issue of a permit to use waste oils as fuel or to regenerate them, respectively, the adoption of all appropriate health
         protection measures and use of the best technology possible where the cost is not excessive. see paras 77-79, 89, 106-111, 2.
 The proper conduct of the pre-litigation procedure laid down in Article EC constitutes an essential guarantee required
         by the Treaty not only in order to protect the rights of the Member State concerned, but also to ensure that any contentious
         procedure will have a clearly defined dispute as its subject-matter. It is only on the basis of a properly conducted pre-litigation
         procedure that the contentious procedure before the Court will enable the latter to judge whether the Member State has in
         fact failed to fulfil the specific obligations which the Commission alleges it has breached. Thus, although the claims as stated in the application cannot in principle be extended beyond the infringements alleged in
         the letter of formal notice and in the operative part of the reasoned opinion, it is none the less the case that, where Community
         law is amended during the course of the pre-litigation procedure, the Commission has standing to seek a declaration that a
         Member State has failed to fulfil obligations which were created in the initial version of a directive, subsequently amended
         or repealed, and which were maintained in force under the new provisions. Conversely, the subject-matter of the dispute cannot
         be extended to obligations arising under the new version of a directive which do not correspond to those arising under the
         previous version of that directive, as otherwise it would constitute a breach of the essential procedural requirements of
         infringement proceedings. see paras 133-3.
 In order for Article of Directive 75/on the disposal of waste oils to be implemented correctly, national legislation
         must require the competent authorities to carry out periodical inspections of undertakings which regenerate waste oils or
         use them as fuel and provide that at the time of the inspections the state of technical development and/or of the environment
         will be examined with a view to revising, where necessary, permits granted to those undertakings. see paras 163, 166-167, 172, 183-186, 4.
 Article of Directive 75/on the disposal of waste oils is intended to enable both the Commission and the Member States
         to be informed on a periodic basis of the technical knowledge acquired by each of those States and of experience gained and
         results obtained through the application of the directive in the Community. The fact that a Member State has not acquired
         new technical knowledge over a certain period also constitutes a useful piece of information with which the Commission and
         the other Member States should become acquainted by virtue of Article of the directive, in particular as that article does
         not provide for any exception to the obligation to convey the information to which it refers. Nor can compliance with the
         obligation laid down in Article to convey information depend on the assessment made by each Member State as to whether
         or not it possesses knowledge worth being conveyed, as otherwise the effectiveness of that provision would be prejudiced.
         see paras 202, 204-205, JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)April (1)
((Failure of a Member State to fulfil its obligations – Directive 75/439/EEC – Disposal of waste oils – Incomplete transposition))
In Case C-392/99, 
            
 Commission of the European Communities , represented by L. Ström and A. Caeiros, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant, 
v
 Portuguese Republic , represented by L. Fernandes and M. Telles Romão, acting as Agents,
            
defendant, 
APPLICATION for a declaration that:
            
─
by failing to adopt provisions by which the competent authority, before granting a permit to undertakings which regenerate
            waste oils or use them as fuel, may satisfy itself that health is appropriately protected where waste oils are used as fuel
            and that the best available technology not entailing excessive cost is used where waste oils are regenerated or used as fuel;
            
            
─
by failing to lay down that residues from the combustion of waste oils are to be disposed of in accordance with Article of Council Directive 78/319/EEC of March on toxic and dangerous waste (OJ L 84, p. 43), and, from June 1995,
            in accordance with Article of Council Directive 75/442/EEC of July on waste (OJ L 194, p. 39), as amended by
            Council Directive 91/156/EEC of March (OJ L 78, p. 32), which, pursuant to Council Directive 91/689/EEC of December
            on hazardous waste (OJ L 377, p. 20), as amended by Council Directive 94/31/EC of June (OJ L 168, p.
            28), replaced Article of Directive 78/319; 
            
─
by not providing for periodical inspection of undertakings which regenerate waste oils or use them as fuel, or for examination
            of trends in the state of technical development and/or of the environment with a view to revising, where necessary, permits
            granted to those undertakings; 
            
─
by failing to convey to the Commission information concerning technical expertise and the experience gained and results obtained
            through the application of measures taken pursuant to Council Directive 75/439/EEC of June on the disposal of waste
            oils (OJ L 194, p. 23), as amended by Council Directive 87/101/EEC of December (OJ L 42, p. 43), 
            
the Portuguese Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles 6(2), 8(2)(a), and of Directive 75/439,
            as amended by Directive 87/101, and the first paragraph of Article and the third paragraph of Article of the EC Treaty
            (now the first paragraph of Article EC and the third paragraph of Article EC),
            
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
composed of: J.-P. Puissochet, President of the Chamber, R. Schintgen, V. Skouris (Rapporteur), F. Macken and N. Colneric, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: C. Stix-Hackl, Registrar: R. Grass, 
            
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,after hearing oral argument from the parties at the hearing on November 2001, at which the Commission was represented by
            A. Caeiros and the Portuguese Republic by M. Telles Romão and M. João Lois, acting as Agent,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2002,
gives the following
Judgment
            
By application lodged at the Court Registry on October 1999, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action
         under Article EC for a declaration that: 
         
─
by failing to adopt provisions by which the competent authority, before granting a permit to undertakings which regenerate
         waste oils or use them as fuel, may satisfy itself that health is appropriately protected where waste oils are used as fuel
         and that the best available technology not entailing excessive cost is used where waste oils are regenerated or used as fuel;
         
         
─
by failing to lay down that residues from the combustion of waste oils are to be disposed of in accordance with Article of Council Directive 78/319/EEC of March on toxic and dangerous waste (OJ L 84, p. 43), and, from June 1995,
         in accordance with Article of Council Directive 75/442/EEC of July on waste (OJ L 194, p. 39), as amended by
         Council Directive 91/156/EEC of March (OJ L 78, p. 32) (hereinafter  
         Directive 75/442), which, pursuant to Council Directive 91/689/EEC of December on hazardous waste (OJ L 377, p. 20), as amended
         by Council Directive 94/31/EC of June (OJ L 168, p. 28) (hereinafter  
         Directive 91/689), replaced Article of Directive 78/319; 
         
─
by not providing for periodical inspection of undertakings which regenerate waste oils or use them as fuel, or for examination
         of trends in the state of technical development and/or of the environment with a view to revising, where necessary, permits
         granted to those undertakings; 
         
─
by failing to convey to the Commission information concerning technical expertise and the experience gained and results obtained
         through the application of measures taken pursuant to Council Directive 75/439/EEC of June on the disposal of waste
         oils (OJ L 194, p. 23), as amended by Council Directive 87/101/EEC of December (OJ L 42, p. 43) (hereinafter
          
         Directive 75/439), 
         
the Portuguese Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles 6(2), 8(2)(a), and of Directive 75/and
         the first paragraph of Article and the third paragraph of Article of the EC Treaty (now the first paragraph of Article
         EC and the third paragraph of Article EC).
         
Legal context
Community legislation
         
            
Under Article of Directive 87/101, which substantially amended Directive 75/439, the Member States were to take the measures
         necessary to comply with Directive 87/with effect from January 1990. 
         
            
Article of Directive 75/provides: 
         
1.
 In order to comply with the measures taken pursuant to Article 4, any undertaking which disposes of waste oils must obtain
         a permit. Where necessary, this permit shall be granted after examination of the installations.
         
2.
 Without prejudice to the requirements laid down by national and Community provisions with a purpose other than that of this
         Directive, a permit may be granted to undertakings which regenerate waste oils or use waste oils as fuel only where the competent
         authority has satisfied itself that all appropriate environmental and health protection measures have been taken, including
         use of the best technology available, where the cost is not excessive.
         
            
Article of Directive 75/439, which relates to the use of waste oils as fuel, provides in its second paragraph: The Member States shall ... ensure that:
         
(a)
the residues from the combustion of waste oils are disposed of in accordance with Article of Directive 78/319/EEC
         . 
         
            
Article of Directive 75/provides: 
         
1.
 The undertakings referred to in Article shall be inspected periodically by the Member States, particularly as regards their
         compliance with the conditions of their permits.
         
2.
 The competent authorities shall examine trends in the state of technical development and/or of the environment with a view
         to revising, where necessary, permits granted to undertakings in accordance with this Directive.
         
            
Article of Directive 75/states: Each Member State shall periodically convey to the Commission information concerning its technical expertise and the experience
         gained and results obtained through the application of measures taken pursuant to this Directive.The Commission shall send an overall summary of such information to the Member States.
         
            
Article of Directive 75/states: Every three years, Member States shall draw up a situation report on the disposal of waste oils in their respective countries
         and shall send it to the Commission.
         
            
The first indent of Article 1(c) of Directive 78/defines the disposal of waste as  
         the collection, sorting, carriage and treatment of toxic and dangerous waste, as well as its storage and tipping above or
         under ground. 
         
            
Article of Directive 78/states: 
         
1.
 Installations, establishments or undertakings which carry out the storage, treatment and/or deposit of toxic and dangerous
         waste must obtain a permit from the competent authorities. Such waste may be stored, treated, and/or deposited only by installations,
         establishments or undertakings holding such permits. Undertakings engaged in the carriage of toxic and dangerous waste shall
         be controlled by the competent authorities of the Member States.
         
2.
 The permit referred to in paragraph shall cover in particular:
         
─
the type and quantity of waste; 
         
─
the technical requirements; 
         
─
the precautions to be taken; 
         
─
the disposal site(s); 
         
─
the methods of disposal. 
         
This permit may also lay down the specific information to be made available at the request of the competent authorities.
         
3.
 Permits may include conditions and obligations. They may be granted for a specified period and may be renewed.
         
            
By virtue of Article of Directive 91/689, Directive 78/was repealed with effect from June 1995. 
         
            
Article 1(2) of Directive 91/provides that Directive 75/applies to hazardous waste. 
         
            
Annex II A to Directive 75/lists disposal operations as they occur in practice. 
         
            
Article of Directive 75/states: 
         
1.
 For the purposes of implementing Articles 4, and 7, any establishment or undertaking which carries out the operations specified
         in Annex II A must obtain a permit from the competent authority referred to in Article 6.
         Such permit shall cover:
         
─
the types and quantities of waste, 
         
─
the technical requirements, 
         
─
the security precautions to be taken, 
         
─
the disposal site,
         
─
the treatment method.
         
2.
 Permits may be granted for a specified period, they may be renewable, they may be subject to conditions and obligations, or,
         notably, if the intended method of disposal is unacceptable from the point of view of environmental protection, they may be
         refused.
         
National legislation
         Legislation relating to the pursuit of industrial activity
         
            
Decreto-Lei No 109/of March (
          Diário da República  I, Series A, No 62, of March 1991), as amended by Decreto-Lei No 282/of August (
          Diário da República  I, Series A, No 192, of August 1993) (hereinafter  
         Decree-Law No 109/91), lays down the rules applicable to the pursuit of industrial activity. 
         
            
As is apparent from the fourth recital in its preamble, Decree-Law No 109/is intended to  
         be an instrument for protection of the collective interest, in the form of both safety of technological processes and the
         seeking of the best conditions for the location and activity of industry, which ensure for both the industrialist and the
         community the multiplier effect of the activity created. 
         
            
Article of Decree-Law No 109/91, headed  
         General safety obligation, states: Industrial activity must be carried out in such a way as to ensure safety with regard to people and property, working conditions
         and the environment, while having regard to the existing level of technological development ...
         
            
Article of Decree-Law No 109/91, headed  
         General risk-prevention obligation, provides: 
         
1.
 Industrialists must pursue their activity in accordance with the applicable legislation and take preventive measures in order
         to eliminate or reduce risks capable of affecting people and property, working conditions and the environment.
         
2.
 Whenever there is an anomaly in the functioning of the establishment, an industrialist must take appropriate measures to correct
         the situation ...
         
            
Article 7(1), (2) and (3) of Decree-Law No 109/reads as follows: 
         
1.
 Duly identified third parties may at any time submit a reasoned complaint, relating to the installation, alteration and operation
         of any industrial establishment, to the coordinating body, or to the supervisory bodies of the regional unit of the ministry
         concerned or the body responsible for safeguarding the rights and interests at issue, and those bodies shall forward the complaint,
         accompanied by a reasoned opinion, to the coordinating body.
         
2.
 The body which receives the complaint shall notify the industrialist thereof.
         
3.
 The coordinating body shall take the necessary measures, in particular by means of inspections, when investigating and making
         a decision on the complaint, consulting, where appropriate, the bodies responsible for safeguarding the rights and interests
         at issue.
         
            
Article of Decree-Law No 109/provides: 
         
1.
 The application for a permit to be submitted by the industrialist to the coordinating body shall be considered in conjunction
         with a document attesting to location approval ... and with an environmental impact study if required under the applicable
         legislation.
         
2.
 The coordinating body shall, where it is obligatory, seek the views of the bodies which have functions in the industrial field
         relating to the environment, health, and hygiene and safety at work.
         ...
         
5.
 Conditions and requirements imposed by the bodies referred to in paragraph must form an integral part of the permit to be
         issued.
         ...
         
            
Article of Decree-Law No 109/provides: 
         
1.
 Responsibility for supervising observance of the statutory provisions relating to pursuit of industrial activity shall lie
         in particular with the coordinating body or with the regional unit of the ministry concerned, in accordance with its institutional
         regulations, without prejudice to the powers of the other bodies involved in the procedure for the grant of authorisation,
         within the framework of their respective functions.
         
2.
 The other supervisory bodies may, where necessary, request the coordinating body to impose measures on the industrialist in
         order to prevent risks and difficulties capable of affecting people and property, working conditions and the environment,
         without prejudice to observance of the provisions of international law relating to the supervision of employment relationships.
         
3.
 The industrialist shall facilitate access of all the supervisory bodies to his installations and provide them with information
         and assistance, sought by a reasoned request, for the purpose of the monitoring of compliance with legislation and the conditions
         which have been imposed on him by the coordinating body.
         
4.
 Where, in the course of supervision, one of the other supervisory bodies records a failure to comply with measures prescribed
         by it, it must draw up a statement thereon and inform the coordinating body, and organise and conduct the infringement procedure.
         
            
Article of Decree-Law No 109/91, headed  
         protective measures, states: Where situations entailing serious risk to health, the safety of persons and property, hygiene and safety of work premises,
         and the environment become apparent, the coordinating body and the other supervisory bodies must, individually or jointly,
         immediately take the measures which are necessary in each case in order to prevent or put an end to that situation, and the
         decision may be taken to suspend production and to close the establishment temporarily, in whole or in part, or to immobilise,
         by sealing, all or part of the equipment, for a maximum period of six months.
         
            
Article 16(1) and (2) of Decree-Law No 109/provides: 
         
1.
 An offence punishable by a fine ... is committed in the event of:
         
(a)
the installation, alteration or operation of an industrial establishment without prior issue of a permit as referred to in
         Articles 8(1) and 11; 
         
(b)
failure to comply with requirements laid down in the applicable technical rules and with measures imposed under Article 12(2).
         
         
2.
 An offence punishable by a fine ... is committed in the event of failure to comply with the obligations relating to recording
         the transfer of the establishment and to communicating the suspension of operations and the cessation of industrial activity.
         
            
Article 2(4)(b) of Portaria No 314/of May (
          Diário da República  I, Series B, No 120, of May 1994; hereinafter  
         Implementing Order No 314/94) provides: A proposal for installation of an establishment in Class A must contain:...
         
(4)
a risk study, except where the industrial establishment is covered by the legislation relating to the prevention of serious
         industrial accidents, which must indicate: ... 
         
(b)
the choice of technologies enabling the use of dangerous equipment or products to be avoided or reduced
         
. 
         
            
Model procedures for the grant of industrial permits are annexed to Implementing Order No 314/94. Points to of Model
         No are worded as follows: 
         
10.
 Description of the safety and industrial hygiene measures, in particular with regard to the risk of fire and explosion, systems
         for capturing and dealing with dust, mist particles and vapour. 
         
11.
 Work system: number of teams. 
         
12.
 Facilities of a social nature, medical facilities at work and health facilities. ... 
         
13.
 Minimum clearance height in the installation ...
         
            
Points to of Model No 3, which is also annexed to Implementing Order No 314/94, are couched in the same terms as Points
         to of Model No 2. 
         Legislation relating to waste management
         
            
Decreto-Lei No 239/of September (
          Diário da República  I, Series A, No 208, of September 1997; hereinafter  
         Decree-Law No 239/97) establishes, as stated in its preamble,  
         an independent mechanism for prior authorisation of waste management operations, not to be confused with authorisation of
         the activities of which those operations sometimes form part, as is the case, so far as concerns industrial waste, with industrial
         permits. 
         
            
Article 4(1) of Decree-Law No 239/is worded as follows: Waste management shall seek, by way of priority, to prevent or reduce the production or harmfulness of waste, in particular
         by reusing it and altering production processes, by means of the adoption of cleaner technologies and by increasing business
         and consumer awareness.
         
            
Article 7(1) and (2) of Decree-Law No 239/states: 
         
1.
 The abandonment of waste is prohibited, as is the production, transport, storage, treatment, recovery or disposal of waste
         by unauthorised bodies or in unauthorised installations.
         
2.
 The deposit of waste is prohibited except on sites, and under the conditions, laid down by a permit granted in advance.
         
            
Article 8(1) of Decree-Law No 239/states that  
         the storage, treatment, recovery and disposal of waste shall be subject to prior authorisation. 
         
            
In addition, it is apparent from Article 9(1) of Decree-Law No 239/that responsibility for authorising operations referred
         to in Article lies with the Minister for the Environment where there is a statutory requirement for prior assessment of
         their environmental impact. 
         
            
Article 10(1) of Decree-Law No 239/is worded as follows: The application for a permit referred to in Article shall be made to the authority with competence for the final decision,
         accompanied by the items required:
         
(a)
where appropriate, by the laws and regulations which govern the conduct of environmental impact assessment procedures; 
         
(b)
by the implementing order of the Minister for the Environment in the case of industrial waste, solid urban waste or other
         types of waste.
         
            
Article of Decree-Law No 239/states: Responsibility for overseeing observance of this decree-law lies with the Institute for Waste, the Directorate-General for
         the Environment and the regional directorates for the environment and natural resources, other bodies with power to authorise
         waste management operations and the police authorities.
         
            
Article of Decree-Law No 239/provides: In the event of an emergency or of serious risk to public health or the environment, the Minister for Health or the Minister
         for the Environment may by decision adopt appropriate protective measures, in particular by suspending any waste management
         operation.
         
            
Article 20(1) and (2) of Decree-Law No 239/states: 
         
1.
 Breach, by the relevant responsible person, of the obligation to ensure that the way in which waste is ultimately dealt with
         is appropriate, under Article 6, and infringement of Articles 7(1), (3) and (4) and 8(1) and of the rules referred to in Article
         15(1) of this decree-law ... constitute an offence punishable by a fine ...
         
2.
 Infringement of Articles 7(2), 16(1) and (2) and 17(1) and (2) constitutes an offence punishable by a fine ...
         
            
Article 21(1)(f) of Decree-Law No 239/is worded as follows: The infringements provided for in the preceding article may, in addition to a fine and in accordance with general legislation,
         be punishable by the following ancillary penalties:...
         
(f)
suspension of permits, licences and approvals.
         
            
Article of Decree-Law No 239/states: 
         
1.
 Where an appropriate licence or permit has not been granted, waste storage, treatment, recovery or disposal operations which
         are in progress require a permit from the competent authority.
         
2.
 Permits as referred to in the preceding paragraph must be applied for by December at the latest and shall be governed
         by Article et seq. of this decree-law.
         
            
The ministerial implementing order referred to in Article 10(1)(b) of Decree-Law No 239/is Portaria No 961//of November
         (
          Diário da República  I, Series B, No 260, of November 1998; hereinafter  
         Implementing Order No 961/98). 
         
            
Article 3(1)(c) of Implementing Order No 961/states: The application for a permit shall be accompanied by:...
         
(c)
a proposal, which must, depending on whether landfill or another waste management operation is involved, contain the items
         set out in Annex I or Annex II hereto which form an integral part of this implementing order.
         
            
Point 1(e) of Annex II to Implementing Order No 961/mentions, among the items to be included in the proposal envisaged
         by Article 3(1)(c), a descriptive statement containing  
         particulars of the number of workers, of the work system and of facilities of a social nature, medical facilities at work
         and health facilities.
         
            
Article of Implementing Order No 961/provides: In accordance with the legislation applicable to the right of access to documents held by public authorities, duly identified
         third parties may request information from the competent body or the regional directorate for the environment or submit to
         them a complaint concerning an installation or operations at issue.
         Legislation relating to the disposal of waste oils
         
            
The Regulamento de Licenciamento das Actividades de Recolha, Armazenagem, Tratamento Prévio, Regeneração, Recuperação, Combustão
         e Incineração dos Óleos Usados (Regulation relating to the Grant of Permits for the Collection, Storage, Pretreatment, Regeneration,
         Reclamation, Combustion and Incineration of Waste Oils) was approved by Portaria No 240/of March (
          Diário da República  I, Series B, No 71, of March 1992) (hereinafter  
         the Regulation annexed to Implementing Order No 240/92). 
         
            
Article of the Regulation annexed to Implementing Order No 240/states: 
         
1.
 The registers of movements of waste oils, referred to in Article 3(1) and (2) of Decree-Law No 88/of February 1991,
         must conform to the models published in Annex I, which forms an integral part of this regulation, and they must be completed
         every quarter by holders, collectors and users of those oils.
         
2.
 The entities referred to in the preceding paragraph must send the registers to the Directorate-General for Energy ...
         
            
Under Article of the Regulation annexed to Implementing Order No 240/92, a permit is required for the  
         pretreatment of waste oils. 
         
            
Article 10(a), which relates to the consideration of applications for permits authorising pretreatment, provides: The application for a permit shall be accompanied by the following information:
         
(a)
location of the unit, treatment capacity and technology for the process, which must be the best available that does not entail
         excessive cost
         . 
         
            
In addition, Article 12(1)(f) of the Regulation annexed to Implementing Order No 240/requires, with regard to authorisation
         of the activities of undertakings which regenerate waste oils, that the  
         installation proposal be annexed to the application for a permit. 
         
            
Article 13(a) states: The installation proposal shall contain the following items:
         
(a)
a statement which describes the installation, including: a detailed description of the industrial activity, with a specification of the technological processes, production diagrams
         and sanitary conditions; an indication of the nominal production capacity to be created and of the envisaged daily and/or weekly production capacity;
         identification of the raw materials or any ancillary materials to be used, and their quantities; a quantitative and qualitative indication of liquid effluents, gaseous emissions and waste; identification of sources of emissions, in particular noise, vibration, radiation and chemical agents; a description of the apparatus, machines and other equipment and their characteristics, indicating the standards or specifications
         to be complied with; an indication of the proposed total power; a description of matters concerning safety organisation in relation to environmental protection, to the protection of people
         and property and to conditions of hygiene and safety at work; ... a description of the industrial installations, including those for storage, combustion, driving power or steam production
         and containers of gases under pressure; a description of the general characteristics of the construction and internal finishing of the industrial establishment; a description of the system for the supply of drinking and other water, quantifying envisaged consumption; ...
         
            
Article 15(a), (b) and (c) of the Regulation annexed to Implementing Order No 240/provides: The Directorate-General for Energy shall, within eight working days, send a copy of the items laid down by Article to the
         following bodies for an opinion:
         
(a)
the Directorate-General for Environmental Quality;
         
(b)
the Directorate-General for Primary Health Care;
         
(c)
the Inspectorate-General for Labour.
         
            
Article of the Regulation annexed to Implementing Order No 240/provides that use of waste oils as fuel is conditional
         upon issue of a permit, which falls within the competence of the regional agencies of the Ministry for Industry and Energy.
         
         
            
Article is worded as follows: The application for a permit shall be accompanied by the following items and information:
         
(a)
a presentation of the project; 
         
(b)
a descriptive statement with an indication of the type of industry in which the combustion occurs; 
         
(c)
the power installed, in megawatts; 
         
(d)
the nature of the unit which uses the oils, for instance indirect combustion furnaces, direct combustion furnaces, steam generators
         and dimension parameters; 
         
(e)
the types of burners; 
         
(f)
the composition of the waste oils to be utilised; 
         
(g)
the percentage of waste oils utilised in the mixtures with other fuels and the quantities consumed; 
         
(h)
the location of the installation in relation to third parties ...; 
         
(i)
information on how combustion residues are ultimately dealt with.
         
            
Article states: The use of waste oils as fuel shall be prohibited in the food industry, in particular in bakeries, and in cases where products
         of combustion come into contact with the food produced.
         
            
Article 2(1) of Decreto-Lei No 88/of February (
          Diário da República  I, Series A, No 45, of February 1991; hereinafter  
         Decree-Law No 88/91) provides: Any tipping or landfilling of waste oils or residues resulting from their treatment which has harmful effects on the soil
         is prohibited.
         
            
In addition, Article 4(2) of Decree-Law No 88/provides: Waste oils may be transported, disposed of and recovered only where authorised of the Director-General for Environmental Quality.
         
            
Article of Decree-Law No 88/states: Without prejudice to the powers conferred by law on other bodies, responsibility for overseeing observance of this decree-law
         lies with the Directorate-General for Energy and the regional agencies of the Ministry for Industry and Energy.
         Legislation relating to the supervisory environmental authorities
         
            
Decreto-Lei No 189/of May (
          Diário da República  I, Series A, No 120, of May 1993; hereinafter  
         Decree-Law No 189/93), which approved the Law establishing the Directorate-General for the Environment, provides in Article 6: 
         
1.
 The tasks of inspecting and controlling potentially polluting activities shall rest with the Office for Environmental Inspection
         and Supervision ...
         
2.
 It shall be the task of [the Office for Environmental Inspection and Supervision]:
         
(a)
to inspect industrial installations and sources of pollution of every kind in order to verify compliance with environmental
         legislation in force; 
         ...
         
4.
 The activity of the [Office for Environmental Inspection and Supervision] shall be structured around an annual plan of ordinary
         inspections which shall be submitted for ministerial approval, and, where necessary, extraordinary inspections, the results
         of which must be communicated immediately to the supervising minister.
         
            
Article of Decreto-Lei No 549/of December (
          Diário da República  I, Series A, No 289, of December 1999; hereinafter  
         Decree-Law No 549/99), which approved the Law establishing the Inspectorate-General for the Environment, provides: It shall be the task of the Inspectorate-General for the Environment ... to ensure compliance with legal rules having an effect
         on the environment and with administrative law within the sphere of the departments answerable to the Minister for the Environment.
         
            
Article 4(1)(a) of Decree-Law No 549/provides: It shall be the task of [the Inspectorate-General for the Environment]:
         
(a)
to oversee observance of laws and regulations in fields having a bearing upon the environment and to inspect establishments,
         premises or activities subject to those provisions
         .
         
            
Article of Decree-Law No 549/states: 
         
1.
 The [Inspectorate-General for the Environment] and the other bodies with inspection functions are obliged to cooperate with
         each other in accordance with their respective legal functions and powers, using for that purpose the mechanisms which prove
         the most appropriate.
         
2.
 The [Inspectorate-General for the Environment] may seek from municipal councils and units answerable to other government departments
         information concerning procedures for the grant of permits in respect of activities having an environmental impact.
         
            
Article of Decreto-Lei No 236/of September (
          Diário da República  I, Series A, No 203, of September 1997; hereinafter  
         Decree-Law No 236/97) states: 
         
1.
 The Institute for Waste shall have responsibility for implementing national waste policy and ensuring compliance with technical
         standards and regulations.
         
2.
 The Institute for Waste shall carry out intersectoral action, in particular with the competent bodies of the Ministries for
         Agriculture, Rural Development and Fisheries, for Economic Affairs and for Health, as regards agricultural, industrial and
         hospital waste respectively.
         
Pre-litigation procedure
            
By letters of March 1991, April 1992, December and April 1994, the Portuguese Government informed the Commission
         that Directive 75/had been transposed into national law by Decree-Law No 88/91, Implementing Order No 240/92, Portaria
         (Implementing Order) No 1028/of November (
          Diário da República  I, Series B, No 256, of November 1992) and Despacho conjunto (Joint Order) of the Ministries for Industry and Energy and
         for the Environment and Natural Resources of April (
          Diário da República  II, No 115, of May 1993). 
         
            
After examining the national provisions notified, the Commission formed the view that they did not transpose Directive 75/correctly and completely. It therefore initiated the procedure laid down in Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC) and, by letter of July 1994, gave the Portuguese Government formal notice to submit its observations. 
         
            
The Portuguese Government replied, justifying its position, by letter of October 1994. 
         
            
Since the Commission considered that the explanations put forward by the Portuguese Government were not satisfactory and that
         Community law remained infringed, on November it sent the Portuguese Republic a reasoned opinion, calling on it to
         comply with the reasoned opinion within two months from notification thereof. 
         
            
In its reply of February the Portuguese Government adhered to its position. 
         
            
It was in those circumstances that the Commission decided to bring the present action. 
         SubstanceFailure to implement Article 6(2) of Directive 75/in so far as it makes authorisation to use waste oils as fuel conditional
         upon all appropriate health protection measures being taken
         Arguments of the parties
         
            
In the first part of its first complaint, the Commission alleges that the Portuguese Republic has failed to adopt measures
         ensuring that issue, by the competent national authority, of the permit required under Article 6(2) of Directive 75/for
         undertakings which use waste oils as fuel is conditional upon all appropriate health protection measures being taken. 
         
            
The Commission notes as a preliminary point that, in order to satisfy the requirement of legal certainty, it is essential
         that the regime for authorising the disposal of waste oils be sufficiently clear and precise to enable all the undertakings
         concerned to know, with the necessary certainty, that the permit application must cover matters relating to health protection
         and that the competent authority is required to take that criterion into consideration as a condition for authorisation. However,
         it is not clear to the Commission which Portuguese legislative provisions govern the submission of permit applications in
         the specific field of use of waste oils as fuel. 
         
            
In particular, the Commission observes that the rules relating to authorisation of the  
         collection, storage, pretreatment, regeneration, reclamation, combustion and incineration of waste oils, namely the Regulation annexed to Implementing Order No 240/92, do not contain any provision relating to health protection
         in connection with the use of waste oils as fuel, with the sole exception of Article of that regulation, which merely prohibits
         their use as fuel in the food industry. 
         
            
The Commission states that, even so far as concerns the undertakings which, according to the assertions of the Portuguese
         Government, have already obtained a permit pursuant to the Regulation annexed to Implementing Order No 240/after submitting
         an installation proposal covering matters relating to health protection, the Portuguese Government does not indicate under
         what provision of that regulation they were required to submit the proposal. 
         
            
The Portuguese Government, on the other hand, contends that its national legislation enables the objective of Article 6(2)
         of Directive 75/to be achieved, which is to ensure that consideration by the competent authority of the application documentation
         enables it to establish, before taking a decision, whether  
         appropriate health protection conditions are present. Contrary to the Commission's assertions, that objective may be achieved in various ways, not necessarily
         entailing an expressly prescribed obligation on the undertaking concerned to annex a statement covering health protection
         aspects to its permit application. There are, in Portuguese law, legal rules which reproduce the content of Article 6(2) of
         Directive 75/439, even if they do not form part of the national legislative measure designed to implement that directive.
         
         
            
According to the Portuguese Government, the reason why health protection is not expressly mentioned in the Regulation annexed
         to Implementing Order No 240/is that that regulation refers to undertakings which normally already hold a permit or which
         must obtain one in order to engage in a principal industrial activity. Those undertakings must accordingly comply with the
         provisions governing authorisation to engage in industrial activity, which take account of that aspect. 
         
            
In this connection, the Portuguese Government cites Articles and of Decree-Law No 109/91, and also Article 9(2) and (5)
         thereof which ensures that conditions and requirements imposed by the bodies which have functions  with regard to,  
          inter alia , health, hygiene and safety at work and are consulted by the authority which issues the permit must be integrated into the
         permit granted. In addition, Article of the decree-law provides that where,  
          inter alia , a situation entailing serious risk to health becomes apparent, measures to prevent or remove the risk must immediately be
         taken. 
         
            
The Portuguese Government also relies on Article 2(4) of Implementing Order No 314/94, which provides that an application
         for authorisation to set up or alter an industrial establishment must be accompanied by a risk study, submitted in accordance
         with the appropriate model and containing, as set out in points to of Model No and points to of Model No annexed
         to that order, a description of matters related to the organisation of hygiene and safety conditions at work. 
         
            
According to the Portuguese Government, account should also be taken of Implementing Order No 961/under which, it states,
         the storage, treatment, recovery and disposal of waste are subject to prior authorisation of the Minister for the Environment.
         It also refers to Article 3(1)(c) of that order, read in conjunction with Annex II thereto, and points out that the documents
         which must be provided in support of the permit application include a descriptive statement containing several items capable
         of ensuring the adoption of health protection measures, for instance social and health facilities, medical facilities at work
         and, generally, all the requirements relating to the identification and treatment of waste. 
         
            
So far as concerns Articles and of Decree-Law No 109/91, the Commission responds that those provisions, which impose a
         general safety obligation and a general risk-prevention obligation respectively, concern pursuit of industrial activity in
         the strict sense and do not necessarily require the undertaking concerned to annex to the permit application a description
         of matters related to health protection; the same is true of Article of the decree-law. 
         
            
Nor does Article of Decree-Law No 109/impose such an obligation on the undertaking concerned. In providing for the possibility
         of suspending production and temporarily closing the establishment, in whole or in part, that provision appears to refer to
         a dangerous situation detected while the industrial activity is being pursued. 
         
            
According to the Commission, only Implementing Order No 961/expressly provides that the permit application must include
         matters relating to health protection. However, that order cannot be taken into account in the present infringement proceedings
         because, by virtue of Article 2(2) of Lei (Law) No 74/of November (
          Diário da República  I, Series A, No 261, of November 1998), it did not enter into force until November 1998, that is to say after expiry
         of the period laid down by the reasoned opinion. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
First, as is apparent from its very wording, Article of Directive 75/does not simply indicate the factors which the
         competent authority must take into account when issuing a permit to an undertaking which wishes to pursue an activity involving
         the disposal of waste oils, but makes issue of that permit expressly subject to a specific condition, namely the adoption
         of all appropriate environmental and health protection measures. 
         
            
While Article 6(1) of the directive merely makes it obligatory, in order for the activity in question to be pursued, that
         a permit be issued, which, where necessary, is granted after the installations of the undertaking concerned have been examined,
         it is clear from Article 6(2) that the permit can be issued only where the competent authority has satisfied itself that all
         the requisite measures have been taken. 
         
            
It is accordingly apparent that, under the authorisation system which the Member States are required, pursuant to Article
         of Directive 75/439, to establish in their national law, implementation of the requisite measures must constitute a  
          sine qua non  for issue of the permit referred to therein. 
         
            
Second, while the Court has held that transposition of a directive into national law does not necessarily require its provisions
         to be reproduced verbatim in a specific, express law or regulation and a general legal context may be sufficient, that is
         so only if that context effectively ensures the full application of the directive in a sufficiently clear and precise manner.
         The Court has pointed out that it is particularly important, in order to satisfy the requirement of legal certainty, that
         the provisions of a directive be implemented with unquestionable binding force, so that individuals have the benefit of a
         clear and precise legal situation enabling them to ascertain the full extent of their rights and duties (see, to that effect,
         Case C-197/Commission  v  
          France  [1997] ECR I-1489, paragraph 15, and Case C-49/Commission  v  
          Italy  [2001] ECR I-8575, paragraph 21).
         
            
It is in the light of those considerations that it must be examined whether the national provisions pleaded by the Portuguese
         Government implement Article 6(2) of Directive 75/correctly. 
         
            
As regards, first of all, Decree-Law No 109/91, while Articles and may be interpreted as requiring a person who wishes
         to use waste oils as fuel to take appropriate safety and risk-prevention measures, they do not in any way provide that actual
         adoption of those measures is a precondition for grant of the permit to which that use is subject. 
         
            
It is true that Article 9(2) and (5) of Decree Law No 109/provides that the authority which considers the permit application
         must consult bodies which have functions in the industrial field relating to the environment, health, and hygiene and safety
         at work, and that those bodies may impose conditions which must form an integral part of the permit to be issued. 
         
            
However, that consultation procedure, envisaged, as stated in Article 9(2), where it is obligatory under the applicable legislation,
         does not in any way guarantee that only undertakings which have taken all appropriate health protection measures obtain a
         permit to use waste oils as fuel. 
         
            
That finding also holds for the protective measures which the competent authorities may take under Article of Decree-Law
         No 109/in reacting to situations of risk that arise while an undertaking which uses waste oils as fuel is engaging in its
         activity. 
         
            
Next, as regards Article 2(4) of Implementing Order No 314/94, while the risk study required thereunder to accompany the permit
         application is liable to provide the competent authority with information relevant for the purposes of its appraisal, that
         provision likewise does not require the undertaking concerned to have taken all appropriate health protection measures in
         order for the permit to be issued. 
         
            
Finally, so far as concerns the provisions of Implementing Order No 961/relied upon by the Portuguese Government, suffice
         it to state that, in accordance with settled case-law, the question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations
         must be determined by reference to the situation in the Member State as it stood at the end of the period laid down in the
         reasoned opinion, and that the Court may not take account of any subsequent changes (see,  
          inter alia , Case C-473/Commission  v  
          Austria  [2001] ECR I-4527, paragraph 13). 
         
            
It is common ground that Implementing Order No 961/did not enter into force until after expiry of the period of two months
         laid down in the reasoned opinion. It must accordingly be acknowledged, in accordance with the case-law cited in the previous
         paragraph, that even if that order implements Article 6(2) of Directive 75/correctly, it is not relevant to the present
         proceedings. 
         
            
It is thus apparent that, even if the competent authorities require, as Article 6(2) of Directive 75/prescribes, that
         an undertaking wishing to use waste oils as fuel take all appropriate health protection measures before they issue the requisite
         permit to it, that requirement is not laid down by a binding national provision which is sufficiently specific, precise and
         clear, so that, in accordance with the case-law recalled in paragraph of this judgment, the article was not implemented
         correctly within the period laid down. 
         
            
Consequently, the first part of the Commission's first complaint must be upheld. 
         Failure to implement Article 6(2) of Directive 75/in so far as it makes authorisation to dispose of waste oils conditional
         upon use of the best technology possible, where the cost is not excessive
         Arguments of the parties
         
            
In the second part of its first complaint, the Commission alleges that the Portuguese Republic has failed to adopt measures
         ensuring that issue, by the competent national authority, of the permit required under Article 6(2) of Directive 75/both
         for undertakings which regenerate waste oils and for those which use them as fuel is conditional upon use of the best technology
         available, where the cost is not excessive. 
         
            
As regards, first, undertakings which seek authorisation to regenerate waste oils, the Commission observes that the first
         item in Article 13(a) of the Regulation annexed to Implementing Order No 240/merely provides that the statement describing
         the installation is to contain  
         a detailed description of the industrial activity, with a specification of the technological processes, and does not clearly inform the undertakings concerned that a permit for regenerating waste oils will be issued to them
         only if the requirement laid down in Article 6(2) of Directive 75/439, namely  
         use of the best technology available, where the cost is not excessive, is observed. The abovementioned provision of the Regulation annexed to Implementing Order No 240/does not therefore set
         out that requirement expressly and unequivocally. 
         
            
The Commission points out that, under Article 10(a) of the Regulation annexed to Implementing Order No 240/92, applications
         for permits authorising the pretreatment of waste oils must be accompanied by,  
          inter alia , information relating to the  
         technology for the process, which must be the best available that does not entail excessive cost, and states that it is incomprehensible why that express reference was considered appropriate by the Portuguese legislature
         for the procedure governing authorisation of the pretreatment of waste oils and inappropriate for the procedure governing
         authorisation of regeneration of the same oils. 
         
            
As regards, second, undertakings which seek authorisation to use waste oils as fuel, the Commission states that it has not
         found in the legislation notified to it any reference to use of the best available technology as a condition for such authorisation.
         
         
            
The Portuguese Government observes first of all that, by virtue of Article of the Treaty, directives are binding, as to
         the result to be achieved, upon the Member States to which they are addressed, but leave to the national authorities the choice
         of form and methods. Consequently, the Commission cannot impose the form or method which it considers the most appropriate
         for implementing a Community provision. Its only task is to check whether the national legislation corresponds to the objective
         which the Community legislature intended to achieve. 
         
            
In addition, the interpretation of Article 6(2) of Directive 75/argued for by the Commission, under which that provision
         requires national legislation to lay down the objective referred to as a condition for authorisation, is, in the Portuguese
         Government's view, incorrect. It argues that the key point in implementing that provision is that the authorisation procedure
         must be conducted on the basis of information or actions enabling the competent authority to establish, before taking a decision,
         whether the conditions entailed by  
         use of the best technology available, where the cost is not excessive are met. 
         
            
The Portuguese Government submits in this connection that the concept of  
         best technology available, where the cost is not excessive is either expressly laid down or implicit in all the procedures for issuing permits in force under its national law. 
         
            
So far as concerns, first, the regeneration of waste oils, the Portuguese Government observes that the information which,
         by virtue of Article 13(a) of the Regulation annexed to Implementing Order No 240/92, the statement describing the installation
         must contain is sufficiently detailed to enable the bodies which issue the permit to carry out an overall assessment of the
         proposed process, in such a way as to determine precisely whether the installation in fact seeks to use the best available
         technology not entailing excessive cost. The level of detail to which proposals will be assessed is thus clear to applicants,
         a result which national legislation would not achieve if it merely contained an express reference to  
         the best technology available, where the cost is not excessive. 
         
            
The Portuguese Government also refers to Article of the Regulation annexed to Implementing Order No 240/92, which states
         that the documentation in respect of an application for a permit to regenerate waste oils is to be sent for an opinion to,
          
          inter alia , the Directorate-General for Environmental Quality, whose powers in this regard are currently exercised by the Institute
         for Waste. The Portuguese Government explains that the Institute for Waste will then necessarily have to take account of the
         need to use  
         the best technology available, where the cost is not excessive, by virtue of Decree-Law No 239/97, Article 4(1) of which provides that waste management is to seek, by way of priority,
         to prevent or reduce the production or harmfulness of waste, in particular by reuse and altering production processes, by
         means of the adoption of cleaner technologies. 
         
            
The Portuguese Government accepts that, in the context of rules relating to the pretreatment of waste oils, the legislature,
         instead of requiring the permit application to be accompanied by a detailed statement describing the technological process,
         simply refers in Article 10(a) of the Regulation annexed to Implementing Order No 240/to the concept of use of the best
         available technology not entailing excessive cost. However, that is a choice of legislative technique for the national legislature
         to make, and not for the Commission to criticise in particular because the concept of  
         cleaner technologies used in Article 4(1) of Decree-Law No 239/is, ultimately, more exacting. The Portuguese Government adds that, as clean
         technologies do not exist, the concept of  
         best available technology proved to correspond more closely to reality and that, in any event, the fundamental concern underlying both concepts is
         the adoption of technologies which are more gentle or more respectful of the environment. 
         
            
As regards, second, the use of waste oils as fuel, the Portuguese Government states that the objective of using the  
         best technology available, where the cost is not excessive is laid down in the Portuguese legislation on industrial permits which covers all the industrial establishments at issue,
         because all are required to hold an industrial permit. 
         
            
In particular, the Portuguese Government relies on the fourth recital in the preamble to Decree-Law No 109/and Article
         thereof which provides that industrial activity must be carried out having regard to the existing level of technological
         development. It also refers to Article 2(4)(b) of Implementing Order No 314/94, read in conjunction with Model No annexed
         to that order, from which it is apparent that the risk study required to accompany the installation proposal includes the
         choice of technologies which enable the use of dangerous equipment or products to be avoided or reduced. 
         
            
In its reply, the Commission submits that the words  
         having regard to the existing level of technological development, which appear in Article of Decree-Law No 109/91, are vague and do not in themselves enable the measures which undertakings
         must adopt in order to pursue their industrial activity in accordance with the  
         existing level of technological development to be identified with the necessary certainty. More specifically, even if the  
         existing level of technological development is the highest, the words  
         have regard to do not reveal how far those measures must go, in particular whether use of the best technology available is obligatory where
         the cost is not excessive. Furthermore, contrary to Article 6(2) of Directive 75/439, that wording does not make reference
         to the fact that the best available technology must be used provided that the cost is not excessive. 
         
            
In addition, the Commission submits with regard to the arguments relating to consultation of the Institute for Waste carried
         out under Article of the Regulation annexed to Implementing Order No 240/and in accordance with Decree-Law No 239/97,
         first, that Article applies solely to the regeneration of waste oils and, second, that the reference to  
         the adoption of cleaner technologies contained in Article 4(1) of Decree-Law No 239/does not necessarily mean that the best technology available is involved.
         Thus, it does not necessarily follow, on reading those two provisions together, that use of the best technology available
         is mandatory. 
         
            
The Commission therefore concludes that the provisions relied upon by the Portuguese Government do not appear to implement
         adequately the condition relating to the use, in the context of the regeneration and combustion of waste oils, of the best
         technology available, where the cost is not excessive. It further considers that the fact that, as has been found, the legislation
         is scattered results in uncertainty as to the applicable legislation, contrary to the requirement of legal certainty. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
Having regard to the purpose of Article 6(2) of Directive 75/439, as described in paragraphs 77, and of this judgment,
         it must be examined whether the Portuguese legislation provides that use of the best available technology not entailing excessive
         cost constitutes a  
          sine qua non   for issue of a permit to dispose of waste oils. 
         
            
As regards the national provisions governing applications for permits to regenerate waste oils, it is true that the requisite
         information in the descriptive statement referred to in Article 13(a) of the Regulation annexed to Implementing Order No 240/92,
         such as the specification of the technological processes, is such as to enable the competent authority to establish, before
         taking a decision, whether the undertaking concerned has used the best available technology not entailing excessive cost.
         However, the information is not in itself sufficient to ensure that compliance with that requirement actually constitutes
         a  
          sine qua non  for issue of the permit. 
         
            
That finding is not affected by the circumstance, referred to by the Portuguese Government, that under Article of the Regulation
         annexed to Implementing Order No 240/the abovementioned descriptive statement is sent for an opinion to,  
          inter alia , the Institute for Waste, which considers it in the light of the legislation applicable to waste management, namely Decree-Law
         No 239/97. Furthermore, the provisions relating to that opinion provide no indication at all as to whether it is binding.
         
         
            
It follows that the national provisions governing applications for permits to regenerate waste oils cannot be considered to
         ensure that use of the best technology available, where the cost is not excessive, is a  
          sine qua non  for issue of the permit required in order to engage in that activity. 
         
            
These findings equally hold with regard to the national provisions applicable to industrial activities as a whole, which the
         Portuguese Government has also relied on, namely Article of Decree-Law No 109/and Article 2(4)(b) of Implementing Order
         No 314/94. Neither the obligation to carry out industrial activity having regard to the existing level of technological development
         nor the obligation to accompany installation proposals with a risk study including the choice of technologies which enable
         the use of dangerous equipment or products to be avoided or reduced ensures that undertakings obtain a permit to regenerate
         waste oils or use them as fuel only if they use the best available technology not entailing excessive cost. 
         
            
Since none of the national provisions invoked by the Portuguese Government ensures that the permit provided for in Article
         of Directive 75/is issued to an undertaking which wishes to dispose of waste oils only if it uses the best technology
         available, where the cost is not excessive, as required by Article 6(2), it is clear that, for reasons essentially analogous
         to those set out in paragraph of this judgment, the second part of the Commission's first complaint is likewise well founded.
         
         
            
The Commission's first complaint must accordingly be upheld. 
         Failure to implement Article 8(2)(a) of Directive 75/Arguments of the parties
         
            
In its second complaint, the Commission alleges that the Portuguese Republic has failed to implement Article 8(2)(a) of Directive
         75/correctly, inasmuch as it failed to lay down that residues from the combustion of waste oils must be disposed of in
         accordance with Article of Directive 78/and, from June 1995, in accordance with Article of Directive 75/which,
         pursuant to Directive 91/689, replaced Article of Directive 78/from that date. 
         
            
The Commission acknowledges in its application that it stated both in its letter of formal notice and in the reasoned opinion
         that Portuguese legislation did not include provisions designed to satisfy the obligation owed by Member States under Article
         8(2)(a) of Directive 75/to ensure that residues from the combustion of waste oils are disposed of in accordance with Article
         of Directive 78/319, without referring to Article of Directive 75/442. 
         
            
However, in its reply to the reasoned opinion the Portuguese Government maintained that  
         under the applicable national legislation, residues from the combustion of waste oils are in principle regarded as hazardous
         waste the disposal of which is provided for by specific provisions of national legislation currently in force, in particular
         Decree-Law No 239/97, which implements Directives 91/156/EEC and 91/689/EEC, and Implementing Order No 818/[Portaria of
         September (
          Diário da República  I, Series B, No 205, of September 1997)] which approves the list of waste. 
         
            
The Commission argues that, given this ground of defence put forward by the Portuguese Government, it had no choice but to
         examine the Portuguese legislation relied upon in order to establish whether it ensured compliance with the obligation to
         dispose of residues from the combustion of waste oils in accordance with Article of Directive 75/442. 
         
            
The Commission refers in support of this analysis to the judgment in Case 211/Commission  v  
          Denmark  [1982] ECR 4547, concerning infringement proceedings in which it had pleaded the provisions of a directive for the first
         time in its application. The Court held in paragraph of that judgment that the Commission had merely replied to a ground
         of defence raised by the Danish Government in response to the reasoned opinion and that, in so doing, it had amended neither
         the definition nor the basis of the alleged infringement. 
         
            
In any event, the Commission submits that, since June 1995, the date on which Directive 78/was repealed by Directive
         91/689, the reference in Article 8(2)(a) of Directive 75/to Article of the repealed directive must be understood as
         a reference to Article of Directive 75/442. 
         
            
The Commission points out, first, that Directive 91/which, as provided in Article 1(2) thereof, renders Directive 75/applicable to hazardous waste, subject to its own provisions, does not contain any provision at all preventing application
         of Article of Directive 75/to the disposal of residues from the combustion of waste oils. 
         
            
Second, comparison of the wording of Article of Directive 78/and Article of Directive 75/reveals that their content
         is largely identical and that they have the same objective, namely to make the disposal of residues from the combustion of
         waste oils subject to prior grant of a permit and to specify the matters which the permit must cover. 
         
            
Accordingly, relying on the judgment in Case C-365/Commission  v  
          Italy  [1999] ECR I-7773, at paragraphs and 40, the Commission maintains that the fact that it referred to Article of Directive
         75/for the first time in the application does not render the complaint inadmissible since the complaint concerns obligations
         arising under that directive which were already applicable under Directive 78/319. 
         
            
As to the merits, the Commission states that it is clear from the Portuguese Government's replies to the letter of formal
         notice and to the reasoned opinion that the Portuguese legislation prior to Decree-Law No 239/and Implementing Order No
         818/did not require, before June 1995, residues from the combustion of waste oils to be disposed of in accordance with
         Article of Directive 78/or, after that date, in accordance with Article of Directive 75/442. 
         
            
The Portuguese Government challenges the admissibility of the Commission's complaint. In its submission, the complaint relates
         to new facts, upon which it did not have the opportunity to state its view in the pre-litigation procedure, and its rights
         of defence have thus been infringed. It maintains that the pre-litigation procedure was concerned with implementation of Directive
         75/and that alone, and that the transposition of Article of Directive 75/into domestic law was not put in issue
         at any time. 
         
            
Although the Portuguese Government considers that the Commission could not properly include in its application the question
         of implementation of Directive 75/442, it none the less wishes to state that the provisions of Article of that directive
         are fully implemented in its national legislation. 
         
            
In support of its assertion it cites, first, Articles and 4(2) of Decree-Law No 88/91, which make the transport, disposal
         and recovery of waste oils subject to prior authorisation of the Director-General for Environmental Quality, thereby implementing
         Article 8(2)(a) of Directive 75/439. 
         
            
Second, the Portuguese Government points out that, from 1997, it is Articles 8(1) and 9(1) of Decree-Law No 239/which have
         made the disposal of residues from the combustion of waste oils subject to prior authorisation, thereby establishing a rule
         forming the basis for implementation of Article of Directive 75/442. 
         
            
Finally, the Portuguese Government submits that the conditions to which grant of prior authorisation to carry out such disposal
         is subject are apparent from Annexes I and II to Implementing Order No 961/98, to which Article 3(1)(c) of that order refers
         and which prescribe the production of documents regarding, in particular, technical requirements in relation to the installation,
         safety precautions to be taken, disposal sites and the method of treatment used. 
         
            
In its reply, the Commission states that it has been unable, upon examination of the legislation referred to by the Portuguese
         Government in its defence, to find national provisions correctly transposing Article of Directive 78/or Article of
         Directive 75/442. 
         
            
First of all, Articles and 4(2) of Decree-Law No 88/cannot be taken into account since they do not lay down specific
         provisions with regard to the disposal of residues from the combustion of waste oils. 
         
            
As regards the provisions of Decree-Law No 239/relied upon by the Portuguese Government, the Commission points out that
         none of them lays down the items which must accompany an application for prior authorisation to carry out the waste disposal
         operations. 
         
            
Finally, the Commission takes the view that Implementing Order No 961/transposes appropriately the rules laid down in Article
         of Directive 75/442, but that it cannot be taken into account in the present case because it entered into force after expiry
         of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion. 
         Findings of the Court
         ─ Admissibility
         
            
It is settled case-law that the purpose of the pre-litigation procedure laid down in Article EC is to give the Member
         State concerned an opportunity to comply with its obligations under Community law or to avail itself of its right to defend
         itself against the complaints made by the Commission (see,  
          inter alia , Case C-1/Commission  v  
          France  [2001] ECR I-9989, paragraph 53). 
         
            
It is also settled case-law that the proper conduct of that pre-litigation procedure constitutes an essential guarantee required
         by the Treaty not only in order to protect the rights of the Member State concerned, but also to ensure that any contentious
         procedure will have a clearly defined dispute as its subject-matter. It is only on the basis of a properly conducted pre-litigation
         procedure that the contentious procedure before the Court will enable the latter to judge whether the Member State has in
         fact failed to fulfil the specific obligations which the Commission alleges it has breached (see,  
          inter alia , the order in Case C-266/Commission  v  
          Spain   [1995] ECR I-1975, paragraphs and 18, and Case C-365/Commission  v  
          Italy , cited above, paragraph 35). 
         
            
Thus, although the claims as stated in the application cannot in principle be extended beyond the infringements alleged in
         the letter of formal notice and in the operative part of the reasoned opinion, it is none the less the case that, where Community
         law is amended during the course of the pre-litigation procedure, the Commission has standing to seek a declaration that a
         Member State has failed to fulfil obligations which were created in the initial version of a directive, subsequently amended
         or repealed, and which were maintained in force under the new provisions (see Case C-365/Commission  v  
          Italy , paragraph 36). 
         
            
Conversely, the subject-matter of the dispute cannot be extended to obligations arising under the new version of a directive
         which do not correspond to those arising under the previous version of that directive, as otherwise it would constitute a
         breach of the essential procedural requirements of infringement proceedings (see, to that effect, Case C-365/Commission  v  
          Italy , paragraph 39). 
         
            
It is in the light of this case-law that it should be examined whether, in the present case, the lack of consistency between
         the reasoned opinion and the application, in so far as the reasoned opinion refers exclusively to implementation of the obligations
         flowing from Article of Directive 78/319, whereas the application also refers to the obligations arising under Article of Directive 75/442, constitutes a ground rendering the Commission's second complaint inadmissible. 
         
            
First of all, by virtue of Article of Directive 91/689, that directive replaced Directive 78/from June 1995. 
         
            
Directive 91/689, as provided in Article 1(2) thereof, extended the application of Directive 75/to hazardous waste, subject
         to its own provisions. Since Directive 91/does not contain any other provision in this connection, from June Article
         of Directive 75/became applicable to residues from the combustion of waste oils, thereby replacing Article of Directive
         78/319. 
         
            
It follows that, from that date, the reference in Article 8(2)(a) of Directive 75/to Article of the repealed Directive
         78/must be understood as a reference to Article of Directive 75/442, so that, on a proper construction of Article 8(2)(a)
         of Directive 75/439, from June the requirements relating to the disposal of residues from the combustion of waste
         oils which are envisaged by that provision are those laid down in Article of Directive 75/442. 
         
            
However, in light of the criteria established by the case-law cited in paragraphs and of this judgment, it still remains
         to determine whether the obligations arising under Article of Directive 75/were already laid down by Article of Directive
         78/319. 
         
            
Article 9(1) of Directive 75/442, like Article 9(1) and (2) of Directive 78/319, contains an obligation on the Member States
         to make the activities of undertakings which dispose of residues from the combustion of waste oils subject to a permit, together
         with a non-exhaustive list of the matters which the permit is to cover. 
         
            
In addition, Article 9(2) of Directive 75/takes up the wording of Article 9(3) of Directive 78/319, in so far as both
         those provisions lay down that permits may be granted for a specified period, be renewed and be subject to conditions and
         obligations. 
         
            
However, Article 9(2) of Directive 75/442, unlike Article 9(3) of Directive 78/319, provides for the possibility of refusing
         a permit, if the intended method is unacceptable from the point of view of environmental protection. 
         
            
Thus, in order to implement the permit regime laid down in Article of Directive 75/for the disposal of residues from
         the combustion of waste oils, the Member States are required to provide not only for the possibility of issuing permits that
         are valid for a specified period, renewable and subject to conditions and obligations, as was already the case under Article
         of Directive 78/319, but also for the possibility of refusing a permit, if the environmental protection requirement is not
         met. 
         
            
It is thus apparent that, by referring to Article of Directive 75/for the first time in its application, the Commission
         extended the subject-matter of the dispute, in so far as that article imposes on the Member States an obligation additional
         to those already flowing from Article of Directive 78/319, the provision referred to in the reasoned opinion. 
         
            
It follows that the complaint alleging that Article 8(2)(a) of Directive 75/has not been implemented correctly is admissible
         only in so far as it concerns, before June 1995, the obligations flowing from Article of Directive 78/and, from that
         date, the obligations arising under Article of Directive 75/which were already owed by the Member States under Article
         of Directive 78/319. 
         ─ Substance
         
            
First of all, the provisions of Decree-Law No 88/do not transpose into Portuguese law the obligations flowing from Article
         8(2)(a) of Directive 75/in relation to the disposal of residues from the combustion of waste oils. Suffice it to state,
         first, that the authorisation procedure provided for in Article 4(2) of that decree-law concerns only waste oils, and not
         residues from their combustion, and second, that Article of the decree-law equally does not lay down an authorisation procedure
         for the disposal of residues from the combustion of waste oils, but only a prohibition on the tipping and landfilling of waste
         oils and residues from their treatment. 
         
            
Nor can Articles and of Decree-Law No 239/be regarded as measures appropriately implementing Article 8(2)(a) of Directive
         75/439, since they merely make the disposal of residues from the combustion of waste oils subject to prior authorisation of
         the Minister for the Environment, without establishing the detailed rules of that procedure and, therefore, without complying
         with the requirements of the provisions to which Article 8(2)(a) of Directive 75/refers. 
         
            
As the Portuguese Government itself acknowledges, those detailed rules were prescribed only by Implementing Order No 961/98.
         For the reasons set out in paragraphs and of this judgment, that order cannot be taken into consideration in the present
         proceedings. 
         
            
Accordingly, the inevitable conclusion is that the Portuguese Republic failed to adopt, within the period laid down, the provisions
         needed in order to comply with the obligations flowing, before June 1995, from Article of Directive 78/and, from
         that date, with those arising under Article of Directive 75/which were already owed by the Member States under Article
         of Directive 78/319. 
         
            
Since the requirements relating to the disposal of residues from the combustion of waste oils, envisaged by Article 8(2)(a)
         of Directive 75/439, were not correctly transposed into Portuguese law, the Commission's second complaint must be upheld,
         within the limits previously set out. 
         Failure to implement Article 13(1) of Directive 75/Arguments of the parties
         
            
In the first part of its third complaint, the Commission alleges that the Portuguese Republic has failed to implement the
         obligation, laid down in Article 13(1) of Directive 75/439, to inspect periodically undertakings which regenerate waste oils
         or use them as fuel, particularly as regards their compliance with the conditions of their permits. 
         
            
In its application, the Commission states that in the pre-litigation procedure the Portuguese Government did not deny that
         the Regulation annexed to Implementing Order No 240/contained no provision at all providing for periodical inspection of
         undertakings which dispose of waste oils, in particular in order to ensure compliance with the conditions of their permits,
         and did not put forward other national provisions which could ensure compliance with this inspection obligation, laid down
         in Article 13(1) of Directive 75/439. 
         
            
In its defence and rejoinder, the Portuguese Government challenges the Commission's contentions and pleads various national
         provisions which, in its submission, are intended to ensure compliance with that obligation. 
         
            
First of all, it refers to Article of Decree-Law No 88/91, which provides that responsibility for overseeing observance
         of the provisions of that decree-law lies with the Directorate-General for Energy and the regional agencies of the Ministry
         for Industry and Energy, and adds that, in accordance with Article of Decree-Law No 239/97, every undertaking which regenerates
         waste oils or uses them as fuel may, at any time, be subject to inspection or scrutiny by the foregoing bodies or by the Institute
         for Waste, the regional directorates for the environment, the Inspectorate-General for the Environment, the municipal authorities
         or the police authorities. 
         
            
The Portuguese Government explains that, as is apparent from Decree-Law No 239/97, those bodies consult each year on an action
         plan for the regular inspection of waste management installations and, where irregularities come to light, may, depending
         on their gravity, adopt the measures provided for in Articles 19, and of the decree-law, that is to say adopt protective
         measures or impose fines or ancillary penalties. 
         
            
The Portuguese Government points out with regard to the Institute for Waste in particular that, as is apparent from Article
         of Decree-Law No 236/97, it has responsibility for implementing national waste policy and ensuring compliance with technical
         standards and regulations, and carries out intersectoral action concerning,  
          inter alia , industrial waste. 
         
            
The Portuguese Government pleads, in addition, the legislation on industrial permits, in particular Article of Decree-Law
         No 109/which makes express provision for overseeing observance of the statutory provisions relating to the pursuit of industrial
         activity. In this context it also points out that under Article of that decree-law, and Article of Implementing Order
         No 961/98, third parties are able to submit complaints relating to the installation, alteration and operation of any industrial
         establishment to the competent authorities, which are required to take the necessary measures, in particular by means of inspections.
         
         
            
The Portuguese Government refers furthermore to Article of Decree-Law No 189/93, from which it is apparent that it is the
         task of the Office for Environmental Inspection and Supervision to carry out inspections of industrial installations enabling
         compliance with environmental legislation in force to be verified. This involves both ordinary inspections, carried out in
         accordance with an annual plan, and, where necessary, extraordinary inspections. 
         
            
Finally, the Portuguese Government relies on Articles and 4(1)(a) of Decree-Law No 549/99, which relate to the functions
         and powers of Inspectorate-General for the Environment, the body which has taken up the duties previously exercised by the
         Office for Environmental Inspection and Supervision. It also refers, in this context, to Article of Decree-Law No 549/99,
         which provides that that body and the other bodies with inspection functions are under a duty to cooperate with each other,
         using for that purpose the mechanisms which appear the most appropriate, and states that, in its opinion, such mechanisms
         include the annual drawing up of action plans. 
         
            
The Commission takes the view that none of the national provisions cited by the Portuguese Government ensures that undertakings
         covered by Article 13(1) of Directive 75/are subject to systematic inspections carried out on a periodic basis. 
         
            
In particular, it submits that it does not necessarily follow from Article of Directive 109/that inspection is periodical,
         and points out that Article of that decree-law and Article of Implementing Order No 961/do not indicate either that
         inspection of the undertakings must satisfy that condition. The fact that, in accordance with Article 7(1) and (3) of Decree-Law
         No 109/91, the body which has the complaint before it must take the necessary measures, in particular by means of inspections,
         when acting upon the complaint demonstrates, on the contrary, that scrutiny is dependent, in this case, on the submission
         of the complaint and that it is therefore occasional and relates solely to undertakings which are the subject of such complaints.
         
         Findings of the Court
         
            
Directive 75/439, as is apparent from Article thereof read in conjunction with Article 13, obliges the Member States to
         establish in their national legal orders machinery for supervising undertakings which dispose of waste oils, and sets out
         the minimum requirements which that machinery must satisfy, as regards its subject-matter and the conditions governing its
         operation. 
         
            
More specifically, the undertakings concerned must be subject to scrutiny both under the authorisation procedure which precedes
         the commencement of operations for the disposal of waste oils, in accordance with Article of Directive 75/439, and in the
         course of those operations on a periodical basis, as is clear from Article 13(1) of the directive. 
         
            
The effect of Article of the directive, in conjunction with Article 13(1), is that, in both cases, the scrutiny must relate
         to compliance with the conditions of the permits, which means that, both under the procedure for issue of the initial permit
         and in the course of the periodical inspections carried out subsequently, the competent authorities must satisfy themselves
         that all appropriate environmental and health protection measures have been taken, including use of the best technology available
         where the cost is not excessive. 
         
            
The provisions of national law cited in this connection by the Portuguese Government do not satisfy the requirements arising
         from Article 13(1) of Directive 75/439, as described above. 
         
            
First of all, the provisions relating to the supervisory powers of the various bodies, namely Article of Decree-Law No 88/91,
         Article of Decree-Law No 239/97, Article of Decree-Law No 109/91, Article of Decree-Law No 236/and Article of
         Decree-Law No 189/93, merely allow the competent authorities to carry out inspections, periodic where appropriate, without
         imposing an obligation upon them in this regard. 
         
            
Even if, as the Portuguese Government contends, it follows from those provisions that every undertaking which disposes of
         waste oils may be inspected at any time, the fact remains that they do not ensure that the undertakings concerned are in fact
         inspected periodically. Furthermore, the inspections covered by them relate only to compliance with the provisions of the
         various applicable decree-laws, and not specifically to compliance with the conditions of the permits, in accordance with
         the obligation which arises under Article 13(1) of Directive 75/439, read in conjunction with Article thereof. 
         
            
Next, in accordance with the case-law recalled in paragraph of this judgment, the provisions of Decree-Law No 549/which
         have been pleaded by the Portuguese Government in this context cannot be taken into consideration in the present proceedings
         because that decree-law did not enter into force until December 1999, that is to say after expiry of the period laid down
         in the reasoned opinion. 
         
            
As to the obligation on the competent authorities to act upon complaints of third parties by taking the necessary measures,
         in particular by inspecting the installations of the undertakings concerned, which results from Article of Decree-Law No
         109/91, it must be stated that that obligation does not satisfy any of the requirements flowing from the Community legislation.
         As the Commission has rightly observed, the inspections referred to in Article of that decree-law are random, inasmuch as
         they are dependent on submission of a complaint and concern solely the undertaking which is the subject of the complaint.
         
         
            
Furthermore, for the reasons stated in paragraphs and of this judgment, Article of Implementing Order No 961/98, which
         is also pleaded in this connection, cannot be taken into consideration in the present proceedings. 
         
            
Finally, as regards the possibility, provided for in Articles 19, and of Decree-Law No 239/97, of adopting protective
         measures or imposing fines or ancillary measures should inspections conducted at waste management installations reveal serious
         irregularities, suffice it to state that such measures cannot in any case be regarded as appropriate implementation of Article
         13(1) of Directive 75/since they do not ensure that compliance with the conditions of permits is checked periodically.
         
         
            
It therefore follows from the foregoing considerations that Article 13(1) of Directive 75/was not correctly implemented
         by the Portuguese Republic. 
         Failure to implement Article 13(2) of Directive 75/Arguments of the parties
         
            
In the second part of its third complaint, the Commission alleges that the Portuguese Republic has failed to implement the
         obligation, laid down in Article 13(2) of Directive 75/439, to examine trends in the state of technical development and/or
         of the environment with a view to revising, where necessary, permits granted to undertakings which regenerate waste oils or
         use them as fuel. 
         
            
The Portuguese Government contends that the relevant applicable national legislation ensures periodical and systematic monitoring
         of the activity of undertakings which dispose of waste oils, in such a way that developments in the technological and environmental
         fields are assessed in the most effective manner for achieving the objectives referred to in Article 13(2) of Directive 75/439,
         since it provides that installations are subject to inspections enabling the competent authorities to impose at any time modifications
         considered more consonant with technical and scientific progress and to suspend authorisations granted to the undertakings
         concerned. 
         
            
The Portuguese Government refers in this regard to Decree-Law No 239/97, in particular to the transitional arrangements laid
         down by Article under which undertakings that hold an authorisation to conduct waste management operations are obliged
         to adapt to new requirements imposed in the meantime by national legislation. In the Portuguese Government's submission, since
         the new legislation that has been published essentially amounts to the transposition into national law of the Community legislation
         adapting the existing regulatory framework to technical and scientific progress, it must be accepted that there is constant
         adaptation to trends in the state of technical development and/or of the environment. It adds that Decree-Law No 239/makes
         express provision for overseeing observance of the rules which it lays down and Article of the decree-law sets out the
         competences for that purpose. 
         
            
The Portuguese Government observes furthermore that the general legislation concerning industrial permits provides for supervision
         in respect of the rules governing the pursuit of industrial activity. In this connection, it invokes Articles and of
         Decree-Law No 109/91, the second of which prescribes protective measures in the event of serious risk to health, the safety
         of persons and property, hygiene and safety of work premises and the environment. 
         
            
In addition, by virtue of Article of Decree-Law No 109/breach of the rules applicable to permits to engage in industrial
         activity constitutes an offence punishable by a fine and, under Article 8(1) of Decree-Law No 239/97, in conjunction with
         Articles 20(1) and 21(1)(f) thereof, ancillary penalties such as the suspension of permits, licences and approvals may also
         be imposed for failure to comply with the rules governing authorisation of the storage, recovery and disposal of waste. 
         
            
The Commission states that it cannot endorse the Portuguese Government's contention that, since the new legislation that has
         been published essentially amounts to the transposition into national law of the Community legislation adapting the existing
         regulatory framework to technical and scientific progress, it should be accepted that there is constant adaptation to trends
         in the state of technical development and/or of the environment. In its submission, that argument effectively renders Article
         13(2) of Directive 75/purposeless. 
         
            
According to the Commission, Article 13(2) obliges the competent authorities of the Member States continuously to assess developments
         in the technological and/or environmental fields. This means, for example, that if, at a given moment, the assessment carried
         out were to establish that, notwithstanding the conditions imposed when the permit was granted, the environmental situation
         had deteriorated or could deteriorate in the area where the undertaking disposing of waste oils had established itself or
         that, in the meantime, new products or equipment resulting from technology more modern than that which existed when the permit
         was granted had been put on the market, the competent authority could revise the permit granted in order to strengthen the
         protection of health and/or the environment. 
         
            
Finally, the Commission contends with regard to the provisions of Decree-Laws No 109/and No 239/relied upon by the Portuguese
         Government, that the obligation to assess developments in the technological and/or environmental fields cannot be complied
         with fully if recourse is had, solely or mainly, to supervision and/or protective measures. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
The obligation owed by national authorities under Article 13(2) of Directive 75/439, which forms an integral part of the supervisory
         machinery established by Articles and of that directive, as described in paragraphs 163, and of the present judgment,
         constitutes the necessary complement to the obligation laid down in Article 6(2) of the directive. 
         
            
While Article 6(2) requires the competent authorities to verify, in the course of the procedure for issuing a permit, whether
         undertakings have taken all appropriate environmental and health protection measures, including use of the best technology
         available where the cost is not excessive, when they commence operations for the disposal of waste oils, Article 13(2) obliges
         those authorities to make sure, in the context of the periodical inspections which they are required to carry out under Article
         13(1), that the conditions for the disposal of waste oils are adapted continuously to trends in the state of technical development
         and/or of the environment. 
         
            
It is thus apparent that that provision is addressed to the competent national authorities, imposing an obligation upon them
         constantly to revise, and to adapt to trends in the state of technical development and/or of the environment, permits granted
         to undertakings which dispose of waste oils. 
         
            
Accordingly, the Portuguese Government's argument that the adaptation required by that provision is already ensured by the
         continuous development of provisions of national law, in particular when they implement the Community provisions, cannot be
         upheld. 
         
            
In the light of the purpose of Article 13(2) of Directive 75/439, as described in the preceding paragraphs, it is also apparent
         that the specific provisions of national law pleaded by the Portuguese Government cannot be regarded as measures appropriately
         implementing that article. An obligation to revise or adapt permits granted in the light of trends in the state of technical
         development and/or of the environment is not imposed by Article of Decree-Law No 109/and Article of Decree-Law No
         239/97, which empower the competent authorities to oversee observance of the rules governing the pursuit of industrial activity,
         Article of Decree-Law No 109/91, which provides for the possibility of taking protective measures in the event of risk
         to the environment or health, or Article of Decree-Law No 109/91, and Article 8(1) of Decree-Law No 239/in conjunction
         with Articles 20(1) and 21(1)(f) thereof, which provide for the possibility of imposing penalties for failure to comply with
         the rules governing authorisation of the storage, recovery and disposal of waste. 
         
            
In view of the foregoing considerations, the Commission's third complaint, alleging a failure to implement Article of Directive
         75/439, must be upheld in its entirety. 
         Failure to convey the information envisaged in Article of Directive 75/Arguments of the parties
         
            
The Commission states in its application that, as Directive 75/was transposed into Portuguese law between February and April 1993, the national implementing legislation has been applied for a sufficiently long period to enable the Portuguese
         Government to obtain and to convey to it the information referred to in Article of that directive. 
         
            
However, the Portuguese Government still has not forwarded to it the report which it planned to send, according to its reply
         to the reasoned opinion,  
         before the end of September and which it described as  
         a more complete report on the transposition and implementation of the directive during 1995, and 1997, drawn up in accordance
         with Decision 94/741/EC, thereby ensuring full compliance with Article of the directive. 
         
            
The Commission states that the Portuguese Government has not denied that it failed to comply with that obligation. In its
         reply to the reasoned opinion, it justified the lack of information by contending that the frequency with which information
         had to be conveyed was not defined and that it did not consider that it had acquired information concerning technical expertise
         in applying its national legislation implementing Directive 75/439. 
         
            
The Commission submits, however, that the fact that a Member State considers that it has not acquired  
         information concerning technical expertise over a certain period does not dispense it from notifying the Commission thereof within the framework of the periodical communication
         of information provided for in Article of Directive 75/and that, if Member States were able to decide by themselves
         whether it was necessary to transmit information to it, the effectiveness of that article could be prejudiced. 
         
            
The Commission adds that if the Member States were not required also to make known that they have failed to acquire information
         concerning technical expertise during the reference period, it could not know that that failure is the very reason for the
         lack of communication and it would be obliged to initiate a procedure under Article EC for infringement of the obligation
         imposed by Article of Directive 75/439, in order to obtain the relevant information. 
         
            
As to the word  
         periodically in Article of Directive 75/439, the Commission submits that it means that the Member States are required to convey the
         information in question to it at regular intervals. Since the precise duration of those intervals is, however, not specified,
         they must be reasonable and their reasonableness must be determined on the basis of the nature of the information required
         by Article 17. According to the Commission, it transpires that the Portuguese Government has never forwarded any of the information
         referred to in that article. 
         
            
To rebut this complaint, the Portuguese Government states first of all that, as regards the obligation laid down in Article
         of Directive 75/to forward every three years a situation report on the disposal of waste oils, a first report, entitled
          
         Report on the application of Directive 87/101/EEC of December 1986, was communicated to the Commission on August 1995. 
         
            
With regard to the period from to 1997, the Portuguese Government refers to a report drawn up in accordance with Commission
         Decision 94/741/EC of October concerning questionnaires for Member States' reports on the implementation of certain
         directives in the waste sector (implementation of Council Directive 91/692/EEC) (OJ L 296, p. 42), which it annexed to
         its defence and notified to the Commission by letter of November 1999. 
         
            
The Portuguese Government explains that the delay in notification of that report to the Commission was due above all to the
         need to compare and validate information gathered by means of two existing data collection systems: first, the system provided
         for in Article of the Regulation annexed to Implementing Order No 240/92, which states that the registers of movements of
         waste oils, referred to in Article 3(1) and (2) of Decree-Law No 88/91, must be completed quarterly by holders, collectors
         and users of those oils and, second, the system established by Portaria (Implementing Order) No 792/of September (
          Diário da República  I, Series B, No 219, of September 1998) approving the model registration form for industrial waste. 
         
            
The Portuguese Government explains that, under Implementing Order No 792/98, producers of industrial waste are obliged to
         complete the registration form, identifying the waste in accordance with the European Waste Catalogue, and to submit it annually,
         before February of the year following the year to which the figures relate, to the regional directorate for the environment
         for the area within which the installation in question falls.  It adds that the regional directorates for the environment
         are responsible for validating and processing the information included in the registration forms and that information must
         be sent annually to the Institute for Waste, before September of the year following the year to which the figures relate.
         
         
            
The Commission states in reply, so far as concerns the first report on the application of Directive 87/101, referred to by
         the Portuguese Government, that the report, which lists and describes the national legislation implementing that directive,
         does not contain the information referred to in Article of Directive 75/439. 
         
            
As regards, next, the report drawn up in accordance with Decision 94/741, relating to the period from to 1997, the Commission
         explains that that decision adopted the questionnaire referred to in Article of Directive 75/439, as amended by Article
         of Council Directive 91/692/EEC of December standardising and rationalising reports on the implementation of certain
         directives relating to the environment (OJ L 377, p. 48) in conjunction with point (a) of Annex VI thereto. It also notes
         that Article 18, as amended, provides that  
         at intervals of three years Member States shall send information to the Commission on the implementation of [Directive 75/439]
         in the form of a sectoral report which must be  
         drawn up on the basis ... of a questionnaire or outline drafted by the Commission in accordance with the procedure laid down
         in Article of Directive 91/692/EEC, and that  
         the first report shall cover the period to inclusive. 
         
            
The Commission points out that the Portuguese Government has not specified the elements of that report which, although it
         was drawn up under Article 18, could, in its view, constitute the information relating to experience gained and results obtained
         by the competent authorities through the application of Directive 75/to which Article thereof refers. In any event,
         even though certain elements of that report could be considered to constitute such information, the Commission notes that
         that information had not been conveyed to it, pursuant to Article of Directive 75/439, on expiry of the period which it
         granted to the Portuguese Republic for complying with the reasoned opinion. 
         
            
Finally, in response to the Portuguese Government's argument that the delay in notification of the report drawn up in accordance
         with Decision 94/was attributable, in particular, to the need to compare and validate information gathered by means of
         the two data collection systems existing under Portuguese legislation, the Commission recalls the settled case-law according
         to which a Member State may not plead provisions, practices or circumstances existing in its internal legal system in order
         to justify a failure to comply with the obligations and time-limits laid down in a directive. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
It is to be observed at the outset that Article of Directive 75/is intended to enable both the Commission and the Member
         States to be informed on a periodic basis of the technical knowledge acquired by each of those States and of experience gained
         and results obtained through the application of the directive in the Community. 
         
            
In the light of the purpose of that article, the Portuguese Government's argument based on the fact that it considers that
         it has not acquired technical knowledge in applying its national legislation transposing Directive 75/into national law
         must be rejected. 
         
            
The fact that a Member State has not acquired new technical knowledge over a certain period also constitutes a useful piece
         of information with which the Commission and the other Member States should become acquainted by virtue of Article of Directive
         75/439, in particular as that article does not provide for any exception to the obligation to convey the information to which
         it refers. 
         
            
Nor can compliance with the obligation laid down in Article of Directive 75/to convey information depend on the assessment
         made by each Member State as to whether or not it possesses knowledge worth being conveyed, as otherwise the effectiveness
         of that provision would be prejudiced. 
         
            
It should also be remembered that Article of Directive 75/imposes on the Member States the obligation to disclose not
         only any technical knowledge that may have been acquired, but also experience gained and results obtained through the application
         of the measures brought into force in national law in order to implement that directive. 
         
            
Finally, as is clear from the file, on expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion seven years had already elapsed
         since the adoption of the first measure transposing Directive 75/into Portuguese law, namely Decree-Law No 88/91, which
         entered into force on February 1991. 
         
            
In the light of the long period of time which thus elapsed, the Portuguese Government cannot legitimately plead the fact that
         the frequency with which information must be conveyed under the obligation imposed by Article of Directive 75/is not
         specified as justification for its failure to perform that obligation. 
         
            
So far as concerns the two reports relied upon by the Portuguese Government, it must be stated that neither of them can be
         regarded as satisfying the obligation to convey information in Article of Directive 75/439. 
         
            
As the Commission has observed without being contradicted by the Portuguese Government, the report on the application of Directive
         87/cannot be regarded, from the point of view of its content, as a report for the purposes of Article of Directive
         75/439, since it contains only a description of the national provisions implementing Directive 75/439, and not the technical
         knowledge, experience and results specifically required under that article. 
         
            
As to the report drawn up in accordance with Decision 94/741, suffice it to state that, even if it could be regarded as satisfying
         the requirements arising under Article of Directive 75/439, it cannot be taken into consideration in the present infringement
         proceedings because it was communicated to the Commission after expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion. 
         
            
It follows that the Commission's fourth complaint, alleging a failure to convey the information prescribed in Article of
         Directive 75/439, must also be upheld. 
         
            
In view of all the foregoing considerations, it must be found that: 
         
─
by failing to adopt, within the prescribed period, provisions requiring the competent authority, before granting a permit
            to undertakings which regenerate waste oils or use them as fuel, to satisfy itself that health is appropriately protected
            where waste oils are used as fuel and that the best available technology not entailing excessive cost is used where waste
            oils are regenerated or used as fuel; 
         
─
by failing to lay down, within the prescribed period, that residues from the combustion of waste oils are to be disposed of
            in accordance with the obligations flowing from Article of Directive 78/and, from June 1995, in accordance with the
            obligations arising under Article of Directive 75/which were already owed by the Member States under Article of Directive
            78/319; 
         
─
by not providing, within the prescribed period, for periodical inspection of undertakings which regenerate waste oils or use
            them as fuel, or for examination of trends in the state of technical development and/or of the environment with a view to
            revising, where necessary, permits granted to those undertakings; 
         
─
by failing to convey to the Commission information concerning technical expertise and the experience gained and results obtained
            through the application of measures taken pursuant to Directive 75/439, 
         
the Portuguese Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles 6(2), 8(2)(a), and of Directive 75/439.
         
Costs
            
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they
         have been applied for in the successful party's pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Portuguese Republic
         has essentially been unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)
hereby: 
         
1.
 Declares that: 
            
─
by failing to adopt, within the prescribed period, provisions requiring the competent authority, before granting a permit
            to undertakings which regenerate waste oils or use them as fuel, to satisfy itself that health is appropriately protected
            where waste oils are used as fuel and that the best available technology not entailing excessive cost is used where waste
            oils are regenerated or used as fuel; 
            
─
by failing to lay down, within the prescribed period, that residues from the combustion of waste oils are to be disposed of
            in accordance with the obligations flowing from Article of Council Directive 78/319/EEC of March on toxic and dangerous
            waste and, from June 1995, in accordance with the obligations arising under Article of Council Directive 75/442/EEC of
            July on waste, as amended by Council Directive 91/156/EEC of March 1991, which were already owed by the Member
            States under Article of Directive 78/319; 
            
 ─
by not providing, within the prescribed period, for periodical inspection of undertakings which regenerate waste oils or use
            them as fuel, or for examination of trends in the state of technical development and/or of the environment with a view to
            revising, where necessary, permits granted to those undertakings; 
            
─
by failing to convey to the Commission information concerning technical expertise and the experience gained and results obtained
            through the application of measures taken pursuant to Council Directive 75/439/EEC of June on the disposal of waste
            oils, as amended by Council Directive 87/101/EEC of December 1986, 
            
the Portuguese Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles 6(2), 8(2)(a), and of Directive 75/439,
            as amended by Directive 87/101; 
            
2.
 Dismisses the remainder of the application; 
3.
 Orders the Portuguese Republic to pay the costs. 
Puissochet
Schintgen 
Skouris 
Macken
Colneric 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on April 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
J.-P. Puissochet  
Registrar
President of the Sixth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: Portuguese.
Top  
 