
Avis juridique important
|
61989JJudgment of the Court of June 1991.  -  Commission of the European Communities v Kingdom of Belgium.  -  Failure to comply with Council Directives 75/440/EEC and 79/869/EEC - Surface water for the production of drinking water - Duty to notify.  -  Case C-290/89.  
European Court reports Page I-Summary
Parties
Grounds
Decision on costs
Operative part
Keywords
++++Member States - Obligations - Compliance with directives - Failure - Justification - Not acceptable  (EEC Treaty, Art. 169)  
Summary
A Member State may not plead provisions, practices or circumstances existing in its internal legal system to justify a failure to comply with obligations and time-limits laid down in Community directives. 
Parties
In Case C-290/89,  Commission of the European Communities, represented by Thomas van Rijn, a member of its Legal Service, acting as Agent, with an address of service in Luxembourg at the office of Guido Berardis, a member of its Legal Service, Wagner Centre, Kirchberg,  applicant,  v  Kingdom of Belgium, represented by Jan Devadder, Deputy Adviser in the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, External Trade and Development Cooperation, with an address of service in Luxembourg at the Belgian Embassy, Rue des Girondins,  defendant,  APPLICATION for a declaration that, by failing to notify the measures taken to implement Council Directive 75/440/EEC of June concerning the quality required of surface water intended for the abstraction of drinking water in the Member States (Official Journal L 194, p. 26) and Council Directive 79/869/EEC of October concerning the methods of measurement and frequency of sampling and analysis of surface water intended for the abstraction of drinking water in Member States (Official Journal L 271, p. 44), or by failing to adopt the measures required for the implementation of those directives, the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EEC Treaty,  THE COURT,  composed of: O. Due, President, J.C. Moitinho de Almeida and M. Díez de Velasco (Presidents of Chambers), Sir Gordon Slynn, C.N. Kakouris, R. Joliet, F. Grévisse, M. Zuleeg and P.J.G. Kapteyn, Judges,  Advocate General: C.O. Lenz,  Registrar: D. Louterman, Principal Administrator,  having regard to the Report for the Hearing,  after hearing oral argument from the parties at the hearing on January 1991,  after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on February 1991,  gives the following  Judgment  
Grounds
By application lodged at the Court Registry on September 1989, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action under Article of the EEC Treaty for a declaration that, by failing to notify the measures taken to implement Council Directive 75/440/EEC of June concerning the quality required of surface water intended for the abstraction of drinking water in the Member States (Official Journal L 194, p. 26) and Council Directive 79/869/EEC of October concerning the methods of measurement and frequencies of sampling and analysis of surface water intended for the abstraction of drinking water in the Member States (Official Journal L 271, p. 44), or by failing to adopt the measures required for the implementation of those directives, the Kingdom of Belgium had failed to fulfil its obligations under the EEC Treaty.  Article of Directive 75/and Article of Directive 79/provide that the Member States are to bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions needed in order to comply with the directives within two years of their notification and are forthwith to inform the Commission thereof. The directives were notified to the Kingdom of Belgium on June and October 1979, respectively, and the period thus expired on June and October respectively.  Reference is made to the Report for the Hearing for a fuller account of the procedure and the pleas in law and arguments of the parties, which are mentioned or discussed hereinafter only in so far as is necessary for the reasoning of the Court.  Article of Directive 79/requires Member States to provide the Commission at its request with all relevant information on the methods of analysis used and the frequency of analysis. The Kingdom of Belgium did not reply to the questions which the Commission had put to it in that respect by letter dated December or to other questions formulated in the same letter also in relation to the implementation of Directives 75/and 79/869. It was only before the Court that the Belgian Government specified the manner in which that directive had, according to itself, been transposed into its national legal system.  It follows that the Kingdom of Belgium infringed the aforementioned Article of Directive 79/and also Article of the Treaty and, accordingly, the complaint of failure to notify the measures adopted for the purposes of the implementation of Directives 75/and 79/must be upheld.  As regards the complaint of failure to adopt the requisite measures for implementation of the two directives, it should first be noted that the Commission accepts the Belgian Government' s position set out in the defence, according to which no measure of transposition is required for the Brussels Region since there is no surface water in that region intended for the production of drinking water.  As regards the Flemish Region, the parties agree that the measures adopted by the Belgian Government correctly transpose the directives, with the exception of Article 4(2) of Directive 75/440. No systematic plan of action, including a timetable for the improvement of surface water, as required by Article 4(2), has been drawn up by the Kingdom of Belgium.  As regards the Walloon Region, the Belgian Government does not deny that several provisions of the directives have not been transposed, but it alleges that that is due to the lack of the necessary financial means.  In that respect it should be pointed out that, as the Court has consistently held, a Member State may not plead provisions, practices or circumstances existing in its internal legal system in order to justify a failure to comply with obligations and time-limits resulting from Community law (see, in particular, the judgment in Case 254/Commission v Italy [1984] ECR 3395).  It follows from all the above considerations that, by failing to notify the measures adopted for the implementation of Directive 75/and 79/and by failing to adopt the measures required for the implementation of those directives in the Flemish and Walloon Regions, the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EEC Treaty.  
Decision on costs
Costs  Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs. Since the Kingdom of Belgium has been unsuccessful, it must be ordered to pay the costs.  
Operative part
On those grounds,  THE COURT,  hereby:  1. Declares that, by failing to notify the measures adopted for the implementation of Council Directive 75/440/EEC of June concerning the quality required of surface water intended for the extraction of drinking water in the Member States and Council Directive 79/869/EEC of October concerning the methods of measurement and frequencies of sampling and analysis of surface water intended for the abstraction of drinking water in the Member States, and by failing to adopt the measures required for the implementation of those directives in the Flemish and Walloon Regions, the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EEC Treaty;  2. Orders the Kingdom of Belgium to pay the costs.  
Top  
 