
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Seventh Chamber)
September (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 2005/14/EC – Insurance against civil liability – Motor vehicles – Failure to transpose within the prescribed period)
In Case C‑457/08,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on October 2008,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by N. Yerrell, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, represented by L. Seeboruth, acting as Agent,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (Seventh Chamber),
composed of A. Ó Caoimh, President of the Chamber, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues and U. Lõhmus (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: M. Poiares Maduro,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities seeks a declaration from the Court that, by failing to adopt
         the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Directive 2005/14/EC of the European Parliament
         and of the Council of May amending Council Directives 72/166/EEC, 84/5/EEC, 88/357/EEC and 90/232/EEC and Directive
         2000/26/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council relating to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use
         of motor vehicles (OJ L 149, p. 14), or, in any event, by failing to notify those provisions to the Commission, the United
         Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of Directive 2005/14.
      
Directive 2005/makes a number of amendments to earlier Community directives relating to insurance against civil liability
         in respect of the use of motor vehicles. Article 6(1) of Directive 2005/provides that Member States were to bring into
         force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with that directive by June at the latest,
         and to inform the Commission thereof forthwith.
      
 Pre-litigation procedure 
Since the Commission was not informed of the measures adopted by the United Kingdom to transpose Directive 2005/into national
         law within the period prescribed by that directive, it initiated infringement proceedings under Article EC, and gave that
         Member State formal notice, by letter of August 2007, to submit its observations.
      
In their response of September 2007, the United Kingdom authorities informed the Commission that the measures necessary
         to transpose Directive 2005/had been adopted in relation to Great Britain, and stated that in Northern Ireland the necessary
         regulations would probably be operational by autumn 2007. As regards Gibraltar, they stated that the drafting of legislation
         would ‘shortly commence’ and that the intention was to complete all legislative stages by June 2008.
      
Since the Commission received formal communication of the implementing measures for Northern Ireland on February 2008, but
         no information concerning the situation in Gibraltar, on April it issued a reasoned opinion calling on the Member State
         to adopt the measures necessary to comply with that reasoned opinion within two months of its receipt. 
      
By letter of June 2008, the Government of the United Kingdom accepted that it had failed to transpose Directive 2005/in Gibraltar in sufficient time, while confirming that the Government of Gibraltar expected to have adopted the necessary
         measures by the end of July 2008.
      
Since the Commission did not receive any further information to show that the measures necessary to transpose Directive 2005/in Gibraltar had finally been adopted by the Member State concerned, it brought the present action. 
      
 The action
In its defence, the United Kingdom acknowledges that Directive 2005/was not transposed in Gibraltar before the expiry of
         the period laid down in Article 6(1) thereof. However, in that connection, it contends, first, that the directive has a wide-ranging
         effect on a substantial amount of existing legislation in Gibraltar, and that transposition was therefore delayed largely
         due to the fact that it was necessary to conduct an extensive review of existing Gibraltar legislation in order to assess
         the directive’s impact. Second, it contends that the measures to transpose the directive in Gibraltar will be adopted and
         enter into force shortly, outlining a timetable for this. 
      
In that regard, it is sufficient to recall, first, that a Member State may not rely on provisions, practices or circumstances
         prevailing in its domestic legal system to justify the failure to observe obligations and time-limits laid down in a directive
         (see, inter alia, Case C-114/Commission v France [2003] ECR I‑3783, paragraph 11, and judgment of December in Case C-330/Commission v France, paragraph 16).
      
Second, according to the Court’s settled case-law, the question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations
         must be determined by reference to the situation prevailing in the Member State at the end of the period laid down in the
         reasoned opinion and the Court cannot take account of any subsequent changes (see, inter alia, judgment of September in Case C-9/Commission v France, paragraph 8, and Case C‑152/Commission v Germany [2008] ECR I‑39, paragraph 15).
      
In the present case, it is common ground that, at the expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion, the United Kingdom
         had not adopted the measures necessary to transpose Directive 2005/in Gibraltar. 
      
In those circumstances, the action brought by the Commission must be considered to be well founded.
      
Accordingly, it must be declared that, by failing to adopt, within the prescribed period, the laws, regulations and administrative
         provisions necessary to comply with Directive 2005/14, the United Kingdom has failed to fulfil its obligations under that
         directive. 
      
 Costs
Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure provides that the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have
         been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the United Kingdom has
         been unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Seventh Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, by failing to adopt, within the prescribed period, the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary
            to comply with Directive 2005/14/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of May amending Council Directives
            72/166/EEC, 84/5/EEC, 88/357/EEC and 90/232/EEC and Directive 2000/26/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council relating
            to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
            Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under Directive 2005/14/EC;
2.      Orders the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to pay the costs. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 