
Case C-17/B.F. Cadman
v
Health & Safety Executive
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Court of Appeal (England and Wales) (Civil Division))
(Social policy – Article EC – Principle of equal pay for men and women – Length of service as a determinant of pay – Objective justification – Burden of proof)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Social policy – Male and female workers – Equal pay 
(Art. EC; Council Directive 97/80)
2.        Social policy – Male and female workers – Equal pay 
(Art. EC; Council Directive 97/80)
1.        Article EC is to be interpreted as meaning that, where recourse to the criterion of length of service as a determinant
         of pay leads to disparities in pay, in respect of equal work or work of equal value, between the men and women to be included
         in the comparison, since, as a general rule, recourse to the criterion of length of service is appropriate to attain the legitimate
         objective of rewarding experience acquired which enables the worker to perform his duties better, the employer does not have
         to establish specifically that recourse to that criterion is appropriate to attain that objective as regards a particular
         job, unless the worker provides evidence capable of raising serious doubts in that regard.   It is therefore for the employer
         to prove that that which is true as a general rule, namely that length of service goes hand in hand with experience and that
         experience enables the worker to perform his duties better, is also true as regards the job in question. 
      
(see paras 38, 40, operative part)
2.        Article EC is to be interpreted as meaning that, where recourse to the criterion of length of service as a determinant
         of pay leads to disparities in pay, in respect of equal work or work of equal value, between the men and women to be included
         in the comparison, where a job classification system based on an evaluation of the work to be carried out is used in determining
         pay, there is no need to show that an individual worker has acquired experience during the relevant period which has enabled
         him to perform his duties better. By contrast, the nature of the work to be carried out must be considered objectively.
      
(see paras 39-40, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Social policy – Article EC – Principle of equal pay for men and women –Length of service as a determinant of pay – Objective justification – Burden of proof)
In Case C-17/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, from the Court of Appeal (England and Wales) (Civil Division) (United
         Kingdom), made by decision of January 2005, received at the Court on January 2005, in the proceedings
      
B.F. Cadman
v
Health & Safety Executive,
intervener:
Equal Opportunities Commission,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans and A. Rosas, Presidents of Chambers, R. Schintgen, N. Colneric
         (Rapporteur), S. von Bahr, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, J. Klučka, U. Lõhmus, E. Levits, A. Ó Caoimh and L. Bay Larsen, Judges,
      
Advocate General: M. Poiares Maduro,
Registrar: B. Fülöp, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on March 2006,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Mrs Cadman, by T. Gill, Barrister, and E. Hawksworth, Solicitor,
–        the Equal Opportunities Commission, by R. Allen QC, R. Crasnow, Barrister, and J. Hardwick and M. Robison, Solicitors,
–        the United Kingdom Government, by M. Bethell and E. O’Neill, acting as Agents, and N. Underhill QC, N. Paines QC and J. Eady,
         Barrister,
      
–        the French Government, by G. de Bergues, acting as Agent,
–        Ireland, by D. O’Hagan, acting as Agent, and N. Travers, BL,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by M.-J. Jonczy and N. Yerrell, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on May 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article EC.
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings between Mrs Cadman and the Health & Safety Executive (‘the HSE’) concerning
         the alignment of her pay with that of her male colleagues.
      
 Legal background
 Community legislation
Article 141(1) and (2) EC provides:
      
‘1.      Each Member State shall ensure that the principle of equal pay for male and female workers for equal work or work of equal
         value is applied.
      
2.      For the purpose of this article, “pay” means the ordinary basic or minimum wage or salary and any other consideration, whether
         in cash or in kind, which the worker receives directly or indirectly, in respect of his employment, from his employer.
      
Equal pay without discrimination based on sex means:
(a)      that pay for the same work at piece rates shall be calculated on the basis of the same unit of measurement;
(b)      that pay for work at time rates shall be the same for the same job.’
Article of Council Directive 75/117/EEC of February on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating
         to the application of the principle of equal pay for men and women (OJ L 45, p. 19) provides:
      
‘The principle of equal pay for men and women outlined in Article [EC], hereinafter called “principle of equal pay”, means,
         for the same work or for work to which equal value is attributed, the elimination of all discrimination on grounds of sex
         with regard to all aspects and conditions of remuneration.
      
In particular, where a job classification system is used for determining pay, it must be based on the same criteria for both
         men and women and so drawn up as to exclude any discrimination on grounds of sex.’
      
Council Directive 97/80/EC of December on the burden of proof in cases of discrimination based on sex (OJ L 14,
         p. 6) is to apply, in accordance with Article 3(1) thereof, to the situations covered, inter alia, by Article EC and by
         Directive 75/117.
      
Article 2(2) of Directive 97/states:
      
‘For purposes of the principle of equal treatment referred to in paragraph 1, indirect discrimination shall exist where an
         apparently neutral provision, criterion or practice disadvantages a substantially higher proportion of the members of one
         sex unless that provision, criterion or practice is appropriate and necessary and can be justified by objective factors unrelated
         to sex.’
      
Under Article 4(1) of Directive 97/80, Member States ‘shall take such measures as are necessary … to ensure that, when persons
         who consider themselves wronged because the principle of equal treatment has not been applied to them establish, before a
         court or other competent authority, facts from which it may be presumed that there has been direct or indirect discrimination,
         it shall be for the respondent to prove that there has been no breach of the principle of equal treatment’.
      
In accordance with Article of Council Directive 98/52/EC of July on the extension of Directive 97/to the United
         Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (OJ L 205, p. 66), Directive 97/was to be transposed in the United Kingdom
         by July at the latest.
      
Article 2(2) of Council Directive 76/207/EEC of February on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment
         for men and women as regards access to employment, vocational training and promotion, and working conditions (OJ L 39,
         p. 40), as amended by Directive 2002/73/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of September (OJ L 269,
         p. 15) (‘Directive 76/207’), provides:
      
‘For the purposes of this Directive, the following definitions shall apply:
…
–        indirect discrimination: where an apparently neutral provision, criterion or practice would put persons of one sex at a particular
         disadvantage compared with persons of the other sex, unless that provision, criterion or practice is objectively justified
         by a legitimate aim, and the means of achieving that aim are appropriate and necessary,
      
…’
Under Article 3(1) of Directive 76/207:
      
‘Application of the principle of equal treatment means that there shall be no direct or indirect discrimination on the grounds
         of sex in the public or private sectors, including public bodies, in relation to:
      
…
(c)      employment and working conditions, including dismissals, as well as pay as provided for in Directive 75/117/EEC;
…’.
In accordance with the first sentence of Article 2(1) of Directive 2002/73, Member States were to bring into force the laws,
         regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with that directive by October at the latest or were
         to ensure, by that date at the latest, that management and labour introduced the requisite provisions by way of agreement.
      
 National legislation
Section of the Equal Pay Act (‘the Equal Pay Act’) provides:
      
‘(1)  If the terms of a contract under which a woman is employed at an establishment in Great Britain do not include (directly or
         by reference to a collective agreement or otherwise) an equality clause they shall be deemed to include one.
      
(2)      An equality clause is a provision which relates to terms (whether concerned with pay or not) of a contract under which a woman
         is employed (the “woman’s contract”), and has the effect that – 
      
…
(b)      where the woman is employed on work rated as equivalent with that of a man in the same employment:
(i)      if (apart from the equality clause) any term of the woman’s contract determined by the rating of the work is or becomes less
         favourable to the woman than a term of a similar kind in the contract under which that man is employed, that term of the woman’s
         contract shall be treated as so modified as not to be less favourable, and
      
(ii)      if (apart from the equality clause) at any time the woman’s contract does not include a term corresponding to a term benefiting
         that man included in the contract under which he is employed and determined by the rating of the work, the woman’s contract
         shall be treated as including such a term;
      
…
(3)      An equality clause shall not operate in relation to a variation between the woman’s contract and the man’s contract if the
         employer proves that the variation is genuinely due to a material factor which is not the difference of sex and that factor:
      
(a)      in the case of an equality clause falling within subsection (2)(a) or (b) above, must be a material difference between the
         woman’s case and the man’s 
      
…
…’
 The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Mrs Cadman is employed by the HSE. Since she has been working for that body the pay system has been altered several times.
         Before the system was incremental, that is to say that each employee received an annual increase until he reached the
         top of the pay scale for his grade. In 1992, the HSE introduced a performance-related element so that the amount of the annual
         increment was adjusted to reflect the employee’s individual performance. Under this system high performing employees could
         reach the top of the scale more quickly. Following the introduction in of a Long Term Pay Agreement, annual pay increases
         were set in accordance with the award of points called ‘equity shares’ linked to the employee’s performance. That change had
         the effect of decreasing the rate at which pay differentials narrowed between longer-serving and shorter-serving employees
         on the same grade. Finally, in 2000, the system was altered again to enable employees lower down the pay bands to be paid
         larger annual increases and, therefore, to progress more quickly through the pay band.
      
In June 2001, Mrs Cadman lodged an application before the Employment Tribunal based on the Equal Pay Act. At the date of her
         claim, she had been engaged as a band inspector, a managerial post, for nearly five years. She took as comparators four
         male colleagues who were also band inspectors.
      
Although they were in the same band as Mrs Cadman, those four persons were paid substantially more than her. In the financial
         year 2000/Mrs Cadman’s annual salary was GBP 129, while the corresponding figures paid to her comparators were GBP 125,
         GBP 345, GBP and GBP 183. 
      
It is common ground that at the date of the claim lodged at the Employment Tribunal the four male comparators had longer service
         than Mrs Cadman, acquired in part in more junior posts.
      
The Employment Tribunal held that under section of the Equal Pay Act the term in Mrs Cadman’s employment contract relating
         to pay should be modified so as not to be less favourable than that in the employment contracts of her four comparators.
      
The HSE appealed to the Employment Appeal Tribunal against that decision. That tribunal held, first, that in the light of
         the judgment in Case 109/Danfoss [1989] ECR 3199, paragraph 25, where unequal pay arose because of the use of length of service as a criterion, no special
         justification was required. It held, second, that even if such justification were required, the Employment Tribunal had erred
         in law when considering justification.
      
By notice of appeal of November 2003, Mrs Cadman appealed against the decision of the Employment Appeal Tribunal to the
         Court of Appeal.
      
The Court of Appeal states that the differentials in pay relied on by Mrs Cadman in support of her action are explained by
         the structure of the pay system, as the HSE applies a system of pay increases which, in one way or another, reflects and rewards
         length of service.
      
Since women in pay band and generally in the relevant part of the HSE’s workforce have on average shorter service than men,
         the use of length of service as a determinant of pay has a disproportionate impact on women.
      
The Court of Appeal states that evidence submitted by the Equal Opportunities Commission, and accepted by all the parties
         to the dispute, shows that in the United Kingdom and throughout the European Union the length of service of female workers,
         taken as a whole, is less than that of male workers. The use of length of service as a determinant of pay plays an important
         part in the continuing, albeit slowly narrowing, gap between female and male workers.
      
In that regard, the Court of Appeal is uncertain whether the case-law of the Court has departed from the finding in Danfoss that ‘the employer does not have to provide special justification for recourse to the criterion of length of service’. Recent
         cases, inter alia Case C‑184/Nimz [1991] ECR I-297, Case C‑1/Gerster [1997] ECR I-5253, and Case C‑243/Hill and Stapleton [1998] ECR I‑3739, arguably represent second thoughts on the part of the Court of Justice. The Court of Appeal notes, in
         that regard, that it is not convinced by the HSE’s argument that the scope of the judgment in Danfoss has been modified by the subsequent case‑law of the Court only in relation to part-time workers and that therefore the criterion
         of length of service never needs objective justification, except in relation to those workers.
      
Furthermore, the Court of Appeal agrees with the Employment Appeal Tribunal that if the issue relating to the scope of the
         judgment in Danfoss were to be resolved in a manner favourable to Mrs Cadman the case would have to be referred back to a differently constituted
         Employment Tribunal, so that the issue of justification could be re-examined.
      
In those circumstances, the Court of Appeal (England and Wales) (Civil Division) decided to stay its proceedings and to refer
         the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Where the use by an employer of the criterion of length of service as a determinant of pay has a disparate impact as between
         relevant male and female employees, does Article EC require the employer to provide special justification for recourse
         to that criterion? If the answer depends on the circumstances, what are those circumstances?
      
(2)      Would the answer to the preceding question be different if the employer applies the criterion of length of service on an individual
         basis to employees so that an assessment is made as to the extent to which greater length of service justifies a greater level
         of pay?
      
(3)      Is there any relevant distinction to be drawn between the use of the criterion of length of service in the case of part-time
         workers and the use of that criterion in the case of full-time workers?’
      
 The first and second questions referred for a preliminary ruling
By its first and second questions, which it is appropriate to examine together, the national court asks essentially whether,
         and if so in what circumstances, Article EC requires an employer to provide justification for recourse to the criterion
         of length of service as a determinant of pay where use of that criterion leads to disparities in pay between the men and women
         to be included in the comparison.
      
 The general scheme arising from Article 141(1) EC
Article 141(1) EC lays down the principle that equal work or work of equal value must be remunerated in the same way, whether
         it is performed by a man or a woman (Case C-320/Lawrence and Others [2002] ECR I-7325, paragraph 11).
      
As the Court held in Case 43/Defrenne [1976] ECR 455, paragraph 12, that principle, which is a particular expression of the general principle of equality which
         prohibits comparable situations from being treated differently unless the difference is objectively justified, forms part
         of the foundations of the Community (see also Case C‑381/Brunnhofer [2001] ECR I-4961, paragraph 28, and Lawrence and Others, paragraph 12).
      
Furthermore, it must be recalled that the general rule laid down in the first paragraph of Article of Directive 75/117,
         which is principally designed to facilitate the practical application of the principle of equal pay outlined in Article 141(1)
         EC, in no way alters the content or scope of that principle (see Case 96/Jenkins [1981] ECR 911, paragraph 22). That rule provides for the elimination of all discrimination on grounds of sex with regard
         to all aspects and conditions of remuneration for the same work or for work to which equal value is attributed (Case 237/Rummler [1986] ECR 2101, paragraph 11).
      
The scope of Article 141(1) EC covers not only direct but also indirect discrimination (see, to that effect, Jenkins, paragraphs and 15, and Case C‑285/Elsner-Lakeberg [2004] ECR I-5861, paragraph 12).
      
It is apparent from settled case-law that Article EC, like its predecessor Article of the EEC Treaty (which became
         Article of the EC Treaty – Articles to of the EC Treaty have been replaced by Articles EC to EC), must
         be interpreted as meaning that whenever there is evidence of discrimination, it is for the employer to prove that the practice
         at issue is justified by objective factors unrelated to any discrimination based on sex (see, to that effect, inter alia,
         Danfoss, paragraphs and 23; Case C-33/Kowalska [1990] ECR I-2591, paragraph 16; Hill and Stapleton, paragraph 43; and Joined Cases C‑4/and C-5/Schönheit and Becker [2003] ECR I-12575, paragraph 71).
      
The justification given must be based on a legitimate objective. The means chosen to achieve that objective must be appropriate
         and necessary for that purpose (see, to that effect, Case 170/Bilka [1986] ECR 1607, paragraph 37).
      
 Recourse to the criterion of length of service
In paragraphs and of the judgment in Danfoss, the Court, after stating that it is not to be excluded that recourse to the criterion of length of service may involve less
         advantageous treatment of women than of men, held that the employer does not have to provide special justification for recourse
         to that criterion.
      
By adopting that position, the Court acknowledged that rewarding, in particular, experience acquired which enables the worker
         to perform his duties better constitutes a legitimate objective of pay policy.
      
As a general rule, recourse to the criterion of length of service is appropriate to attain that objective. Length of service
         goes hand in hand with experience, and experience generally enables the worker to perform his duties better.
      
The employer is therefore free to reward length of service without having to establish the importance it has in the performance
         of specific tasks entrusted to the employee.
      
In the same judgment, the Court did not, however, exclude the possibility that there may be situations in which recourse to
         the criterion of length of service must be justified by the employer in detail. 
      
That is so, in particular, where the worker provides evidence capable of giving rise to serious doubts as to whether recourse
         to the criterion of length of service is, in the circumstances, appropriate to attain the abovementioned objective. It is
         in such circumstances for the employer to prove that that which is true as a general rule, namely that length of service goes
         hand in hand with experience and that experience enables the worker to perform his duties better, is also true as regards
         the job in question.
      
It should be added that where a job classification system based on an evaluation of the work to be carried out is used in
         determining pay, it is not necessary for the justification for recourse to a certain criterion to relate on an individual
         basis to the situation of the workers concerned. Therefore, if the objective pursued by recourse to the criterion of length
         of service is to recognise experience acquired, there is no need to show in the context of such a system that an individual
         worker has acquired experience during the relevant period which has enabled him to perform his duties better. By contrast,
         the nature of the work to be carried out must be considered objectively (Rummler, paragraph 13).
      
It follows from all of the foregoing considerations, that the answer to the first and second questions referred must be that
         Article EC is to be interpreted as meaning that, where recourse to the criterion of length of service as a determinant
         of pay leads to disparities in pay, in respect of equal work or work of equal value, between the men and women to be included
         in the comparison: 
      
–        since, as a general rule, recourse to the criterion of length of service is appropriate to attain the legitimate objective
         of rewarding experience acquired which enables the worker to perform his duties better, the employer does not have to establish
         specifically that recourse to that criterion is appropriate to attain that objective as regards a particular job, unless the
         worker provides evidence capable of raising serious doubts in that regard;
      
–        where a job classification system based on an evaluation of the work to be carried out is used in determining pay, there is
         no need to show that an individual worker has acquired experience during the relevant period which has enabled him to perform
         his duties better.
      
 The third question referred for a preliminary ruling
In the light of the answer given to the first and second questions, there is no need to answer the third question.
      
 The temporal effects of this judgment
The United Kingdom Government and Ireland take the view that, if the Court were contemplating departing from the principles
         that it laid down in the judgment in Danfoss, considerations of legal certainty would require a limit on the temporal effects of the judgment to be given.
      
Since this judgment contains only a clarification of the case-law in this field, there is no need to limit its temporal effects.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby rules:
Article EC is to be interpreted as meaning that, where recourse to the criterion of length of service as a determinant
            of pay leads to disparities in pay, in respect of equal work or work of equal value, between the men and women to be included
            in the comparison: 
–        since, as a general rule, recourse to the criterion of length of service is appropriate to attain the legitimate objective
            of rewarding experience acquired which enables the worker to perform his duties better, the employer does not have to establish
            specifically that recourse to that criterion is appropriate to attain that objective as regards a particular job, unless the
            worker provides evidence capable of raising serious doubts in that regard;
–        where a job classification system based on an evaluation of the work to be carried out is used in determining pay, there is
            no need to show that an individual worker has acquired experience during the relevant period which has enabled him to perform
            his duties better.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 