
Judgment of the Court (Third Chamber) of November – Commission v Spain
(Case C‑154/08) 
Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Sixth VAT Directive – Article and Article 4(1), (2) and (5) – Harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax: uniform basis of assessment – Taxable persons – Activities or operations carried out by ‘registradores de la propiedad’ (land registrars) acting as settlement agents in
         charge of settlement offices of a mortgage district – Economic activities – Activity carried out independently – Public-law bodies carrying out activities in connection with their public duties – Infringement of Community law attributable to a national court
      
1.                     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Application initiating proceedings – Statement of subject-matter and pleas in
            law – Formal requirements – Unambiguous wording of the form of order sought by the applicant (Art. EC, Statute of the
            Court of Justice, Art. 21; Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, Art. 38(1)(c)) (see paras 60, 63, 67)
2.                     Tax provisions – Harmonisation of laws – Turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax – Economic activities carried on
            independently for the purpose of Article of the Sixth Directive (Council Directive 77/388, Arts and 4(1) and (2)) (see
            paras 90, 93, 97, 103, 107, 109, 118, and operative part)
3.                     Member States – Obligations – Failure to fulfil obligations – Liability (Art. EC) (see paras 125-126)
Re:
Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Infringement of Articles and 4(1) and (2) of Sixth Council Directive 77/388/EEC
                  of May on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes – Common system of value added
                  tax: uniform basis of assessment (OJ L 145, p. 1) – Taxable persons – Activities or operations carried out by ‘registradores
                  de la propiedad’.
               
Operative part
The Court: 
1.
	Declares that, by considering that the services supplied to an Autonomous Community by ‘registradores de la propiedad’ acting
                     as settlement agents in charge of a settlement office of a mortgage district (‘oficina liquidadora de distrito hipotecario’)
                     are not subject to value added tax, the Kingdom of Spain has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article and Article
                     4(1) and (2) of Sixth Council Directive 77/388/EEC of May on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating
                     to turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax: uniform basis of assessment;
                  
2.
	Orders the Kingdom of Spain to pay the costs.
Top  
 