
         				Ordonnance de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-77/DEP Commission of the European CommunitiesvOder-Plan Architektur GmbH, in liquidation, and Others
«(Taxation of costs)»
Order of the Court (Third Chamber), February Summary of the Order
1..
Procedure – Costs – Taxation – Recoverable costs – Factors to be taken into consideration  (Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, Art. 74) 
2..
Procedure – Costs – Taxation – Recoverable costs – Meaning – Factors to be taken into consideration – Necessary expenses relating to the taxation procedure – Included  (Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, Arts 69(1) and 74) 
1.
 In relation to taxation of costs as regards lawyers' fees, Community law has no rules relating to payment on a fixed fee basis
         or in relation to the number of hours requiring to be worked in any particular case.  The Court should therefore make a general
         assessment of the circumstances of the case, having regard to the nature and purpose of the case, its importance in the field
         of Community law, and the difficulties of the case, the amount of work the procedure before the Court may have given rise
         to on the part of agents or counsel instructed in it, and the financial importance of the dispute for the parties. see para. 2.
 As regards the expenses relating to the taxation procedure, by contrast with Article 69(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the
         Court of Justice, which provides that a decision as to costs is to be given in the final judgment or in the order which closes
         the proceedings, no such provision appears in Article of the said Rules. This is because, when determining the recoverable
         costs, the Court takes into account all the circumstances of the case until the order for taxation of the costs is pronounced.
         Accordingly, it is, first, unnecessary to decide separately on the costs incurred for the purposes of that procedure. Secondly,
         this means that the necessary expenses incurred in relation to that procedure are recoverable. see para. ORDER OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)February (1)
((Taxation of costs))
 In Case C-77/DEP, 
         
Commission of the European Communities, represented by R.B. Wainwright, acting as Agent, assisted by M. Núñez-Müller, Rechtsanwalt, with an address for service
         in Luxembourg,
         
applicant, 
v
Oder-Plan Architektur GmbH, in liquidation, established in Berlin (Germany), acting by its liquidator, C. Schlote,NCC Deutsche Bau GmbH, formerly NCC Siab Bau GmbH, established in Fürstenwalde (Germany), acting by its administrator, K. Bauer, represented by
         D. Stoecker, Rechtsanwalt,andEsbensen Consulting Engineers, established in Virum (Denmark), represented by D. Stoecker,
         
defendants, 
 APPLICATION for taxation of recoverable costs following the judgment of the Court of October in Case C-77/Commission v  
         Oder-Plan Architektur and Others [2001] ECR I-7355,
         
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
 composed of: A. Rosas, President of the Chamber, R. Schintgen and N. Colneric (Rapporteur), Judges, 
         
 Advocate General: J. Kokott, Registrar: R. Grass, 
         
after hearing the Advocate General, makes the following 
Order
Background to the dispute and forms of order sought by the Commission
            
 By application lodged at the Court Registry on March 1999, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action
         under Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC) for an order requiring Oder-Plan Architektur GmbH (hereinafter  
         Oder-Plan), NCC Deutsche Bau GmbH (hereinafter  
         Deutsche Bau) and Esbensen Consulting Engineers (hereinafter  
         Esbensen) jointly and severally to pay it EUR 510, plus interest of EUR 798.for the period from January to January
         1999, and, as from January 1999, interest at the rate applied by the European Monetary Cooperation Fund for its euro transactions,
         plus 2% of the principal amount of EUR 510. 
         
            
 The dispute arose from a contract granting Community financial support for implementation of a project in the energy sector.
         After it had terminated the contract, the Commission sought repayment of part of the support. 
         
            
 By judgment of October in Case C-77/Commission v  
         Oder-Plan Architektur and Others [2001] ECR I-7355, the Court, first, ordered Oder-Plan, by default, jointly and severally with Deutsche Bau and Esbensen,
         to pay to the Commission the sum of EUR 510, plus interest of EUR 077.for the period from January to January
         1999. Secondly, it ordered Deutsche Bau and Esbensen, jointly and severally as between each other and with Oder-Plan, to pay
         to the Commission the sum of EUR 510, plus interest of EUR 077.for the period from January to January 1999.
         It dismissed the remainder of the application. It also ordered Oder-Plan, Deutsche Bau and Esbensen, jointly and severally,
         to pay the costs. 
         
            
 Following this judgment, the Commission informed Deutsche Bau and Esbensen by letter of November that the costs to
         be paid by them amounted to EUR 949.in respect of lawyer's fees and EUR in respect of administrative expenses. The
         invoices for the fees submitted by the Commission's lawyer were annexed to the letter. 
         
            
 By letter of November 2001, Deutsche Bau and Esbensen refused to pay the sums demanded by the Commission. ... They stated
         that the maximum sum owed by the defendants ... to the Commission was DEM 930, that is to say EUR 520.67. ...
         
            
 The defendant Oder-Plan has not responded to either the demands for payment, or the notes of expenses or the reminders sent
         by the Commission and has not made any payment. 
         
            
 In these circumstances, the Commission, by application lodged on December under Article 74(1) of the Rules of Procedure,
         requested the Court to tax the costs payable by the defendants, as the parties jointly and severally liable to make payment
         thereof, amounting in aggregate to EUR 199.44. 
         Substance Arguments of the parties
         ...Findings of the Court
         ...
         
            
 As regards lawyers' fees, Community law has no rules relating to payment on a fixed fee basis or in relation to the number
         of hours requiring to be worked in any particular case.  The Court should therefore make a general assessment of the circumstances
         of the case, having regard to the nature and purpose of the case, its importance in the field of Community law, and the difficulties
         of the case, the amount of work the procedure before the Court may have given rise to on the part of agents or counsel instructed
         in it, and the financial importance of the dispute for the parties to it (see order of January in Case C-104/DEP
          
         Mulder and Others   v  
         Council and Commission [2004] ECR I-0000, paragraph 51). ...
         
            
 In the light of the foregoing, the sum of EUR 949.requested in respect of lawyers' fees in relation to the procedure
         in the main proceedings does not exceed what was necessarily incurred within the meaning of Article 73(b) of the Rules of
         Procedure. 
         
            
 With respect to the administrative expenses, an amount of EUR is also appropriate, having regard to the fact that this
         includes not only internal administrative expenses for copying, but also expenses relating to travel to the hearing. 
         
            
 As regards the expenses relating to the taxation procedure, by contrast with Article 69(1) of the Rules of Procedure, which
         provides that a decision as to costs is to be given in the final judgment or in the order which closes the proceedings, a
         similar provision does not appear in Article of the said Rules. This is because, when determining the recoverable costs,
         the Court takes into account all the circumstances of the case until the order for taxation of the costs is pronounced. Accordingly,
         it is, first, unnecessary to decide separately on the costs incurred for the purposes of this procedure (see the order in
          
         Mulder, cited above, paragraph 87). Secondly, this means that the necessary expenses incurred in relation to this procedure are
         recoverable (see, to that effect,  
         Mulder, paragraphs and 88). 
         
            
 Nevertheless, having regard to the matters referred to in paragraph of this order, the sum of EUR claimed in this
         respect considerably exceeds what may be regarded as an appropriate figure. In that regard, it should be noted in particular
         that it was only a sum of EUR 678.that was truly in dispute. 
         
            
 In these circumstances, the total of the recoverable costs should be set at EUR 600.
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Third Chamber)
 hereby orders:
         The total costs to be paid to the Commission of the European Communities by Oder-Plan Architektur GmbH, NCC Deutsche Bau GmbH
            and Esbensen Consulting Engineers, as the parties jointly and severally liable to make payment thereof, are set at EUR 600. Luxembourg, February 2004. 
         
R. Grass 
A. Rosas  
Registrar
President of the Third Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: German.
Top  
 