
Case C-300/Ursula Voß
v
Land Berlin
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Bundesverwaltungsgericht)
(Article EC – Principle of equal pay for men and women – Civil servants – Overtime – Indirect discrimination against women employed part-time)
Opinion of Advocate General Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer delivered on July Judgment of the Court (First Chamber), December Summary of the Judgment
Social policy – Male and female workers – Equal pay 
(Art. EC)
Article EC is to be interpreted as precluding national legislation on the remuneration of civil servants which defines
         overtime, for both full-time civil servants and part-time civil servants, as hours worked over and above their normal working
         hours, and which remunerates those additional hours at a rate lower than the hourly rate applied to their normal working hours,
         so that part-time civil servants are less well paid than full-time civil servants in respect of hours which are worked over
         and above their normal working hours, but which are not sufficient to bring the number of hours worked overall above the level
         of normal working hours for full-time civil servants where:
      
– in the group of workers subject to that legislation, a considerably higher percentage of women is affected as compared with
         the percentage of men so affected,
      
and
– the difference in treatment is not justified by objective factors wholly unrelated to discrimination based on sex.
(see para. 44, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
December (*)
      
(Article EC – Principle of equal pay for men and women – Civil servants – Overtime – Indirect discrimination against women employed part-time)
In Case C‑300/06,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Bundesverwaltungsgericht (Germany), made by decision of May 2006, received at the Court on July 2006, in the proceedings
      
Ursula Voß
v
Land Berlin,
intervening party:
Vertreterin des Bundesinteresses beim Bundesverwaltungsgericht,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of P. Jann, President of the Chamber, A. Tizzano, A. Borg Barthet (Rapporteur), M. Ilešič and E. Levits, Judges,
Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Ms Voß, by E. Ribet Buse, Rechtsanwalt,
–       the German Government, by M. Lumma and C. Blaschke, acting as Agents,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by V. Kreuschitz and M. van Beek, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on July 2007,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article EC.
The reference has been made in the course of proceedings between Ms Voß and Land Berlin concerning the remuneration for overtime
         worked by Ms Voß, who is employed part-time.
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
Article 141(1) and (2) EC provides:
‘Each Member State shall ensure that the principle of equal pay for male and female workers for equal work or work of equal
         value is applied.
      
2.      For the purposes of this article, “pay” means the ordinary basic or minimum wage or salary and any other consideration, whether
         in cash or in kind, which the worker receives directly or indirectly, in respect of his employment, from his employer.
      
Equal pay without discrimination based on sex means:
(a)      that pay for the same work at piece rates shall be calculated on the basis of the same unit of measurement;
(b)      that pay for work at time rates shall be the same for the same job.’
 National legislation
Paragraph 35(2) of the Civil Service Code (Landesbeamtengesetz), in the amended version of February (GVBI BE, p. 368),
         states as follows:
      
‘A civil servant is obliged to work without remuneration beyond his normal weekly working hours if mandatory job-related circumstances
         require him to do so and the overtime is limited to exceptional cases. If he is obliged to work for more than five hours per
         month outside of normal working hours on account of additional work which is required or sanctioned for job purposes, then
         he shall be granted, within three months, extra leave corresponding to the overtime worked. If extra leave is not possible
         for mandatory job-related reasons, civil servants in grades in which remuneration is proportional to seniority may instead
         receive pay for a period of up to hours per year.’
      
Paragraph 6(1) of the Federal Law on Remuneration of Civil Servants (Bundesbesoldungsgesetz) (‘BBesG’) – Paragraph 1(1)(i)
         of which also regulates the pay of regional civil servants – states:
      
‘In the case of part-time work, remuneration and working time shall be reduced by the same proportions.’
Paragraph of the BBesG empowers the Federal Government to lay down, by regulation, the detailed rules governing remuneration
         of overtime in so far as it is not compensated for by extra leave. 
      
Paragraph 2(1) of the Regulation on the Granting of Overtime Remuneration for Civil Servants (Verordnung über die Gewährung
         von Mehrarbeitsvergütung für Beamte) of March (BGBl. I, p. 528), as amended on December (BGBl. I,
         p. 3494) (‘MVergV’), adopted on the basis of Paragraph 48(1) of the BBesG, provides: 
      
‘Those civil servants in grades in which remuneration is proportional to seniority may obtain remuneration for overtime in
         the following areas:
      
...
6.      in teaching, in the case of teaching staff.’
Paragraph 3(1) of the MVergV states:
‘The remuneration shall be paid only where the overtime is carried out by a civil servant subject to the civil service working
         hours regime and for whom the overtime: 
      
(1)      has been assigned or granted in writing,
(2)      exceeds, by more than five hours per calendar month, the normal monthly working hours or, to the extent that the civil servant
         has worked during only part of the month, that share of the monthly working hours, and 
      
(3)      owing to mandatory job-related circumstances, cannot be compensated by extra leave granted within a period of three months.’
According to Paragraph of the MVergV, the amount of remuneration paid for each hour of overtime worked depends on the grade
         of the civil servant. 
      
Paragraph 5(2) of the MVergV states:
‘In the case of overtime in the teaching sector, 
(1)      three hours teaching is equivalent to five hours for the application of Paragraph 3(1)(2) [of that regulation];
...’
It is clear from the order for reference that under the MVergV the hourly rate of pay for overtime is lower than the hourly
         rate of pay for work carried out in the course of ‘normal working hours’ (the hours which are fixed and obligatory as regards
         both the individual civil servant and employer).
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
Ms Voß is a civil servant employed as a teacher by Land Berlin. For the period from July until May she worked
         as a part-time teacher on the basis of teaching hours per week. At that time, the number of teaching hours required of
         a full-time teacher was 26.5. 
      
Between January and May 2000, Ms Voß worked between four and six teaching hours each month in addition to her normal
         working hours.
      
The remuneration received by Ms Voß for that period amounted to DEM 075.14. According to the national court, the remuneration
         received by a full-time teacher for the same number of hours of work amounted to DEM 616.in respect of the same period.
         
      
According to the national court, the explanation for that situation lies in the fact that the hours worked by Ms Voß which
         are classed as overtime – that is, the hours worked over and above her normal working hours, but not sufficient to bring the
         hours worked overall above the level of normal working hours for full-time staff – were paid at a rate lower than the hourly
         rate applied to the corresponding number of hours worked by a full-time teacher which, for the latter, count as normal working
         hours.
      
The national court thus found that, in respect of the months from January to May 2000, for an equal amount of work, Ms Voß
         was paid less than a teacher employed full-time. 
      
Ms Voß claimed that, instead of the hourly overtime rate laid down in the MVergV, remuneration for the overtime that she worked
         – up to the ceiling of 26.teaching hours per week – should be calculated at the same hourly rate as applies in the case
         of full-time teachers for the hours worked in the course of their normal working hours. 
      
As that claim was rejected by Land Berlin, Ms Voß contested the rejection decision before the Verwaltungsgericht (Administrative
         Court) (Germany), which upheld her action. Land Berlin brought an appeal on a point of law before the Bundesverwaltungsgericht
         (Federal Administrative Court) (Germany) against the judgment upholding the applicant’s action.
      
According to the Bundesverwaltungsgericht, the question at issue in the dispute before it is whether the remuneration of part-time
         teachers at a lower rate for teaching hours worked as overtime constitutes, in the light of the pay received by full-time
         teachers for the same number of hours worked in the course of their normal working hours, discrimination against women teachers
         as prohibited under Community law. According to the Bundesverwaltungsgericht, the reply to that question depends upon whether
         the second subparagraph of Article 141(2) EC requires that overtime worked by a part-time teacher up to the point where the
         number of hours worked overall matches the normal hours for a full-time teacher must not be less well paid than the same number
         of hours worked by a full-time teacher in the course of his normal working hours.
      
In those circumstances, the Bundesverwaltungsgericht decided to stay proceedings and refer the following question to the Court
         of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Does Article EC preclude national legislation under which remuneration for additional work which takes place outside
         of normal working hours is paid at the same rate with regard to full-time as well as part-time civil servants and that rate
         is lower than the pro-rata remuneration allotted to full-time civil servants as regards a period of equal length within normal
         working hours where it is predominantly women who are employed part-time?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
By its question the national court asks, in essence, whether Article EC is to be interpreted as precluding – in situations
         where the majority of the part-time civil servants concerned are women – national legislation on the remuneration of civil
         servants, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which defines overtime, for both full-time civil servants and part-time
         civil servants, as hours worked over and above their normal working hours, and which remunerates those additional hours at
         a rate lower than the hourly rate applied to their normal working hours, so that part-time civil servants are less well paid
         than full-time civil servants in respect of hours which are worked over and above their normal working hours, but which are
         not sufficient to bring the number of hours worked overall above the level of normal working hours for full-time civil servants.
      
Ms Voß and the Commission of the European Communities submit that, in so far as the remuneration for that overtime is lower
         than the remuneration received for hours worked in the course of normal working hours, it gives rise to indirect discrimination
         since, as a result, when part-time teachers (most of whom are women) work over and above their normal working hours – up to
         the point that the number of hours worked overall matches the normal hours for a full-time teacher – they receive less pay
         than full-time teachers for the same number of hours worked. 
      
The German Government contends that, in the case before the referring court, there is no unequal treatment with regard to
         overtime, as full-time teachers and part-time teachers have the same hourly rate of pay, as laid down in Paragraph 4(3) of
         the MVergV, for the overtime they work.
      
In that regard, it should be borne in mind that Article EC lays down the principle of equal pay for male and female workers
         for equal work. That principle forms part of the foundation of the European Community (see Case 43/Defrenne [1976] ECR 455, paragraph 12).
      
The principle of equal pay excludes not only the application of provisions leading to direct sex discrimination, but also
         the application of provisions which maintain different treatment between men and women at work as a result of the application
         of criteria not based on sex where those differences of treatment are not attributable to objective factors wholly unrelated
         to sex discrimination (Case 170/Bilka-Kaufhaus [1986] ECR 1607, paragraphs and 30, Joined Cases C-399/92, C-409/92, C-425/92, C-34/93, C-50/and C-78/Helmig and Others [1994] ECR I-5727, paragraph 20, and Case C-285/Elsner-Lakeberg [2004] ECR I-5861, paragraph 12).
      
As regards the legislation at issue in the main proceedings, it is common ground that it does not establish any direct discrimination
         based on sex. It is therefore necessary to check whether such legislation is likely to lead to indirect discrimination contrary
         to Article EC. 
      
To do that, it is necessary initially to determine, first, whether that legislation establishes a difference in treatment
         between part-time workers and full-time workers, and, secondly, whether that difference in treatment affects a considerably
         higher number of women than men.
      
If there is an affirmative answer to those two questions, it must be asked whether there are objective factors wholly unrelated
         to sex discrimination which can justify the difference in treatment found. 
      
In that regard, it must be noted that there is unequal treatment wherever the overall pay of full-time employees is higher
         than that of part-time employees for the same number of hours worked on the basis of an employment relationship (Helmig and Others, paragraph 26).
      
The Court has already, on two previous occasions, ruled on the question whether part-time workers and full-time workers received
         different treatment as regards remuneration for overtime. 
      
At paragraphs to of Helmig and Others, the Court held that there is no difference in treatment between part-time workers and full-time workers where the relevant
         national provisions provide for overtime supplements only in respect of hours worked in addition to normal working hours as
         fixed by collective agreement, and not in respect of those worked in addition to the normal working hours fixed for an individual.
         The Court found that, in those circumstances, part-time employees do, in fact, receive the same overall pay as full-time employees
         for the same number of hours worked, and that is so both where the hours worked by the part-time employee do not exceed the
         normal working hours as fixed by collective agreement and where they do, since the overtime supplements provided for in the
         latter situation are payable to both categories of worker.
      
By contrast, at paragraph of Elsner-Lakeberg, the Court held that there is a difference in treatment between part-time and full-time workers where the applicable national
         provisions provide that all workers are required to work a minimum of three hours per month over and above their own normal
         working hours in order to be able to claim an overtime supplement. 
      
In that case, Ms Elsner-Lakeberg, who was a teacher, taught for hours per week, while full-time teachers taught for 24.hours per week. Ms Elsner-Lakeberg had worked 2.hours overtime during one month. Accordingly, she was not entitled to remuneration
         for that overtime. As a result, she was paid on the basis of teaching hours even though she had worked 17.hours. By contrast,
         a full-time teacher who had worked 17.teaching hours was paid for 17.teaching hours, given that he had not exceeded his
         normal weekly working hours. The Court held that there was a difference in treatment as regards remuneration since, for an
         equal number of teaching hours worked, part-time workers were less well paid than full-time workers.
      
In the main proceedings, it is clear from the order for reference that Ms Voß, who works part-time, receives remuneration
         which, for an equal number of hours worked, is lower than that paid to a full-time teacher, in respect of the hours which
         she has worked over and above her normal working hours but which are insufficient to bring the hours worked overall above
         the level of normal working hours for full-time teachers. 
      
Thus, a part-time teacher whose normal weekly working hours are teaching hours per week and who works 3.hours over and
         above those normal working hours receives less pay than that received by a full-time teacher for 26.teaching hours.
      
An examination of the components of the remuneration shows that that situation arises because overtime hours, which are less
         well paid than ‘normal’ hours, are defined as hours worked over and above the normal working hours fixed for the individual
         teacher, a number which obviously varies according to whether the employee works part-time or full-time. It follows that the
         lower rate of remuneration for overtime applies to full-time teachers only in respect of hours worked over and above 26.teaching hours per week, while, in the case of part-time teachers, that rate is applied when they exceed their own normal
         working hours, the number of which is, by definition, lower than 26.hours. In the case of Ms Voß, the lower rate of remuneration
         is applied for hours worked over and above teaching hours per week. 
      
It must therefore be concluded that the national legislation at issue in the main proceedings, under which the remuneration
         for hours worked by part-time civil servants over and above their normal working hours – up to the point where the number
         of hours worked overall matches the normal hours for a full-time civil servant – is lower than the remuneration for hours
         worked by full-time civil servants, gives rise to a difference in treatment between the two categories of civil servant, to
         the detriment of those who work part-time. 
      
In a situation where that difference in treatment affects a considerably higher number of women than men and to the extent
         that there are no objective factors wholly unrelated to sex discrimination which might justify such a difference in treatment,
         Article EC precludes the relevant national legislation. 
      
According to the referring court, approximately 88% of the teachers employed part-time by Land Berlin in the spring of were women.
      
Nevertheless, in order to ascertain whether the difference in treatment found between full-time workers and part-time workers
         affects a considerably higher number of women than men, the national court must take into account all those workers subject
         to the national legislation in which the difference in treatment, established at paragraph of the present judgment, has
         its origin. For that purpose, it is for the national court to determine whether that difference in treatment originates in
         the BBesG and/or in the MVergV, since, in principle, it is the scope of the legislation at issue which determines the category
         of persons who may be included in the comparison (Case C-256/Allonby [2004] ECR I-873, paragraph 73). 
      
It must also be recalled, as the Court held at paragraph of the judgment in Case C-167/Seymour-Smith and Perez [1999] ECR I-623, that the best approach to the comparison of statistics is to consider, on the one hand, the proportion of
         men in the workforce affected by the difference in treatment and, on the other, the proportion of women in the workforce who
         are so affected. 
      
If the statistics available indicate that, of the workforce, the percentage of part-time workers who are women is considerably
         higher than the percentage of part-time workers who are men, it will be necessary to hold that such a situation is evidence
         of apparent sex discrimination, unless the legislation at issue in the main proceedings is justified by objective factors
         wholly unrelated to any discrimination based on sex (see, to that effect, Seymour-Smith and Perez, paragraphs to 63).
      
In the case before the referring court, it is not clear from the order for reference that the lower remuneration for overtime
         worked by part-time workers is based on objective factors justified by reasons wholly unrelated to discrimination based on
         sex. It is for the national court, however, to check that point.
      
Consequently, the reply to the question referred must be that Article EC is to be interpreted as precluding national legislation
         on the remuneration of civil servants, such as that at issue in the main proceedings – which defines overtime, for both full-time
         civil servants and part-time civil servants, as hours worked over and above their normal working hours, and which remunerates
         those additional hours at a rate lower than the hourly rate applied to their normal working hours, so that part-time civil
         servants are less well paid than full-time civil servants in respect of hours which are worked over and above their normal
         working hours, but which are not sufficient to bring the number of hours worked overall above the level of normal working
         hours for full-time civil servants – where:
      
–       in the group of workers subject to that legislation, a considerably higher percentage of women is affected as compared with
         the percentage of men so affected;
      
and
–       the difference in treatment is not justified by objective factors wholly unrelated to discrimination based on sex.
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
Article EC is to be interpreted as precluding national legislation on the remuneration of civil servants, such as that
            at issue in the main proceedings – which defines overtime, for both full-time civil servants and part-time civil servants,
            as hours worked over and above their normal working hours, and which remunerates those additional hours at a rate lower than
            the hourly rate applied to their normal working hours, so that part-time civil servants are less well paid than full-time
            civil servants in respect of hours which are worked over and above their normal working hours, but which are not sufficient
            to bring the number of hours worked overall above the level of normal working hours for full-time civil servants – where:
–       in the group of workers subject to that legislation, a considerably higher percentage of women is affected as compared with
            the percentage of men so affected;
and
–       the difference in treatment is not justified by objective factors wholly unrelated to discrimination based on sex.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 