
Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber) of December – A2A, formerly ASM Brescia v Commission
(Case C-318/P)
Appeal – State aid – Aid granted to public utilities – Tax exemptions – Decision declaring the aid scheme incompatible with the common market – Action for annulment – Admissibility – Locus standi – Legal interest in bringing proceedings – Article EC – Concept of ‘aid’ – Article EC – Concept of ‘new aid’ – Article EC – Duty to cooperate in good faith – Regulation (EC) No 659/– Articles and – Lawfulness of a recovery order – Principle of legal certainty – Duty to state reasons
1.                     Actions for annulment – Natural or legal persons – Measures of direct and individual concern to them – Commission decision
            prohibiting a sectoral aid scheme – Action brought by an undertaking having received individual aid granted under that scheme
            and that must be recovered – Admissibility (Art. 230, fourth para., EC) (see paras 55-60)
2.                     Actions for annulment – Legal interest in bringing proceedings – Condition – Action capable of procuring an advantage for
            the party bringing it – Commission decision on the recovery of State aid (see paras 68-70)
3.                     Appeals – Pleas in law – Inadequate statement of reasons – Reliance by the Court of First Instance on implied reasoning –
            Whether permissible – Conditions (Art. EC; Statute of the Court of Justice, Arts and 53, first para.) (see para. 97)
4.                     Appeals – Pleas in law – Mistaken assessment of the facts – Inadmissibility – Review by the Court of the assessment of the
            facts and evidence – Possible only where the clear sense of the evidence has been distorted (Art. EC; Statute of the Court
            of Justice, Art. 58, first para.) (see paras 103-105)
5.                     Appeals – Pleas in law – Plea directed against a ground of the judgment not necessary in order to support the operative part
            – Plea in law ineffective (see para. 109)
6.                     Appeals – Pleas in law – Distortion of national law relied on as evidence – Admissibility (Art. EC; Statute of the Court
            of Justice, Art. 51, first para.) (see para. 125)
7.                     Appeals – Pleas in law – Plea submitted for the first time in the context of the appeal – Inadmissibility (Rules of Procedure
            of the Court of Justice, Arts 42(2) and 118) (see para. 131)
Re: 
Appeal brought against the judgment of the Court of First Instance (Eighth Chamber, Extended Composition) of June in Case T‑189/ASM Brescia 
v 
Commission
 by which that court dismissed the action brought for annulment of Articles and of Commission Decision 2003/193/EC of
                  June on State aid granted by Italy in the form of tax exemptions and subsidised loans to public utilities with a majority
                  public capital holding (OJ L 77, p. 21).
               
Operative part
The Court: 
1.
	Dismisses the main appeal and the cross-appeal;
2.
	Orders A2A SpA to pay the costs of the main appeal;
3.
	Orders the European Commission to pay the costs of the cross-appeal.
Top  
 