
ORDER OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE COURT
July (*)
      
(Appeal – Application for interim measures – Applications for interim measures and for suspension of operation – Directive 91/414/EEC – Inadmissibility)
In Case C‑277/P(R),
APPEAL pursuant to the second paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, brought on June 2007,
Makhteshim-Agan Holding BV, established in Amsterdam (Netherlands),
      
Makhteshim-Agan Italia Srl, established in Bergamo (Italy),
      
Magan Italia Srl, established in Bergamo,
      
represented by K. Van Maldegem and C. Mereu, avocats,
appellants,
the other party to the proceedings being:
Commission of the European Communities, represented by B. Doherty and L. Parpala, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant at first instance,
THE PRESIDENT OF THE COURT,
after hearing Advocate General V. Trstenjak,
makes the following
Order
By their appeal, Makhteshim-Agan Holding BV, Makhteshim-Agan Italia Srl and Magan Italia Srl seek to have set aside the order
         of the President of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities of March in Cases T‑393/R I, T-393/R II and T-393/R III Makhteshim-Agan Holding and Others v Commission (not published in the ECR) (‘the order under appeal’), by which the Court of First Instance dismissed their applications
         for interim measures seeking suspension of operation of a decision alleged to be contained in a letter from the Commission
         of October (‘the contested measure’) concerning the evaluation of the active substance azinphos-methyl, in accordance
         with Council Directive 91/414/EEC of July concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market (OJ L 230, p. 1, and corrigendum OJ L 170, p. 40), as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 806/of April (OJ
         L 122, p. 1), (‘Directive 91/414’), and for other interim measures. 
      
 Legal context
Directive 91/establishes, inter alia, the Community system of authorisation and withdrawal of authorisation for placing
         plant protection products on the market. 
      
Article of that directive provides that ‘Member States shall ensure that a plant protection product is not authorised unless
         … its active substances are listed in Annex I’. 
      
Active substances which are not listed in Annex I to Directive 91/may, under certain conditions, benefit from derogating
         transitional rules. Article 8(2) of that directive thus provides that ‘a Member State may, during a period of years following
         the notification of this Directive, authorise the placing on the market in its territory of plant protection products containing
         active substances not listed in Annex I that are already on the market two years after the date of notification of this Directive’.
         
      
Commission Regulation (EEC) No 3600/of December laying down detailed rules for the implementation of the first
         stage of the programme of work referred to in Article 8(2) of Council Directive 91/414/EEC concerning the placing of plant
         protection products on the market (OJ L 366, p. 10), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1199/of June (OJ L 170, p. 19) (‘Regulation No 3600/92’), organises the procedure for evaluating a number of substances with a view
         to their possible listing in Annex I to Directive 91/414. Those substances include azinphos-methyl.
      
Article of Commission Regulation (EC) No 2076/of November extending the time period referred to in Article
         8(2) of Directive 91/414/EEC and concerning the non-inclusion of certain active substances in Annex I to that Directive and
         the withdrawal of authorisations for plant protection products containing these substances (OJ L 319, p. 3), as amended
         by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1335/of August (OJ L 211, p. 6) (‘Regulation No 2076/2002’), provides:
      
‘The time period of years referred to in Article 8(2) of Directive 91/414/EEC is extended until December for the
         active substances which are assessed in the framework of Regulation (EEC) No 3600/… [Until that date], Member States may
         continue to authorise or authorise again the placing on the market of plant protection products containing those active substances,
         in accordance with the provisions of Article 8(2) of Directive 91/414/EEC’.
      
Article of Directive 91/provides that ‘[t]he Commission shall be assisted by the Standing Committee on the Food Chain
         and Animal Health set up pursuant to Article of Regulation (EC) No 178/[of the European Parliament and of the Council
         of January laying down the general principles and requirements of food law, establishing the European Food Safety
         Authority and laying down procedures in matters of food safety (OJ L 31, p. 1)]’ (‘the Standing Committee’). The procedure
         for that committee is governed by Articles and of Council Decision 1999/468/EC of June laying down the procedures
         for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the Commission (OJ L 184, p. 23), as amended by Council Decision
         2006/512/EC of July (OJ L 200, p. 11) (‘Decision 1999/468’).
      
Article 7(3A) of Regulation No 3600/provides that, after the assessment procedure, the Commission is to present to the
         Standing Committee a draft directive to include the active substance in Annex I to Directive 91/414, or a draft decision to
         withdraw the authorisations of plant protection products containing the active substance, or a draft decision to suspend plant
         protection products containing the active substance from the market, with the option, however, of reconsidering the inclusion
         of the active substance in Annex I after submission of the results of additional trials or of additional information, or,
         last, a draft decision to postpone inclusion of the active substance in that annex pending the submission of the results of
         additional trials or information. 
      
Article of Decision 1999/states:
      
‘...
2. The representative of the Commission shall submit to the committee a draft of the measures to be taken. The committee shall
         deliver its opinion on the draft …
      
...
4. If the measures envisaged are not in accordance with the opinion of the committee, or if no opinion is delivered, the Commission
         shall, without delay, submit to the Council a proposal relating to the measures to be taken and shall inform the European
         Parliament.
      
...
6. ... 
If ... the Council has indicated by qualified majority that it opposes the proposal, the Commission shall re-examine it. It
         may submit an amended proposal to the Council, re-submit its proposal or present a legislative proposal on the basis of the
         Treaty.’
      
 The facts giving rise to the dispute and the procedure before the Court of First Instance 
At paragraphs to of the order under appeal, the President of the Court of First Instance summarised the facts giving
         rise to the dispute as follows: 
      
‘Makhteshim‑Agan Holding BV is a distributor of azinphos-methyl in the European Union. Makhteshim‑Agan Italia Srl is the holder
         of authorisations for the marketing in Italy of plant protection products based on azinphos-methyl and it distributes under
         licence other products for which Magan Italia Srl is the holder of marketing authorisations.
      
On a date not specified in the file but in any event before July 1993, Makhteshim-Agan International Co-ordination Center,
         subsequently replaced by Makhteshim-Agan Holding BV, notified the Commission that it wished to obtain the inclusion of azinphos-methyl
         in Annex I to Directive 91/414.
      
On March the Commission submitted to the Standing Committee a draft directive to include azinphos-methyl in Annex I
         to Directive 91/414.
      
As the Standing Committee issued an unfavourable opinion on that draft directive, the Commission, in accordance with Article
         5(4) of Decision 1999/468, submitted the draft directive to the Council. On September the Council opposed it. 
      
On October 2006, the Commission sent to the Federal [Republic of Germany] as the rapporteur Member State for azinphos-methyl,
         a letter containing the following conclusion:
      
“The Commission sees no possibility of changing the Council’s mind on this substance. Thus, it would serve no useful purpose
         for the Commission to resubmit the same proposal or an amended one (for example by proposing a directive including the substance
         in Annex I [to Directive 91/414] with even further conditions). For the same reasons, it would be pointless for the Commission
         to submit a legislative proposal under Article EC: the Council’s position would remain the same, and it would be unrealistic
         to imagine that such a text could be adopted before the deadline of December 2006.
      
Therefore the Commission considers that the Council’s opposition means that no further steps can be taken to approve azinphos-methyl.
         In the absence of any approval at Community level by the date laid down in Article 8(2) of Directive 91/414, there would no
         longer be any legal basis for keeping the substance on the market. That date is December (see Article of … Regulation
         [No] 2076/2002…). 
      
Member States should therefore ensure that authorisations for plant protection products containing this substance are withdrawn
         by December 2006. I would be grateful if you could make this known to interested parties (manufacturers, vendors and farmers
         etc.) in your Member State, and also to the notifiers with whom you had contact as rapporteur Member State.”’
      
By application lodged at the Registry of the Court of First Instance on December 2006, the appellants brought an action
         under the fourth paragraph of Article EC for annulment of the contested measure and an action under Article EC for
         a declaration that the Commission had failed to act. By separate documents lodged at the Registry on and December 2006,
         the appellants each lodged an application for interim measures. 
      
In the three sets of interlocutory proceedings, the appellants claimed that the President of the Court of First Instance should:
         
      
–        declare the applications admissible and well-founded;
–        suspend the contested measure pending the outcome of the main case in so far as it amounts in fact and in law to a failure
         to include azinphos-methyl in Annex I to Directive 91/414;
      
–        suspend the time-limit referred to in Article 8(2) of Directive 91/as concerns azinphos-methyl pending the outcome of
         the main case and until a decision has been adopted in respect of the inclusion of azinphos-methyl in Annex I to that directive,
         order an extension of that time-limit, or order the Commission to establish such an extension, in order to allow Member States
         to continue to grant authorisations for plant protection products based on azinphos-methyl after December and to authorise
         the marketing and sale of such products on their territory; and 
      
–        order the Commission to pay the costs. 
The Commission contended that the President of the Court of First Instance should dismiss the applications for interim measures
         as inadmissible or unfounded and order the appellants to pay the costs. 
      
 The order under appeal 
In the order under appeal, the President of the Court of First Instance pointed out that, while the admissibility of the main
         action should not, in principle, be examined in proceedings relating to an application for interim measures, it may, however,
         be necessary, where it is contended that the main action from which the application for interim measures is derived is manifestly
         inadmissible, to establish certain grounds supporting the conclusion that such an action is prima facie admissible. Accordingly,
         he ascertained whether the appellants had established certain grounds supporting the conclusion that the main actions for
         annulment and for failure to act were not prima facie manifestly inadmissible. 
      
In that context, he examined the appellants’ argument that, in so far as it expresses a definitive position adopted by the
         Commission in the context of the assessment procedure provided for in Directive 91/414, the contested measure is a measure
         which produces its own legal effects, namely the ban on the marketing of azinphos-methyl and plant protection products based
         on that substance, and which, therefore, can be regarded as a measure open to challenge for the purposes of Article EC.
         
      
The President of the Court of First Instance stated that, according to settled case-law, measures against which proceedings
         for annulment may be brought under Article EC are measures the legal effects of which are binding on, and capable of affecting
         the interests of, the applicant by having a significant effect on his legal position. Subsequently, he found, first, that
         the contested measure reflected only the Commission’s intention to follow a particular line of conduct and could not be regarded
         as intended to produce legal effects. Second, it was not the interpretation of Directive 91/set out by the Commission
         in the contested measure that was capable of producing legal effects, but its application to a given situation. In those circumstances,
         the President of the Court of First Instance held that the appellants had not demonstrated to the requisite legal standard
         that the contested measure was capable of having legal effects of such a kind as to have a significant effect on their legal
         position.
      
Furthermore, in response to the appellants’ argument that the contested measure amounts to a decision not to include the product
         in Annex I to Directive 91/414, the President of the Court of First Instance observed that that measure does not appear, by
         its form, by its content or by its context, to be a Commission decision adopted under Article 7(3A) of Regulation No 3600/92.
         
      
From the foregoing considerations, the President of the Court of First Instance drew the conclusion that the appellants had
         not established to the requisite legal standard that the action for annulment, on which their applications for interim measures
         were based, was not prima facie manifestly inadmissible. 
      
Even though that finding would have been sufficient to dismiss the applications for interim measures, since they were based
         solely on the main action for annulment of the contested measure, the President of the Court of First Instance also examined
         the arguments put forward by the Commission seeking to demonstrate that the main action for failure to act was also inadmissible.
         In that regard, he observed that, contrary to the requirement in the second paragraph of Article EC, the appellants had
         not called upon the Commission to act. Furthermore, he held that there was sufficient evidence to support the conclusion that
         the Commission had adopted a position within the meaning of Article EC. Consequently, the President of the Court of First
         Instance held that the applicants had not demonstrated that the main action for failure to act was not prima facie manifestly
         inadmissible. 
      
 The appeal 
In support of their appeal, the appellants submit three pleas in law alleging, respectively, mischaracterisation of the contested
         measure; a manifest error of interpretation and/or a distortion of the facts and evidence; and incorrect application of Community
         law. 
      
They claim that the Court should set aside the order under appeal, declare their applications at first instance admissible
         and well-founded and, on that basis, grant the requested forms of interim relief.
      
The Commission lodged its observations on the appeal on July 2007. It contends that the appeal should be dismissed. 
      
 Consideration of the appeal
Irrespective of the issue of the nature and the classification of the contested measure, it should be noted in the first place
         that, by their first claim, the applicants request the President to suspend the contested measure pending the outcome of the
         main case, in so far as it amounts in fact and in law to a failure to include azinphos-methyl in Annex I to Directive 91/414,
         in order that products based on that substance may continue to be marketed and sold. 
      
In that regard, even if the operation of the contested measure were suspended, the marketing and the sale of the products
         based on azinphos-methyl could continue only until the expiry of the period, laid down in Article 8(2) of Directive 91/for inclusion of that substance in Annex I to that directive. According to Article of Regulation No 2076/that period
         expired on December 2006.
      
As the President of the Court of First Instance correctly points out, at paragraph of the order under appeal, after the
         expiry of that period and in the absence of any decision to include the substance in Annex I to Directive 91/and, therefore,
         of any authorisation at Community level before the deadline of December 2006, there was no longer any legal basis for maintaining
         azinphos-methyl on the market and the Member States were required, under Article of Directive 91/414, to withdraw their
         marketing authorisations for that substance. 
      
Consequently, given that, even in the event that their application for suspension of operation of the contested measure were
         granted, the appellants would not be able to obtain the continuation of the marketing and sale of products based on azinphos-methyl,
         their pleas in law in support of that application must be rejected as redundant.
      
In the second place, as regards the appellants’ application for the suspension or extension of the time-limit referred to
         in Article 8(2) of Directive 91/in respect of azinphos-methyl, pending the outcome of the main proceedings and until a
         decision has been adopted with regard to the inclusion of that substance in Annex I to that directive, it should be borne
         in mind that, under the first subparagraph of Article 104(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance, an
         application to suspend the operation of any measure adopted by an institution, made pursuant to Article EC, is to be admissible
         only if the applicant is challenging that measure in proceedings before the Court of First Instance.
      
Even allowing that it lies within the jurisdiction of a judge hearing an application for interim measures to order the suspension
         of operation of an act other than the act challenged in the main action (see, to that effect, order in Case 18/R Gutmann v Commission [1966] ECR p. 135), it is none the less apparent from the very essence of proceedings for interim measures that such jurisdiction
         may not as a matter of principle be exercised unless both the acts in question emanate from the same institution and that
         institution is a party to the proceedings (see order of the President of the Court in Case 133/R Nashua Corporation v Commission [1987] ECR 2883, paragraph 7).
      
In the present case, the measure which is challenged in the main action was adopted by the Commission, while the Directive,
         of which suspension of operation is sought as an interim measure, emanates from the Council. It does not therefore lie within
         the jurisdiction of the judge hearing the application for interim measures to grant, where appropriate, such a request for
         an interim measure given that granting it would have the effect of suspending an act of a legislative nature emanating from
         an institution which is not a party to the present proceedings.
      
Moreover, it must be borne in mind that the Council has been absolutely opposed to the listing of azinphos-methyl in Annex
         I to Directive 91/414, even under the very strict conditions proposed by the Commission.
      
It follows that the appeal, in so far as it seeks suspension of operation or extension of the time-limit referred to in Article
         8(2) of Directive 91/414, must be dismissed as inadmissible. 
      
Having regard to all of the foregoing considerations, the appellants’ pleas in law cannot succeed and the appeal must therefore
         be dismissed. 
      
 Costs
In accordance with Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, applicable to the procedure on appeal under Article of those
         Rules, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings.
         As the Commission has applied for costs against the appellants, and the appellants have been unsuccessful, the latter must
         be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the President of the Court hereby orders:
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
2.      Makhteshim-Agan Holding BV, Makhteshim-Agan Italia Srl and Magan Italia Srl shall pay the costs. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 