
Case C-169/Abbey National plc and Inscape Investment Fund
v
Commissioners of Customs & Excise
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
VAT and Duties Tribunal, London)
(Sixth VAT Directive – Article 13B(d)(6) – Management of special investment funds – Exemption – Meaning of ‘management’ – Functions of a depositary – Delegation of administrative management function)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Tax provisions – Harmonisation of laws – Turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax – Exemptions provided for in the
            Sixth Directive 
(Council Directive 77/388, Art. 13B(d)(6))
2.        Tax provisions – Harmonisation of laws – Turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax – Exemptions provided for in the
            Sixth Directive 
(Council Directive 77/388, Art. 13B(d)(6))
1.        The concept of ‘management’ of special investment funds in Article 13B(d)(6) of Sixth Directive 77/on the harmonisation
         of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes has its own independent meaning in Community law whose content
         the Member States may not alter.
      
While the English and Dutch versions of that provision are ambiguous as to whether it confers on the Member States the task
         of defining both the meaning of ‘special investment funds’ and that of ‘management’ of those funds, it is clear, particularly
         from the Danish, German, French and Italian versions, that that provision refers to the Member States’ definitions only as
         regards the first of those meanings. The limited scope of that reference to national law, as is clear from the versions mentioned,
         is supported by the context in which the expression occurs, by the scheme of the Sixth Directive and by the purpose of avoiding
         divergences in the application of the value-added tax system from one Member State to another. 
      
 (see paras 40-43, operative part 1)
2.        Article 13B(d)(6) of Sixth Directive 77/on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes
         is to be interpreted as meaning that the concept of ‘management of special investment funds’ referred to in that provision
         covers the services performed by a third‑party manager in respect of the administrative management of the funds, if, viewed
         broadly, they form a distinct whole and are specific to, and essential for, the management of those funds. 
      
On the other hand, that provision does not cover the functions of depositary, such as those set out in Articles 7(1) and (3)
         and 14(1) and (3) of Directive 85/on the coordination of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating
         to undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities. Those functions do not fall under the management of
         undertakings for collective investment but under the control and supervision of their activities, the aim being to ensure
         that undertakings for collective investment are managed in accordance with the law. 
      
However, since to be regarded as exempt transactions for the purposes of Article 13B(d)(6) of the Sixth Directive, services
         performed by a third-party manager in respect of the administrative management of the funds must, viewed broadly, form a distinct
         whole, fulfilling in effect the specific, essential functions of a service described in that same point 6, mere material or
         technical supplies, such as the making available of a system of information technology, are not covered by Article 13B(d)(6)
         of that directive.
      
(see paras 65, 70-71, 74, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
May (*)
      
(Sixth VAT Directive – Article 13B(d)(6) – Management of special investment funds – Exemption – Meaning of ‘management’ – Functions of a depositary – Delegation of administrative management function)
In Case C-169/04,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the VAT and Duties Tribunal, London (United Kingdom), made by
         decision of April 2004, received at the Court on April 2004, in the proceedings
      
Abbey National plc, 
Inscape Investment Fund
v
Commissioners of Customs & Excise,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of A. Rosas, President of the Chamber, J. Malenovský, S. von Bahr (Rapporteur), A. Borg Barthet and U. Lõhmus, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on March 2005,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Abbey National plc, by J. Woolf, Barrister, and J.-C. Bouchard, avocat, instructed by R. Croker, Solicitor,
–        the United Kingdom Government, by K. Manji, E. O’Neill and S. Nwaokolo, acting as Agents, and by R. Hill, Barrister,
–        the Luxembourg Government, by S. Schreiner, acting as Agent,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by R. Lyal, acting as Agent,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2005,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 13B(d)(6) of Sixth Council Directive 77/388/EEC
         of May on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes – Common system of value added
         tax: uniform basis of assessment (OJ L 145, p. 1; ‘the Sixth Directive’).
      
The reference was made in the course of two sets of proceedings between Abbey National plc (‘Abbey National’) and Inscape
         Investment Fund, on the one hand, and the Commissioners of Customs & Excise (‘the Commissioners’), on the other, concerning
         the taxation of services supplied by the depositaries of a number of authorised unit trusts and of an open-ended investment
         company (‘OEIC’), and administration and accounting services performed by a third company delegated by the management company
         of an OEIC.
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
Article 13B(d) of the Sixth Directive provides as follows:
      
‘Without prejudice to other Community provisions, Member States shall exempt the following under conditions which they shall
         lay down for the purpose of ensuring the correct and straightforward application of the exemptions and of preventing any possible
         evasion, avoidance or abuse: 
      
...
(d)      the following transactions:
1.      the granting and the negotiation of credit and the management of credit by the person granting it; 
2.      the negotiation of or any dealings in credit guarantees or any other security for money and the management of credit guarantees
         by the person who is granting the credit; 
      
3.      transactions, including negotiation, concerning deposit and current accounts, payments, transfers, debts, cheques and other
         negotiable instruments, but excluding debt collection and factoring; 
      
4.      transactions, including negotiation, concerning currency, bank notes and coins used as legal tender, with the exception of
         collectors’ items; “collectors’ items” shall be taken to mean gold, silver or other metal coins or bank notes which are not
         normally used as legal tender or coins of numismatic interest; 
      
5.      transactions, including negotiation, excluding management and safe keeping, in shares, interests in companies or associations,
         debentures and other securities, excluding:
      
–        documents establishing title to goods, 
–        the rights or securities referred to in Article 5(3); 
6.      management of special investment funds as defined by Member States’.
Article 1(2) of Council Directive 85/611/EEC of December on the coordination of laws, regulations and administrative
         provisions relating to undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities (UCITS) (OJ L 375, p. 3) defines
         undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities (‘UCITS’) as undertakings:
      
‘–      the sole object of which is the collective investment in transferable securities of capital raised from the public and which
         operate on the principle of risk-spreading,
      
and
–      the units of which are, at the request of holders, repurchased or redeemed, directly or indirectly, out of those undertakings’
         assets. …’ 
      
Article 1(3) of the same directive provides that those undertakings may be constituted ‘under the law of contract (as common
         funds managed by management companies) or trust law (as unit trusts) or under statute (as investment companies)’. For the
         purposes of Directive 85/611, the term ‘common funds’ includes unit trusts.
      
Pursuant to Article 4(1) of that directive, a UCITS is to be authorised by the authorities of the Member State in which it
         is situated. Such authorisation is valid for all Member States. 
      
According to Article 4(2) of the same directive, for the purposes of authorisation a unit trust must have appointed a management
         company and a depositary whereas an investment company which is subject to the same requirement as regards a depositary is
         not required to appoint a management company. 
      
Under Articles 7(1) and 14(1) of Directive 85/611, a special investment fund’s and an investment company’s assets must be
         entrusted to a depositary for safe keeping. 
      
As regards special investment funds, in the terms of Article 7(3) of that directive, a depositary must moreover:
      
‘(a)      ensure that the sale, issue, repurchase, redemption and cancellation of units effected on behalf of a unit trust or by a management
         company are carried out in accordance with the law and the fund rules;
      
(b)      ensure that the value of units is calculated in accordance with the law and the fund rules;
(c)      carry out the instructions of the management company, unless they conflict with the law or the fund rules;
(d)      ensure that in transactions involving a unit trust’s assets any consideration is remitted to it within the usual time‑limits;
(e)      ensure that a unit trust’s income is applied in accordance with the law and the fund rules.’
As for investment companies, Article 14(3) of the same directive provides that apart from keeping the assets safe the depositary
         must:
      
‘(a)      ensure that the sale, issue, repurchase, redemption and cancellation of units effected by or on behalf of a company are carried
         out in accordance with the law and with the company’s instruments of incorporation;
      
(b)      ensure that in transactions involving a company’s assets any consideration is remitted to it within the usual time‑limits;
(c)      ensure that a company’s income is applied in accordance with the law and its instruments of incorporation.’
Under Articles and of Directive 85/611, a depositary is, in accordance with the national law of the State in which the
         management company’s or the investment company’s registered office is situated, to be liable to those companies and the unit-holders
         for any loss suffered by them as a result of its unjustifiable failure to perform its obligations, or its improper performance
         of them.
      
Under Articles 10(1) and 17(1) of the same directive, no single company may act as both management or investment company and
         depositary.
      
Directive 85/was amended by Directive 2001/107/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of January 2002, with
         a view to regulating management companies and simplified prospectuses (OJ L 41, p. 20), and by Directive 2001/108/EC
         of the European Parliament and of the Council of January 2002, with regard to investments of UCITS (OJ L 41, p. 35).
         The second subparagraph of Article 5(2) of Directive 85/611, as amended, refers to Annex II to that directive which contains
         a non-exhaustive list of the functions included in the activity of management of special investment funds and of investment
         companies. That list mentions the following functions:
      
‘–      Investment management
–      Administration:
(a) legal and fund management accounting services;
(b) customer inquiries;
(c) valuation and pricing (including tax returns);
(d) regulatory compliance monitoring;
(e) maintenance of unit-holder register;
(f) distribution of income;
(g) unit issues and redemptions;
(h) contract settlements (including certificate dispatch);
(i) record keeping.
–      Marketing’.
Article 5g(1) of Directive 85/611, as amended, which, pursuant to Article 13b of that directive, also applies to investment
         companies which have not appointed an authorised management company, permits management companies, subject to certain conditions,
         ‘to delegate to third parties for the purpose of a more efficient conduct of the companies’ business to carry out on their
         behalf one or more of their own functions’.
      
 National legislation
Pursuant to items and of Group in Schedule of the Value Added Tax Act (‘the VAT Act 1994’), authorised unit
         trusts (item 9) and OEICs (item 10) are treated in the United Kingdom as ‘special investment funds’ for the purposes of Article
         13B(d)(6) of the Sixth Directive.
      
Directive 85/was implemented in the United Kingdom by the Financial Services and Markets Act (‘the FSMA’) which is,
         however, of wider scope than that directive.
      
According to the FSMA, an authorised unit trust is a collective investment scheme under which the property is held on trust
         for the participants and which is authorised by an authorisation order. Under such a scheme, investors buy or sell units in
         the trust. Unless the manager buys the units from the investor or sells units to him, new units are created or redeemed each
         time an investor wants to buy or sell units.
      
According to the rules applicable to collective investment schemes set out in the Financial Services Authority’s Collective Investment Schemes Sourcebook (‘CIS Sourcebook’), the manager of an authorised unit trust is under a duty to manage that trust in accordance with the trust deed, the rules
         in the CIS Sourcebook and the most recent prospectus.
      
The decision requesting a preliminary ruling states that an OEIC is a form of collective investment scheme similar to a unit
         trust except that it has a corporate structure rather than being governed by trust law. In addition to the provisions of the
         FSMA, OEICs are regulated inter alia by the Open-Ended Investment Companies Regulations (‘the OEIC Regulations’). An
         OEIC has a variable share capital so that new shares are created when an investor wants to invest in the company and are redeemed
         when the investor wants to liquidate his investment.
      
The OEIC Regulations require an OEIC to have at least one Authorised Corporate Director (‘ACD’), which must be a body corporate
         approved and authorised to act as manager.
      
Under the FSMA and CIS Sourcebook, the depositary of an authorised unit trust is described as a ‘trustee’ whereas under the OEIC Regulations, the depositary
         of an OEIC is referred to as a ‘depositary’.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Abbey National Unit Trust Managers Limited and Scottish Mutual Investment Managers Limited, members of the Abbey National
         VAT group, are the managers of and authorised unit trusts respectively.
      
The trustees of those trusts are either Clydesdale Bank plc (‘Clydesdale’), Citicorp Trustee Company Limited (‘Citicorp’)
         or HSBC Bank plc (‘HSBC’). The referring tribunal states that those companies charge a general fee for their trustee functions.
         Although Clydesdale and HSBC also act as custodians, the general trustee fees which they charge do not cover global custody
         services, for which a separate fee is charged, whereas Citicorp, as trustee, does not act as custodian.
      
Inscape Investments Limited was appointed ACD of Inscape Investment Fund and Abbey National Asset Managers Limited was appointed
         ACD of three other OEICs. Inscape Investments Limited and Inscape Investment Fund are also members of the Abbey National VAT
         group.
      
Citicorp was appointed depositary of those four OEICs and charges a general fee for its services. However, it does not act
         as custodian of those OEICs.
      
Towards the end of 2000, Inscape Investments Limited entered into an agreement on Inscape Investment Fund’s accounting with
         Bank of New York Europe Limited and, subsequently, with Bank of New York (‘Bank of New York’). Under that agreement, Bank
         of New York undertook to perform a raft of services delegated by Inscape Investments Limited, in particular computing the
         amount of income and the price of units or shares, the valuation of assets, accounting, the preparation of statements for
         the distribution of income, the provision of information and documentation for periodic accounts and tax, statistical and
         VAT returns, and the preparation of income forecasts. 
      
Bank of New York also undertook to provide other services such as data processing, fund reconciliation, calculation and recording
         of charges and expenses, recording of corporate events, distribution of daily sub-fund prices to the press, production of
         tax and VAT returns and returns to the Bank of England, calculation of distribution rates and yields, and answers to enquiries
         from Inscape Investments Limited and/or the depositary.
      
Abbey National brought an action on the ground that the VAT had been reclaimed by several of the trustees of the authorised
         unit trusts managed by its subsidiaries, and Inscape Investment Fund brought an action on the ground that its depositary was
         reclaiming the VAT from it.
      
In addition, Abbey National challenges the charging of VAT by Bank of New York to Inscape Investments Limited on the administration
         and accounting services that Bank of New York supplied as fund administrator.
      
Abbey National also contends that the services supplied by Bank of New York are exempt from VAT because they constitute ‘management
         of special investment funds’ under Article 13B(d)(6) of the Sixth Directive. In that regard, it points out that the administration
         of a fund clearly forms part of its management and that the subcontracting of all the administrative facets of management
         or of a large proportion of them, which form a specific and essential part of management, should not be treated differently
         from the subcontracting of some of the decisions as to the selection of investments.
      
Abbey National and Inscape Investment Fund also contend that the services, other than custody services, supplied by the trustees
         of an authorised unit trust and by the depositary of an OEIC are also exempt under Article 13B(d)(6) of the Sixth Directive.
         Verification and decision-making functions performed by the depositary or the trustee are both comprised in management functions.
      
The decision requesting a preliminary ruling states that, according to the Commissioners, the specific and essential function
         of the management of special investment funds is investment management involving the selection and disposal of the assets
         under management. They argue that this excludes the services supplied by the trustees and depositaries from the scope of the
         exemption, since they are not generally directly involved in day-to-day investment management decisions, and their primary
         role is to protect the consumer and investor. That also excludes the administration services supplied by the fund administrator
         from the scope of the exemption, since none of those involves the selection and disposal of the assets under management.
      
The referring tribunal does not find the scope of the exemption contained in Article 13B(d)(6) of the Sixth Directive to be
         clear. It points out, in that regard, that there is a disparity between the practices of the Member States as to the treatment
         of the transactions at issue in the main proceedings.
      
In those circumstances, the VAT and Duties Tribunal, London, decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling: 
      
‘(1)      Does the exemption for “management of special investment funds as defined by Member States”, contained in Article 13B(d)(6)
         of the Sixth VAT Directive, mean that the Member States have the power to define the activities comprising the “management”
         of the special investment funds, as well as the power to define the special investment funds which may benefit from the exemption?
      
(2)      If the answer to Question is no and the term “management” in Article 13B(d)(6) of the Sixth VAT Directive is to be given
         an independent Community law meaning, in the light of … Directive 85/…, are charges made by a depositary or trustee for
         the services it provides pursuant to Articles and of … Directive [85/611], national regulatory provisions and the relevant
         fund rules, exempt supplies of “management of special investment funds” under Article 13B(d)(6) of the Sixth VAT Directive?
      
(3)      Again, if the answer to Question is no and the term “management” is to be given an independent Community law meaning, does
         the exemption for the “management of special investment funds” in Article 13B(d)(6) of the Sixth VAT Directive apply to services
         performed by a third-party manager in respect of the administrative management of the funds?’
      
 The first question
By its first question, the referring tribunal is asking, in essence, whether the concept of ‘management’ of special investment
         funds in Article 13B(d)(6) of the Sixth Directive has its own independent meaning in Community law whose content the Member
         States may not alter. 
      
 Observations submitted to the Court
Abbey National, the Luxembourg Government and the Commission of the European Communities submit that the exemption under Article
         13B(d)(6) of the Sixth Directive for ‘the management of special investment funds as defined by Member States’ does not confer
         power on the latter to define the activities covered by the term ‘management’ of the funds.
      
On the other hand, the United Kingdom Government submits that that exemption confers that power on the Member States, as well
         as the power to define the special investment funds which may benefit from the exemption.
      
 Findings of the Court
According to settled case-law, the exemptions provided for in Article of the Sixth Directive have their own independent
         meaning in Community law which must be given a Community definition whose purpose is to avoid divergences in the application
         of the VAT system from one Member State to another (see, particularly, Case C-358/Commission v Ireland [2000] ECR I-6301, paragraph 51; Case C‑428/Fonden Marselisborg Lystbådehavn [2005] ECR I-1527, paragraph 27; and Joined Cases C‑394/and C-395/Ygeia [2005] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 15). 
      
While, consequently, the Member States may not alter their content, in particular in laying down conditions of application,
         that cannot however be so where the Council has specifically conferred on them the task of defining certain terms of an exemption
         (see Case C-468/Gemeente Emmen[1996] ECR I-1721, paragraph 25).
      
It is therefore appropriate to consider whether Article 13B(d)(6) of the Sixth Directive confers on the Member States the
         task of defining both the meaning of ‘special investment funds’ and that of ‘management’ of those funds or whether it covers
         only the first of those two concepts.
      
In that regard, it must be stated that while the English and Dutch versions of that provision are ambiguous as to its scope,
         it is clear, particularly from the Danish, German, French and Italian versions, that Article 13B(d)(6) of the Sixth Directive
         refers to the Member States’ definitions only as regards the meaning of ‘special investment funds’. 
      
The limited scope of that reference to national law, as is clear particularly from the Danish, German, French and Italian
         versions, is supported by the context in which the expression occurs, by the scheme of the Sixth Directive and by the purpose
         of avoiding divergences in the application of the VAT system from one Member State to another. 
      
Therefore, the reply to the first question must be that the concept of ‘management’ of special investment funds in Article
         13B(d)(6) of the Sixth Directive has its own independent meaning in Community law whose content the Member States may not
         alter. 
      
 The second and third questions
By its second and third questions, which it is convenient to consider together, the referring tribunal is asking, in essence,
         whether Article 13B(d)(6) of the Sixth Directive is to be interpreted in such a way that the concept of ‘management of special
         investment funds’ does or does not cover: 
      
–        the services charged for by a depositary pursuant to Articles and of Directive 85/611, national regulatory provisions and the relevant fund rules; and
–        the administrative and accounting management services of the funds performed by a third-party manager.
 Observations submitted to the Court 
Abbey National and the Luxembourg Government submit that charges made by a depositary or trustee for the services it supplies
         pursuant to Articles and of Directive 85/611, national regulatory provisions and the relevant fund rules are exempt supplies under Article 13B(d)(6) of the Sixth Directive.
         
      
The latter provision also covers the services performed by a third-party manager in respect of the administrative management
         of the funds. 
      
The United Kingdom Government submits that the term ‘management’ of special investment funds in Article 13B(d)(6) of the Sixth
         Directive should be understood as referring to the core function of investment management performed by the manager of a special
         investment fund. 
      
That exemption does not extend to the charges made by a depositary or trustee for the safe custody of the assets of the special
         investment fund or for supervising the manager’s activities to ensure that they are carried out in accordance with the law
         and fund rules. 
      
For the same reasons, that exemption does not apply to the supply of purely administrative services to the manager by a subcontracted
         fund-accounting administrator. 
      
The Commission submits that the expression ‘management of special investment funds’ within the meaning of Article 13B(d)(6)
         of the Sixth Directive covers all services which are closely linked to the operation of the fund, that is, to determining
         policies for investment and the acquisition and sale of shares. 
      
The services supplied by a depositary pursuant to Articles and of Directive 85/611, national regulatory provisions and
         the fund rules do not constitute fund management for the purposes of Article 13B(d)(6) of the Sixth Directive. 
      
Nor do the services performed by a third-party manager in respect of the administrative management of the funds constitute
         fund management for the purposes of that provision. 
      
 Findings of the Court
It must be noted, at the outset, that Article 13B(d)(6) of the Sixth Directive covers special investment funds whatever their
         legal form. Undertakings for collective investment constituted under the law of contract or trust law, and those constituted
         under statute both come within the scope of that provision. 
      
Neither the context nor the wording of Article 13B(d)(6) of the Sixth Directive indicates that the legislature intended to
         limit the application of that provision only to undertakings for collective investment constituted under the law of contract
         or under trust law. 
      
In fact, when the Sixth Directive was adopted, the Community terminology in this field was not yet harmonised, since Directive
         85/611, Article 1(3) of which gives a Community definition of UCITS, was adopted only in 1985. In addition, while the French
         and Italian versions of Article 1(3) of Directive 85/611, when they designate undertakings for collective investment constituted under the law of contract, use the same expression
         as that which appears in Article 13B(d)(6) of the Sixth Directive, such is not the case in other language versions of that
         provision, particularly the English, German, Danish and Dutch versions. 
      
Moreover, as regards the application of Article 13B(d)(6) of the Sixth Directive to transactions effected between undertakings
         for collective investment and their participants, any other interpretation of that provision, exempting from VAT the management
         of undertakings for collective investment constituted under the law of contract or under trust law, and not those constituted
         under statute, would be contrary to the principle of fiscal neutrality on which, in particular, the common system of VAT established
         by the Sixth Directive is based, and which precludes economic operators carrying out the same transactions being treated differently
         in relation to the levying of VAT (see Case C-382/02Cimber Air [2004] ECR I‑8379, paragraphs and 24, and Case C‑280/Jyske Finans [2005] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 39).
      
Next, the content of the meaning of ‘management’ of special investment funds must be considered.
      
In that regard, it must be noted that Article 13B(d)(6) of the Sixth Directive contains no definition of that term. 
      
That provision must therefore be interpreted in the light of the context in which it is used and of the aims and scheme of
         that directive, having particular regard to the underlying purpose of the exemption which it establishes (see, to that effect,
         Case C-284/Temco Europe [2004] ECR I-11237, paragraph 18, and Fonden Marselisborg Lystbådehavn, paragraph 28).
      
First of all, it must be borne in mind that, since the exemptions referred to in Article of the Sixth Directive are exceptions
         to the general principle that VAT is to be levied on all services supplied for consideration by a taxable person, they should
         be interpreted strictly (see, in particular, Case C-275/Sinclair Collis [2003] ECR I-5965, paragraph 23, and Case C-8/Taksatorringen [2003] ECR I-13711, paragraph 36). 
      
Next, it follows from Article 1(2) of Directive 85/that the transactions carried out by UCITS consist in the collective investment in transferable securities of capital raised
         from the public. With the capital provided by subscribers when they purchase shares, UCITS assemble and manage, on behalf
         of the subscribers and for a fee, portfolios consisting of transferable securities (see Case C-8/BBL [2004] ECR I-10157, paragraph 42).
      
As the Advocate General observed in point of her Opinion, the purpose of the exemption, under Article 13B(d)(6) of the
         Sixth Directive, of transactions connected with the management of special investment funds is, particularly, to facilitate
         investment in securities for small investors by means of investment undertakings. Point of that provision is intended to
         ensure that the common system of VAT is fiscally neutral as regards the choice between direct investment in securities and
         investment through undertakings for collective investment.
      
It follows that the transactions covered by that exemption are those which are specific to the business of undertakings for
         collective investment.
      
Therefore, apart from tasks of portfolio management, those of administering undertakings for collective investment themselves,
         such as those set out in Annex II to Directive 85/611, as amended, under the heading ‘Administration’, which are functions
         specific to undertakings for collective investment, come within the scope of Article 13B(d)(6) of the Sixth Directive.
      
On the other hand, that provision does not cover the functions of depositary of undertakings for collective investment, such
         as those set out in Articles 7(1) and (3) and 14(1) and (3) of Directive 85/611. Those functions do not fall under the management
         of undertakings for collective investment but under the control and supervision of their activities, the aim being to ensure
         that undertakings for collective investment are managed in accordance with the law. 
      
As regards the services performed by a third-party manager in respect of the administrative management of the funds, it should
         be noted first that, like the transactions exempted under points and of Article 13B(d) of the Sixth Directive (see Case
         C-2/SDC [1997] ECR I-3017, paragraph 32), the management of special investment funds referred to in point of that article is defined
         according to the nature of the services provided and not according to the person supplying or receiving the services.
      
Next, the wording of Article 13B(d)(6) of the Sixth Directive does not in principle preclude the management of special investment
         funds from being broken down into a number of separate services which may come within the meaning of ‘management of special
         investment funds’ in that provision, and which may benefit from the exemption under it, even where they are provided by a
         third-party manager (see, to that effect, as regards Article 13B(d)(3) of the Sixth Directive, SDC, paragraph 64, and, as regards Article 13B(d)(5) of that directive, Case C‑235/CSC Financial Services [2001] ECR I‑10237, paragraph 23).
      
In those circumstances, it follows from the principle of fiscal neutrality that operators must be able to choose the form
         of organisation which, from the strictly commercial point of view, best suits them, without running the risk of having their
         operations excluded from the exemption under Article 13B(d)(6) of the Sixth Directive.
      
It follows that management services performed by a third-party manager come, generally, within the scope of Article 13B(d)(6)
         of the Sixth Directive.
      
However, to be regarded as exempt transactions for the purposes of Article 13B(d)(6) of the Sixth Directive, services performed
         by a third-party manager in respect of the administrative management of the funds must, viewed broadly, form a distinct whole,
         fulfilling in effect the specific, essential functions of a service described in that same point (see, to that effect, as
         regards Article 13B(d)(5) of the Sixth Directive, SDC, paragraph 66, and CSC Financial Services, paragraph 25).
      
The services supplied must therefore concern specific essential elements of the management of special investment funds. Mere
         material or technical supplies, such as the making available of a system of information technology, are not covered by Article
         13B(d)(6) of the Sixth Directive (see, to that effect, as regards Article 13B(d)(3), SDC, paragraph 66).
      
Therefore, it must be held that Article 13B(d)(6) of the Sixth Directive is to be interpreted as meaning that the services
         performed by a third-party manager in respect of the administrative management of the funds come within the concept of ‘management
         of special investment funds’ in that provision if, viewed broadly, they form a distinct whole, and are specific to, and essential
         for, the management of special investment funds.
      
It is for the referring tribunal to establish whether the services in question in the main proceedings meet those criteria.
         
      
It follows from the foregoing that the reply to the second and third questions must be that Article 13B(d)(6) of the Sixth
         Directive is to be interpreted as meaning that the concept of ‘management of special investment funds’ referred to in that
         provision covers the services performed by a third‑party manager in respect of the administrative management of the funds,
         if, viewed broadly, they form a distinct whole and are specific to, and essential for, the management of those funds. On the
         other hand, services corresponding to the functions of a depositary, such as those set out in Articles 7(1) and (3) and 14(1)
         and (3) of Directive 85/611, are not covered by that concept.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national tribunal,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that tribunal. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the
         costs of those parties, are not recoverable. 
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      The concept of ‘management’ of special investment funds in Article 13B(d)(6) of Sixth Council Directive 77/388/EEC of May on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes – Common system of value
            added tax: uniform basis of assessment has its own independent meaning in Community law whose content the Member States may
            not alter. 
2.      Article 13B(d)(6) of Sixth Directive 77/is to be interpreted as meaning that the concept of ‘management of special investment funds’ referred to in that provision
            covers the services performed by a third-party manager in respect of the administrative management of the funds, if, viewed
            broadly, they form a distinct whole, and are specific to, and essential for, the management of those funds. 
On the other hand, services corresponding to the functions of a depositary, such as those set out in Articles 7(1) and (3)
            and 14(1) and (3) of Council Directive 85/611/EEC of December on the coordination of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to undertakings for
            collective investment in transferable securities (UCITS), are not covered by that concept. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 