
Case C-523/Commission of the European Communities
v
Kingdom of the Netherlands
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Conclusion by a Member State of a bilateral air transport agreement with the United States of America – Right of establishment – Secondary law governing the internal market in air transport – External competence of the Community)
Opinion of Advocate General Mengozzi delivered on November Judgment of the Court (Grand Chamber), April Summary of the Judgment
1.     Member States – Obligations – Failure to fulfil obligations – Justification – Principle of the protection of legitimate expectations
            
(Art. EC)
2.     International agreements – Agreements concluded by the Member States – Agreements predating the EC Treaty – Article EC
            – Scope 
(Art. EC)
3.     Transport – Air transport – Pricing of intra-Community routes and computerised reservation systems used in the Member States
(EC Treaty, Art. (now Art. EC); Council Regulations Nos 2299/and 2409/92)
4.     Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Bilateral air transport agreement between a Member State and
            a non-Member State
(EC Treaty, Art. (now, after amendment, Art. EC))
1.     The procedure for a failure on the part of a Member State to fulfil its obligations is based on the objective finding that
         a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations under Community law and the principle of protection of legitimate expectations
         cannot be relied on by a Member State in order to preclude an objective finding of a failure on its part to fulfil its obligations
         under the Treaty or secondary legislation, since to admit that justification would run counter to the aim pursued by the procedure
         under Article EC.
      
(see para. 28)
2.     The amendments made following the accession of a Member State to the European Communities to a bilateral air transport agreement
         entered into between that Member State and a non-Member country indicate a renegotiation of the agreement as a whole. Whilst
         some provisions of that agreement were not formally modified by those amendments or were subject only to marginal changes
         in drafting, the commitments arising from those provisions were none the less confirmed during the renegotiation. In such
         a case, the Member States are prevented not only from contracting new international commitments but also from maintaining
         such commitments in force if they infringe Community law.
      
(see para. 51)
3.     Article of the Treaty (now Article EC) requires Member States to facilitate the achievement of the Community’s tasks
         and to abstain from any measure which could jeopardise the attainment of the objectives of the Treaty. In the area of external
         relations, the Community’s tasks and the objectives of the Treaty would be compromised if Member States were able to enter
         into international commitments containing provisions capable of affecting rules adopted by the Community or of altering their
         scope.
      
By maintaining in force, despite the renegotiation of a bilateral air transport agreement entered into with a non-Member country,
         international agreements concerning air fares and rates charged by carriers designated by that State on intra-Community routes
         and concerning computerised reservation systems offered for use or used on national territory, a Member State fails to fulfil
         its obligations under Article of the Treaty and under Regulations No 2409/on fares and rates for air services and 2299/on a code of conduct for computerised reservation systems.
      
(see paras 74-76)
4.     A clause contained in a bilateral air transport agreement entered into by a Member State and a non-Member State which permits
         the non-Member State, inter alia, to withhold or revoke a concession or authorisation to an airline designated by the Member
         State, but of which a substantial part of the ownership and effective control is not vested in that Member State or its nationals,
         is contrary to Article of the Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC).
      
Such a clause undeniably affects airlines established in the Member State of which a substantial part of the ownership and
         effective control is vested either in a Member State other than the host State or in nationals of such a Member State. The
         latter so-called Community airlines may always be excluded from the benefit of the bilateral agreement, while that benefit
         is assured to the national airlines of which a substantial part of the ownership and effective control is vested in the Member
         State or its nationals. Consequently, those airlines suffer discrimination which prevents them from benefiting from the treatment
         which the host Member State accords to its own nationals.
      
(see paras 86-90)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
April (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Conclusion by a Member State of a bilateral air transport agreement with the United States of America – Right of establishment – Secondary law governing the internal market in air transport – External competence of the Community)
In Case C‑523/04,
ACTION for failure to fulfil obligations under Article EC, brought on December 2004,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by M. Huttunen and W. Wils, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Kingdom of the Netherlands, represented by H.G. Sevenster and M. de Grave, acting as Agents,
      
defendant,
supported by:
French Republic, represented by G. de Bergues and A. Hare, acting as Agents,
      
intervener,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans, K. Lenaerts, P. Kūris, E. Juhász and J. Klučka, Presidents
         of Chambers, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur), K. Schiemann, J. Makarczyk, U. Lõhmus, E. Levits and A. Ó Caoimh, Judges,
      
Advocate General: P. Mengozzi,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on November 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities seeks a declaration from the Court that by contracting or maintaining
         in force, despite the renegotiation of the Air Transport Agreement concluded between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the
         United States of America on April (Tractatenblad 1957, No 53; (‘the Agreement’)), of international commitments towards the United States of America:
      
–       concerning air fares and rates charged by carriers designated by the United States on intra-Community routes,
–       concerning computerised reservation systems (‘CRSs’) used or offered for use on Netherlands territory, and
–       recognising the United States as having the right to withdraw, suspend or limit traffic rights in cases where air carriers
         designated by the Kingdom of the Netherlands are not owned by the latter or by Netherlands nationals,
      
the Kingdom of the Netherlands has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC),
         Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC), Council Regulation (EEC) No 2409/of July on
         fares and rates for air services (OJ L 240, p. 15), and Council Regulation (EEC) No 2299/of July on a code
         of conduct for computerised reservation systems (OJ L 220, p. 1), as amended by Council Regulation (EEC) No 3089/of
         October (OJ L 278, p. 1).
      
By order of the President of the Court of June 2005, the French Republic was granted leave to intervene in support of the
         Kingdom of the Netherlands.
      
 Legal context
Article of Regulation No 2299/provides:
‘This Regulation shall apply to computerised reservation systems [(CRSs)] when offered for use and/or used in the territory
         of the Community for the distribution and sale of air transport products irrespective of:
      
–       the status or nationality of the system vendor,
–       the source of the information used or the location of the relevant central data processing unit,
–       the geographical location of the air transport product concerned.
However, Article 7(1) and (2) of that regulation provide:
‘1.      The obligations of a system vendor under Articles to shall not apply in respect of a parent carrier of a third country
         to the extent that its CRS does not conform with this Regulation or does not offer Community air carriers equivalent treatment
         to that provided under this Regulation.
      
2.      The obligations of parent and participating carriers under Article shall not apply in respect of a CRS controlled by air
         carriers of a third country to the extent that a parent or participating carrier is not accorded equivalent treatment in that
         country to that provided under this Regulation and under Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2672/88.’
      
According to Article 1(1) of Regulation No 2409/92, that regulation concerns the criteria and procedures to be applied for
         the establishment of fares and rates on air services for carriage wholly within the Community.
      
Article 1(2) and (3) of the same regulation read as follows:
‘2.      Without prejudice to paragraph 3, this Regulation shall not apply:
(a)      to fares and rates charged by air carriers other than Community air carriers;
(b)      to fares and rates established by public service obligation, in accordance with Council Regulation (EEC) No 2408/of July on access for Community air carriers to intra-Community air routes, … .
      
3.      Only Community air carriers shall be entitled to introduce new products or lower fares than the ones existing for identical
         products.’
      
Article of Regulation No 2409/provides:
‘This Regulation shall enter into force on January 1993.’
 Background to the dispute
 The Agreement
On April 1957, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the United States concluded the Agreement.
That Agreement was added to by a protocol of March (Tractatenblad 1978, No 55; ‘the Protocol’), and amended by an exchange of notes on October and December (Tractatenblad 1988, No 12), by an exchange of notes of January and March (Tractatenblad 1992, No 63) and by an exchange of notes of October (Tractatenblad 1992, No 177; ‘the Exchange of Notes of October 1992’).
      
The Protocol was amended by a protocol of June (Tractatenblad 1986, No 88) and by the Exchange of Notes of October 1992.
      
The Exchange of Notes of October amended several provisions of the Agreement, particularly Article (definitions),
         Article (allocation of rights), Article (designation), Article (ownership and control of airlines), Article (security),
         Article (customs duties and user charges), Article (fair competition), Article (dispute settlement), Article (termination),
         and also the schedule to the Agreement containing the table of air routes. In addition, a number of amendments were made to
         the Protocol.
      
By contrast, the Exchange of Notes of October did not amend the provisions of the Agreement concerning air fares
         and rates or CRSs.
      
That Exchange of Notes provided that it was to apply provisionally from the date on which it was concluded, namely October
         1992. The Netherlands Parliament having ratified that exchange of notes on April 1993, it entered into force on May
         (Tractatenblad 1993, Nos and 85).
      
 The ‘open skies’ cases and their consequences
Before commencing the present proceedings against the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Commission brought proceedings for failure
         to fulfil obligations against eight other Member States which had concluded air transport agreements with the United States.
      
The Commission sent each of those Member States a letter of formal notice between June and May and a reasoned opinion
         between March and April 1998, and brought an action against them on December 1998. The Kingdom of the Netherlands intervened
         in support of the defendant Member State in each of those cases. The Court gave its ruling in those cases (known as ‘the open skies cases’) on November by judgments in Case C‑466/Commission v United Kingdom [2002] ECR I‑9427, Case C‑467/Commission v Denmark [2002] ECR I‑9519, Case C‑468/Commission v Sweden [2002] ECR I‑9575, Case C‑469/Commission v Finland [2002] ECR I‑9627, Case C‑471/Commission v Belgium [2002] ECR I‑9681, Case C‑472/Commission v Luxembourg [2002] ECR I‑9741, Case C‑475/Commission v Austria [2002] ECR I‑9797, and Case C‑476/Commission v Germany [2002] ECR I‑9855.
      
In the seven latter judgments (the action against the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland concerned a separate
         situation), the Court held that, by entering into or maintaining in force, despite the renegotiation of existing agreements,
         international commitments towards the United States concerning air fares and rates charged by carriers designated by the United
         States on intra-Community routes, concerning CRSs offered for use or used in the territory of the respective defendant Member
         State, and by recognising the United States as having the right to withdraw, suspend or limit traffic rights in cases where
         air carriers designated by the defendant Member State were not owned by the latter or its nationals, the defendant Member
         States had failed to fulfil their obligations under Articles and of the Treaty and under Regulations Nos 2409/and
         2299/89, as amended by Regulation No 3089/93.
      
Following those judgments, the Commission wrote to the Kingdom of the Netherlands on November 2002, July and March requesting, first, that it not pursue bilateral negotiations with the United States, and, secondly, that it terminate
         the Agreement.
      
 Pre-litigation procedure and forms of order sought
Referring to the Exchange of Notes of October 1992, the Commission sent the Kingdom of the Netherlands a letter of formal
         notice on January 1999, to which the latter replied by letter of June 1999.
      
On October 2000, the Commission served a reasoned opinion on the Kingdom of the Netherlands, requesting it to take the
         necessary compliance measures within two months following service. The Kingdom of the Netherlands replied to the reasoned
         opinion by letter of February 2001.
      
The Commission brought the present action on December 2004.
 The plea of inadmissibility alleging excessive duration of the pre-litigation procedure
 Arguments of the parties
The Kingdom of the Netherlands emphasises the very long duration of the pre-litigation procedure in this case. It argues that
         the Commission allowed more than six years to elapse between the Exchange of Notes of October and the sending of the
         letter of formal notice (January 1999), and allowed more than four years to elapse between the sending of the reasoned opinion
         (October 2000) and the bringing of the present action (December 2004). The Commission thereby placed the Kingdom of the Netherlands
         in such an unfavourable position that it lost its right to bring the latter before the Court in this matter.
      
Although the Commission brought proceedings for failure to fulfil obligations against eight other Member States in in
         the ‘open skies’ cases, it did not challenge the Exchange of Notes of October 1992. By waiting more than six years before sending the Kingdom
         of the Netherlands a letter of formal notice, the Commission gave rise to a legitimate expectation on the part of the Netherlands
         Government that there had not been a breach of Community rules.
      
The Commission did not comply with the obligation to take action within a reasonable time, which is allied to the principle
         of sound administration and flows from the principle of legal certainty.
      
Supported on this point by the French Government, the Kingdom of the Netherlands argues that the Agreement, as amended,
         gave legal certainty to the carriers concerned, who thereby derived access to the American market. It contends that, in the
         meantime, the Commission  approved the alliance between KLM Royal Dutch Airlines (‘KLM’) and Northwest Airlines, and that
         the United States takes the view that the commitments contained in that agreement were conditions for the granting of the
         antitrust immunity necessary for that alliance. Termination of the Agreement would mean the immediate withdrawal of that
         antitrust immunity by the American authorities, and would make it impossible to obtain such an immunity for the cooperative
         arrangement between KLM and Air France (already approved by the Commission). The damage due to withdrawal of that antitrust
         immunity would run into millions of euros.
      
The Commission replies that, in accordance with consistent case-law, it is not required to comply with fixed deadlines when
         applying Article EC.
      
Moreover, the fact that the Commission brought proceedings for failure to fulfil obligations against the Netherlands later
         than it did against the eight other Member States did not disadvantage the Netherlands, but rather the contrary. Compared
         with the eight other Member States, the Kingdom of the Netherlands had the advantage of extra time to avoid the bringing of
         an action by revoking the Exchange of Notes of October 1992.
      
 Findings of the Court
It is true that, in some circumstances, excessive duration of the pre-litigation procedure provided for by Article EC
         is capable of making it more difficult for the Member State in question to refute the Commission’s arguments and thus of infringing
         the rights of the defence. In this case, however, the Netherlands Government has not proved that the unusual duration of the
         procedure has had any effect on the manner in which it has organised its defence (see, in that regard, Case C‑96/Commission v Netherlands [1991] ECR I‑2461, paragraphs and 16, and Commission v Austria, cited above, paragraph 36).
      
Furthermore, it must be pointed out that the procedure for a declaration of a failure on the part of a Member State to fulfil
         its obligations is based on the objective finding that a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations under Community
         law and that the principle of protection of legitimate expectations cannot, in a case such as the present, be relied on by
         a Member State in order to preclude an objective finding of a failure on its part to fulfil its obligations under the EC Treaty
         or secondary legislation, since to admit that justification would run counter to the aim pursued by the procedure under Article
         EC (Commission v Austria, paragraph 38).
      
The fact that termination of the Agreement might entail the withdrawal of antitrust immunity by the American authorities
         and any damage that might thereby arise are irrelevant as regards the admissibility of this action. This action, based on
         Article EC, seeks only a declaration that Community law has been infringed as a result of commitments entered into between
         the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the United States.
      
This objection must therefore be dismissed.
 The argument concerning developments after the reasoned opinion
 Arguments of the parties
The Kingdom of the Netherlands, supported by the French Government, argues that the Commission brought the present action
         without taking sufficient account of developments which took place after the reasoned opinion. On June 2003, after the delivery
         of the judgments in the ‘open skies’ cases, the Council of the European Union conferred two mandates upon the Commission to negotiate air transport agreements
         with the United States and other non-member States within the framework of Regulation (EC) No 847/of the European Parliament
         and of the Council of April on the negotiation and implementation of air service agreements between Member States
         and third countries (OJ L 157, p. 7). On several occasions, the Commission requested Member States to refrain from bilateral
         negotiations on air transport so as not to compromise the Community negotiations in progress.
      
If the Court were to uphold the present action, the Kingdom of the Netherlands would be obliged to annul the provisions held
         to be contrary to Community law. That would place the Netherlands in an impossible position. By negotiating such an annulment
         with the United States, the Kingdom of the Netherlands would be interfering with the Community negotiations in progress.
      
The Kingdom of the Netherlands further argues, supported by the French Government, that in the current proceedings the Commission
         has not taken into account either the two negotiating mandates conferred by the Council on the Commission in June 2003, or
         Regulation No 847/2004. Thus there was no assessment of the considerable damage which a termination of the bilateral agreements
         on air transport could cause to airlines.
      
The principle of loyal cooperation between the Community institutions and the Member States, recognised in Article of the
         Treaty, applies reciprocally, so that the Commission is itself required to cooperate in preserving the efficacy of Community
         law. There would be no loyal cooperation if the Commission were effectively to prevent the Kingdom of the Netherlands from
         complying with its Community obligations. The Commission infringed Article of the Treaty by bringing the present action
         when the Member States and the Council have given it the necessary instruments to bring transatlantic air transport into conformity
         with Community law.
      
Termination of the Agreement would create a legal vacuum which would be prejudicial to the interests of the Kingdom of
         the Netherlands and of other Member States. Even if flights remained possible on the basis of the principle of courtesy, as
         the Commission suggests, application of that principle would no longer allow Community carriers to enjoy the legal and economic
         certainty guaranteed by the existence of an agreement such as that in the present case. Approval of their aeronautical programmes
         would have to be renewed each season and would become uncertain. The validation or rejection of their operating conditions
         would involve an additional administrative burden and would expose Community carriers to the rejection of certain flights
         by the authorities of the United States.
      
The Commission replies that, in its letters to the Kingdom of the Netherlands of November 2002, July and March
         2005, its request to that Member State was not to enter into negotiations with the United States, but to use the termination
         clauses contained in the Agreement. That would not place the Kingdom of the Netherlands in an unsustainable position.
      
Moreover, the Commission argues, the fear that termination of that agreement would create a legal void is without foundation.
         If a new agreement were not concluded between the Community and the United States, flights would remain possible on the basis
         of the principle of courtesy.
      
 Findings of the Court
Apart from the considerations set out in paragraph of this judgment, it should be noted that the provisions of Article
         EC are to be applied without the Commission being required to comply with a fixed time-limit. In this case, the Commission
         has explained that it decided to wait for the ‘open skies’ judgments delivered by the Court in 2002, and the reactions of the Netherlands Government to those judgments, before bringing
         the present action. In so doing, the Commission did not exercise its discretion under Article EC in a manner contrary
         to the Treaty.
      
According to consistent case-law, the question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations must be determined
         by reference to the situation obtaining in the Member State at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion and
         the Court cannot take account of any subsequent changes (see, in particular, Case C-433/Commission v Germany [2005] ECR I-6985, paragraph 32, and case-law cited therein).
      
In this case, the time-limit set in the reasoned opinion expired on December 2000, so that the developments relied on by
         the Kingdom of the Netherlands are irrelevant to the present dispute.
      
That argument must therefore be dismissed.
 Merits
 The need to rule on the existence of a new agreement following the changes made by the Exchange of Notes of October Arguments of the parties
According to the Commission, the changes made by the Exchange of Notes of October radically altered the nature of the
         Agreement, transforming it into a totally new agreement of the ‘open skies’ type, namely an agreement which had to comply with several criteria defined by the Government of the United States, such
         as free access to all routes, the granting of unlimited route and traffic rights, the determination of prices according to
         a ‘double disapproval’ system for air routes between the parties to the agreement, and the possibility of code-sharing. Those
         changes had the effect of creating a closer framework of cooperation between the United States of America and the Kingdom
         of the Netherlands, entailing new and significant international commitments for the latter. Those changes provide proof of
         a renegotiation of the Agreement in its entirety. In such a case, Member States are prevented not only from contracting
         new international commitments but also from maintaining such commitments in force if they infringe Community law.
      
The Kingdom of the Netherlands denies that the Exchange of Notes of October constitutes a new agreement. It argues that
         the Agreement has remained intact as such. The provisions which were added consolidated elements that were present in
         the initial agreement. The adaptations of October were the culmination of the liberalisation initiated several years
         earlier for the benefit of airlines of the two contracting countries. The Agreement had contained the essential elements
         of an ‘open skies’-type agreement even before 1992, so that the Exchange of Notes of October did not have the effect of transforming it
         into a new agreement of that type.
      
The Kingdom of the Netherlands argues that, pre-dating January 1958, the Agreement was covered by the first paragraph
         of Article EC, according to which the EC Treaty does not affect the obligation on the Member State concerned to respect
         the rights which non-member States derive from an agreement concluded before the entry into force of the EEC Treaty. In its
         submission, the same applies to subsequent secondary legislation; the mere existence of that legislation does not have the
         effect of requiring a Member State to terminate commitments towards non-member States.
      
 Findings of the Court
The Court notes that the Agreement did not originally contain any provision on CRSs. The Exchange of Notes of January
         and March added an annex to that agreement concerning the principles of non-discrimination and competition in the
         context of CRSs. The Exchange of Notes of October made no amendment to that annex.
      
Similarly, the provisions of the Agreement concerning air fares and rates, namely Article 11, result from the Exchange
         of Notes of January and March 1992, the Exchange of Notes of October containing no provisions on the matter.
      
It is true that, in its application, the Commission acknowledges that the Exchange of Notes of October made no alteration
         to the provisions on CRSs and air fares and rates appearing in the Agreement, as amended, prior to October 1992.
      
In addition, as the Advocate General has noted in point of his Opinion, the Exchange of Notes of October expresses
         the intention of the contracting parties not to replace the Agreement but only to amend some of its provisions, albeit
         important ones.
      
It is clear from the file that the amendments made in October to the Agreement, described in paragraph of this
         judgment, had the effect of totally liberalising air transport between the United States and the Kingdom of the Netherlands
         by ensuring free access to all routes between all points situated within those two States, without limitation of capacity
         or frequency, without restriction as to intermediate points and those situated behind or beyond (‘behind, between and beyond
         rights’) and with all desired combinations of aircraft (‘change of gauge’). That total freedom has been complemented by provisions
         concerning opportunities for the airlines concerned to conclude code-sharing agreements and by provisions furthering competition.
      
It follows that the amendments made in October to the Agreement have had the effect of creating the framework of
         a more intensive cooperation between the United States and the Kingdom of the Netherlands, which entails new and significant
         international commitments for the latter.
      
Moreover, the amendments made in October indicate a renegotiation of the Agreement in its entirety. Whilst some
         provisions of that agreement were not formally modified by those amendments or were subject only to marginal changes in drafting,
         the commitments arising from those provisions were none the less confirmed during the renegotiation. In such a case, the Member
         States are prevented not only from contracting new international commitments but also from maintaining such commitments in
         force if they infringe Community law.
      
Furthermore it must be regarded as beyond dispute that the amendments made in October to the Agreement as a whole
         affect the scope of certain of the provisions which were not formally amended by those amendments, or were amended only in
         a limited way.
      
It follows that all the international commitments challenged in this action must be assessed in relation to the provisions
         of Community law cited by the Commission in support of this action (see, to that effect, Commission v Denmark, paragraphs to 42; Commission v Sweden, paragraphs to 40; Commission v Finland, paragraphs to 42; Commission v Belgium, paragraphs to 53; Commission v Luxembourg, paragraphs to 48, and Commission v Austria, paragraphs to 52).
      
It follows from that analysis that the argument of the Netherlands Government based on the first paragraph of Article EC is unfounded.
      
 The failure to fulfil obligations arising from infringement of the external competence of the Community
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission argues that whenever, in order to implement a common policy envisaged by the EC Treaty, the Community has taken
         measures establishing common rules in whatever form, Member States are no longer entitled to contract with non-member States
         obligations which affect those rules or alter their scope. In that regard, the Commission accuses the Kingdom of the Netherlands
         of infringing the exclusive external competence of the Community by undertaking commitments towards the United States concerning,
         first, air fares and rates charged by carriers designated by the United States of America on intra-community routes, and,
         second, CRSs used or offered for use on Netherlands territory.
      
Concerning air fares and rates, the Commission argues in its application that, from the entry into force of Regulation No
         2409/92, the Kingdom of the Netherlands could no longer contract on its own or maintain international commitments concerning
         air fares and rates charged by carriers of non-member States on intra-Community routes. Despite that, Article of the Agreement, as amended by the Exchange of Notes of January and March and by Article of the Protocol, contained
         such a commitment. Moreover, when the Exchange of Notes of October was concluded, the Kingdom of the Netherlands maintained
         that provision. That Member State therefore infringed the exclusive external competence conferred on the Community by Article
         1(3) of Regulation No 2409/92.
      
Concerning CRSs, the Commission states that the Kingdom of the Netherlands maintained the annex to the Agreement concerning
         the principles of CRSs at the time of the renegotiation of that agreement in October 1992. By so doing, the Kingdom of the
         Netherlands infringed the exclusive external competence enjoyed by the Community under Regulation No 2299/89.
      
The Kingdom of the Netherlands argues that, as the law stands at present, Member States retain the competence to conclude
         bilateral agreements for as long as the Commission has not been granted an express mandate. It could be otherwise only in
         cases where Community rules might be affected by the bilateral obligations of a Member State, which is not the case here.
      
Even if it were accepted that the Commission may derive exclusive external competence by reason of the adoption of an internal
         Community regulation, such competence could come into being only after the entry into force of that regulation. Since Regulation
         No 2409/did not come into force until January 1993, it could not affect the Kingdom of the Netherlands in October 1992.
      
In its reply, the Commission relies by analogy on Case C-129/Inter-Environment Wallonie [1997] ECR I-7411, paragraph 45, in which the Court held that, during the period prescribed for transposition of a directive,
         the Member States must refrain from taking any measures liable seriously to compromise the attainment of the result prescribed
         by that directive. The Commission notes in that regard that the Netherlands Parliament ratified the Exchange of Notes of October
         on April 1993, that is to say after January 1993, the date on which Regulation No 2409/came into force.
      
To that argument, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, supported on this point by the French Government, replies that to claim
         for the first time in the reply, as does the Commission, that the exclusive external competence of the Community comes into
         being at the time of the adoption of Regulation No 2409/92, rather than at the time of its entry into force, constitutes a
         new plea tending to change the subject-matter of the dispute and the introduction of which is prohibited by Article 42(2)
         of the Rules of Procedure. In any event, the judgment in Inter-Environnement Wallonie is not relevant in this case, firstly because this case concerns a regulation and not a directive, and, secondly, because
         no provision of the Agreement is likely seriously to compromise the achievement of the result prescribed by Regulation
         No 2409/92. Finally, the ratification of the Exchange of Notes of October by the Netherlands Parliament is irrelevant
         because that Exchange of Notes had already been applied since October 1992.
      
 Findings of the Court
Concerning, first, air fares and rates, it should be noted that, according to Article 1(2)(a) of Regulation No 2409/92, that
         regulation does not apply to fares and rates charged by air carriers other than Community air carriers, that restriction however
         being stated to be ‘without prejudice to paragraph 3’ of the same article. Under Article 1(3) of Regulation No 2409/92, only
         Community air carriers are entitled to introduce new products or fares lower than the ones existing for identical products.
      
It follows from those provisions, taken together, that Regulation No 2409/has, indirectly but definitely, prohibited air
         carriers of non-member States which operate in the Community from introducing new products or fares lower than the ones existing
         for identical products. By proceeding in that way, the Community legislature has limited the freedom of those carriers to
         set fares and rates, where they operate on intra-Community routes. Accordingly, to the extent indicated in Article 1(3) of
         Regulation No 2409/92, the Community has acquired exclusive competence to enter into commitments with non-member States relating
         to that limitation on the freedom of non-Community carriers to set fares and rates.
      
It follows that, since the entry into force of Regulation No 2409/92, the Kingdom of the Netherlands has no longer been entitled,
         despite the renegotiation of the Agreement, to enter on its own into or maintain in force international commitments concerning
         the fares and rates to be charged by carriers of non-member States on intra-Community routes.
      
A commitment of that type arises from Article of the Agreement, as amended by the Exchange of Notes of January
         and March and by Article of the Protocol. The Kingdom of the Netherlands has maintained that commitment despite
         the renegotiation of the Agreement which led to the Exchange of Notes of October 1992. By proceeding in that way, the
         Kingdom of the Netherlands has thus infringed the exclusive external competence of the Community which results from Article
         1(3) of Regulation No 2409/(see, to that effect, Commission v Denmark, paragraphs to 100; Commission v Sweden, paragraphs to 96; Commission v Finland, paragraphs to 101; Commission v Belgium, paragraphs to 113; Commission v Luxembourg, paragraphs to 106; Commission v Austria, paragraphs to 115, and Commission v Germany, paragraphs to 126).
      
That conclusion cannot be called into question by the argument of the Netherlands Government that the Exchange of Notes of
         October took place before the entry into force of Regulation No 2409/92. As the Advocate General has pointed out in points
         to of his Opinion, even if that Exchange of Notes was provisionally applicable as from October 1992, the agreement
         between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the United States was not definitively concluded until after its ratification by
         the Netherlands Parliament on April 1993. That date is after the entry into force of Regulation No 2409/92.
      
Concerning, secondly, CRSs, the Commission claims that the Court should declare that the Kingdom of the Netherlands has failed
         to fulfil its obligations under Regulation No 2299/89, as amended by Regulation No 3089/93.
      
Regulation No 3089/was adopted on October and came into force, pursuant to Article 2(1) thereof, on December
         1993.
      
Whether it be a matter of the adoption of that regulation or of its entry into force, both those dates are after the ratification
         of the Exchange of Notes of October 1992. It follows that exclusive external competence of the Community, contended for by
         the Commission, could not result from Regulation No 3089/93.
      
The Court must therefore assess the claim concerning CRSs by reference to Regulation No 2299/only, without taking account
         of Regulation No 3089/93.
      
It follows from Articles and of Regulation No 2299/that, subject to reciprocity, that regulation also applies to nationals
         of non-member States, where they offer for use or use a CRS on Community territory.
      
By the effect of that regulation, the Community acquired exclusive competence to agree with non-member States the obligations
         relating to CRSs offered for use or used on its territory.
      
It is not in dispute that, by the Exchange of Notes of January and March 1992, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the
         United States of America added to the Agreement an annex concerning the principles relating to CRSs, including those
         applying to CRSs offered for use or used on Netherlands territory. The Kingdom of the Netherlands maintained that annex in
         force despite the renegotiation of the Agreement which led to the Exchange of Notes of October 1992. By acting in that
         way, that Member State infringed the exclusive external competence of the Community arising from Regulation No 2299/(see,
         to that effect, Commission v Denmark, paragraphs to 104; Commission v Sweden, paragraphs to 100; Commission v Finland, paragraphs to 105; Commission v Belgium, paragraphs to 117; Commission v Luxembourg, paragraphs to 110; Commission v Austria, paragraphs to 119, and Commission v Germany, paragraphs to 130).
      
Moreover, Article of the Treaty requires Member States to facilitate the achievement of the Community’s tasks and to abstain
         from any measure which could jeopardise the attainment of the objectives of the EC Treaty.
      
In the area of external relations, the Court has held that the Community’s tasks and the objectives of the EC Treaty would
         be compromised if Member States were able to enter into international commitments containing provisions capable of affecting
         rules adopted by the Community or of altering their scope.
      
It follows from the foregoing considerations that, by entering into or maintaining in force, despite the renegotiation of
         the Agreement, international commitments concerning air fares and rates charged by carriers designated by the United
         States on intra-Community routes and concerning CRSs offered for use or used on Netherlands territory, the Kingdom of the
         Netherlands has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of the Treaty and under Regulations Nos 2409/and 2299/(see, to that effect, Commission v Denmark, paragraphs to 112; Commission v Sweden, paragraphs to 108; Commission v Finland, paragraphs to 113; Commission v Belgium, paragraphs to 126; Commission v Luxembourg, paragraphs to 118; Commission v Austria, paragraphs to 126, and Commission v Germany, paragraphs to 137).
      
 Failure to fulfil obligations arising from infringement of Article of the Treaty
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission contends that, by the Exchange of Notes of October 1992, Article of the Agreement concerning the ownership
         and control of airlines was entirely replaced.
      
The Commission argues that, under that Article 4, as amended (‘the clause on the ownership and control of airlines’), airlines
         of Member States other than the Kingdom of the Netherlands may always be excluded from the application of the Agreement,
         whereas that agreement applies automatically to Netherlands airlines. Airlines of those Member States thus suffer discrimination,
         in that they do not enjoy the same treatment as nationals in the Netherlands, in breach of Article of the Treaty.
      
The Netherlands Government replies that, contrary to what the Commission argues, the Exchange of Notes of October does
         not entirely replace Article of the Agreement but merely clarifies some of its terms. The substance of that Article
         remained unchanged. In that regard, the Exchange of Notes of October does not represent a new agreement, and the Agreement is protected by the first paragraph of Article EC.
      
 Findings of the Court
Article of the Agreement, in its initial version, provided:
‘Each contracting party reserves the right to withhold or revoke the privilege of exercising the rights provided for in Article
         of this Agreement from an airline designated by the other contracting party in the event that it is not satisfied that substantial
         ownership and effective control of such airline are vested in nationals of the other contracting party …’.
      
The Exchange of Notes of October amended the beginning of that article as follows, while leaving the remainder unchanged:
‘Each Contracting Party reserves the right to withhold, suspend, limit, impose conditions, or revoke the privilege of exercising
         the rights provided for in this Agreement ...’.
      
It is obvious that Article of the Agreement has not been entirely replaced by virtue of the Exchange of Notes of October
         1992, as the Commission alleges.
      
The Court nevertheless finds, as the Advocate General has pointed out in point of his Opinion, that even if, from a formal
         point of view, Article of the Agreement was not greatly amended by the Exchange of Notes of October 1992, its content
         and scope were profoundly altered by that Exchange of Notes, the latter having necessarily had an impact on the scope of that
         article, following full liberalisation of fifth-freedom routes within the meaning of Article of the International Air Transport
         Agreement (Chicago, December 1944; UNTS 389).
      
It follows, first, that the clause on the ownership and control of airlines must be assessed having regard to the provisions
         of Community law which have been invoked, and, secondly, that the Netherlands Government’s argument based on the first paragraph
         of Article EC is unfounded.
      
As regards the applicability of Article of the Treaty, it should be noted that that provision applies in the field of air
         transport and is intended in particular to apply to airlines established in a Member State which supply air transport services
         between a Member State and a non-member State.
      
In this case, the clause on the ownership and control of airlines permits the United States, inter alia, to withhold or revoke
         a concession or authorisation to an airline designated by the Kingdom of the Netherlands, but of which a substantial part
         of the ownership and effective control is not vested in that Member State or Netherlands nationals.
      
There can be no doubt that airlines established in the Netherlands of which a substantial part of the ownership and effective
         control is vested either in a Member State other than the Kingdom of the Netherlands or in nationals of such a Member State
         (‘Community airlines’) are capable of being affected by that clause.
      
By contrast, the formulation of that clause shows that the United States is in principle obliged to grant the necessary concessions
         or authorisations to airlines of which a substantial part of the ownership and effective control is vested in the Kingdom
         of the Netherlands or Netherlands nationals (‘Netherlands airlines’).
      
It follows that Community airlines may always be excluded from the benefit of the Agreement, while that benefit is assured
         to Netherlands airlines. Consequently, Community airlines suffer discrimination which prevents them from benefiting from the
         treatment which the host Member State, namely the Kingdom of the Netherlands, accords to its own nationals.
      
It follows that the clause on the ownership and control of airlines is contrary to Article of the Treaty (see, to that
         effect, Commission v Denmark, paragraphs to and to 133; Commission v Sweden, paragraphs to and to 124; Commission v Finland, paragraphs to and to 129; Commission v Belgium, paragraphs to and to 142; Commission v Luxembourg, paragraphs to and to 133; Commission v Austria, paragraphs to and to 143, and Commission v Germany, paragraphs to and to 156).
      
In those circumstances, it is apparent that the claim that the Kingdom of the Netherlands has failed to fulfil its obligations
         under Article of the Treaty is well founded.
      
Having regard to the whole of those considerations, the Court must conclude that, by contracting or maintaining in force,
         despite the renegotiation of the Agreement, international commitments towards the United States:
      
–       concerning air fares and rates charged by carriers designated by the United States on intra-Community routes,
–       concerning CRSs used or offered for use on Netherlands territory, and
–       recognising the United States as having the right to withdraw, suspend or limit traffic rights in cases where air carriers
         designated by the Kingdom of the Netherlands are not owned by the latter or by Netherlands nationals,
      
the Kingdom of the Netherlands has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles and of the Treaty, and under Regulations
         Nos 2409/and 2299/89.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Kingdom of the Netherlands
         has been unsuccessful in its pleas, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
Pursuant to Article 69(4) of the Rules of Procedure, the French Republic must bear its own costs.
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      By contracting or maintaining in force, despite the renegotiation of the Air Transport Agreement concluded between the Kingdom
            of the Netherlands and the United States of America on April 1957, international commitments towards the United States of
            America:
–       concerning air fares and rates charged by carriers designated by the United States of America on intra-Community routes, 
–       concerning computerised reservations systems used or offered for use on Netherlands territory, and
–       recognising the United States of America as having the right to withdraw, suspend or limit traffic rights in cases where air
            carriers designated by the Kingdom of the Netherlands are not owned by the latter or by Netherlands nationals,
the Kingdom of the Netherlands has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC),
            Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC), and under Council Regulations (EEC) Nos 2409/of July
            on fares and rates for air services and 2299/of July on a code of conduct for computerised reservation systems.
2.      The Kingdom of the Netherlands is ordered to pay the costs.
3.      The French Republic is ordered to bear its own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Dutch.
      
Top  
 