
Case C-168/Laszlo Hadadi (Hadady)
v
Csilla Marta Mesko, married name      Hadadi (Hadady)
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Cour de cassation (France))
(Judicial cooperation in civil matters – Regulation (EC) No 2201/– Jurisdiction, recognition and enforcement of decisions in matrimonial matters and the matters of parental responsibility
         – Article – Transitional provisions − Application to a judgment given in a Member State which acceded to the European Union in – Article 3(1) − Jurisdiction in matters relating to divorce − Relevant connecting factors − Habitual residence − Nationality
         − Spouses residing in France and each holding French and Hungarian nationality)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Judicial cooperation in civil matters – Jurisdiction, recognition and enforcement of decisions in matrimonial matters and
            the matters of parental responsibility – Regulation No 2201/– Temporal scope
(Act of Accession of 2003; Council Regulation No 2201/2003, Art. 64(4))
2.        Judicial cooperation in civil matters – Jurisdiction, recognition and enforcement of decisions in matrimonial matters and
            the matters of parental responsibility – Regulation No 2201/– Jurisdiction in divorce matters – Spouses resident in the
            Member State addressed and each having the nationality of the Member State of origin and the Member State addressed – Obligation
            of the court addressed to take into account the common double nationality of the spouses
(Council Regulation No 2201/2003, Arts 3(1)(b), and 64(4))
3.        Judicial cooperation in civil matters – Jurisdiction, recognition and enforcement of decisions in matrimonial matters and
            the matters of parental responsibility – Regulation No 2201/– Jurisdiction in divorce matters – Alternative grounds of
            jurisdiction laid down in Article 3(1)(a) and (b)
(Council Regulation No 2201/2003, Art. 3(1)(a) and (b))
1.        The recognition of a judgment of divorce granted by a court in the Republic of Hungary after the date of entry into force
         in Hungary of Regulation No 1347/but before the date on which Regulation No 2201/concerning jurisdiction and the
         recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and the matters of parental responsibility, repealing Regulation
         (EC) No 1347/2000, became applicable, must be assessed by applying Article 64(4) of Regulation No 2201/2003, since proceedings
         were instituted and the judgment delivered within the period set out in that provision. In accordance with that provision,
         such a divorce judgment is to be recognised pursuant to Regulation No 2201/if jurisdiction was founded on rules which
         accorded with those provided for either in Chapter II of that regulation, or in Regulation No 1347/2000, or in a convention
         concluded between the Member State of origin and the Member State addressed which was in force when the proceedings were instituted.
      
(see paras 27-29)
2.        Where the court of the Member State addressed must verify, pursuant to Article 64(4) of Regulation No 2201/concerning
         jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and the matters of parental responsibility,
         repealing Regulation No 1347/2000, whether the court of the Member State of origin of a judgment would have had jurisdiction
         under Article 3(1)(b) of that regulation, the latter provision precludes the court of the Member State addressed from regarding
         spouses who each hold the nationality both of that State and of the Member State of origin as nationals only of the Member
         State addressed. That court must, on the contrary, take into account the fact that the spouses also hold the nationality of
         the Member State of origin and that, therefore, the courts of the latter could have had jurisdiction to hear the case.
      
Accordingly, if spouses having the same dual nationality were treated as if they had only the nationality of the Member State
         seised, that would have the effect of precluding them, in the context of the transitional rule of recognition referred to
         in Article 64(4) of Regulation No 2201/2003, from relying on Article 3(1)(b) of that regulation before a court of the Member
         State addressed in order to establish the jurisdiction of the courts of another Member State, even though those persons hold
         the nationality of the latter State.
      
(see paras 41-43, operative part 1)
3.        Where spouses each hold the nationality of the same two Member States, Article 3(1)(b) of Regulation No 2201/concerning
         jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and the matters of parental responsibility,
         repealing Regulation No 1347/2000, precludes the jurisdiction of the courts of one of those Member States from being rejected
         on the ground that the applicant does not put forward other links with that State. On the contrary, the courts of those Member
         States of which the spouses hold the nationality have jurisdiction under that provision and the spouses may seise the court
         of the Member State of their choice. 
      
In that regard, the system of jurisdiction of the courts provided for under Article 3(1)(a) and (b) of Regulation No 2201/is based on a number of alternative objective grounds with no hierarchy being established between them. Therefore, the coexistence
         of several courts having jurisdiction is permitted, without any hierarchy being established between them.
      
In addition, there is nothing in the wording of Article 3(1)(b) to suggest that only the ‘effective’ nationality could be
         taken into account in applying that provision. Such a criterion cannot be found in the objectives of that provision or in
         the context of which it forms part and would restrict individuals’ choice of the court having jurisdiction, particularly in
         cases where the right to freedom of movement for persons had been exercised. Thus, to the extent that habitual residence would
         be an essential consideration for the purpose of determining the most effective nationality, the grounds of jurisdiction provided
         for in Article 3(1)(a) and (b) of Regulation No 2201/would frequently overlap. That would amount to establishing, with
         regard to persons holding a number of nationalities, a hierarchy between the grounds of jurisdiction laid down in Article
         3(1), for which there is no basis in the wording of that paragraph  
      
(see paras 48-54, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Judicial cooperation in civil matters – Regulation (EC) No 2201/– Jurisdiction, recognition and enforcement of decisions in matrimonial matters and the matters of parental responsibility
         – Article – Transitional provisions − Application to a judgment given in a Member States which acceded to the European Union in – Article 3(1) − Jurisdiction in matters relating to divorce − Relevant connecting factors − Habitual residence − Nationality
         − Spouses residing in France and each holding French and Hungarian nationality)
      
In Case C‑168/08,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Articles EC and EC from the Cour de cassation (France), made by decision of
         April 2008, received at the Court on April 2008, in the proceedings
      
Laszlo Hadadi (Hadady)
v
Csilla Marta Mesko, married name Hadadi (Hadady),
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of A. Rosas, President of Chamber, A. Ó Caoimh (Rapporteur), J. Klučka, P. Lindh and A. Arabadjiev, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on February 2009,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Mr Hadadi (Hadady), by C. Rouvière, avocate,
–        Ms Mesko, by A. Lyon-Caen, avocat,
–        the French Government, by G. de Bergues and by A.-L. During and B. Beaupère-Manokha, acting as Agents,
–        the Czech Government, by M. Smolek, acting as Agent,
–        the German Government, by J. Möller, acting as Agent,
–        the Hungarian Government, by K. Szíjjártó and M. Kurucz, acting as Agents,
–        the Polish Government, by M. Dowgielewicz, acting as Agent,
–        the Slovak Government, by J. Čorba, acting as Agent,
–        the Finnish Government, by A. Guimaraes-Purokoski, acting as Agent,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by V. Joris and S. Saastamoinen, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2009,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 3(1) of Council Regulation (EC) No 2201/of November concerning jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and the
         matters of parental responsibility, repealing Regulation (EC) No 1347/(OJ L 338, p. 1).
      
The reference was made in proceedings between Mr Hadadi (Hadady) and Ms Mesko regarding the recognition by the French courts
         of a judgment of Pest Court (Hungary) granting their divorce.
      
 Legal framework
 Community legislation
 Regulation No 1347/According to recitals and in the preamble to Council Regulation (EC) No 1347/of May on jurisdiction and
         the recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and in matters of parental responsibility for children
         of both spouses (OJ L 160, p. 19):
      
‘(4) Differences between certain national rules governing jurisdiction and enforcement hamper the free movement of persons
         and the sound operation of the internal market. There are accordingly grounds for enacting provisions to unify the rules of
         conflict of jurisdiction in matrimonial matters and in matters of parental responsibility so as to simplify the formalities
         for rapid and automatic recognition and enforcement of judgments. 
      
…
(12)      The grounds of jurisdiction accepted in this Regulation are based on the rule that there must be a real link between the party
         concerned and the Member State exercising jurisdiction. ...’
      
Article of Regulation No 1347/2000, which lays down general rules relating to divorce, legal separation and marriage annulment,
         was replaced by Article of Regulation No 2201/2003. The wording of those two articles is identical.
      
 Regulation No 2201/Recitals and in the preamble to Regulation No 2201/read as follows:
      
‘(1)      The European Community has set the objective of creating an area of freedom, security and justice, in which the free movement
         of persons is ensured. To this end, the Community is to adopt, among others, measures in the field of judicial cooperation
         in civil matters that are necessary for the proper functioning of the internal market.
      
...
(8)      As regards judgments on divorce, legal separation or marriage annulment, this Regulation should apply only to the dissolution
         of matrimonial ties and should not deal with issues such as the grounds for divorce, property consequences of the marriage
         or any other ancillary measures.’
      
Under Article 1(1)(a) of Regulation No 2201/2003, the regulation is to apply, whatever the nature of the court or tribunal,
         in civil matters relating to divorce, legal separation or marriage annulment.
      
Article of that regulation, headed ‘General jurisdiction’, provides in paragraph 1:
      
‘In matters relating to divorce, legal separation or marriage annulment, jurisdiction shall lie with the courts of the Member
         State:
      
(a)      in whose territory:
–        the spouses are habitually resident, or 
–        the spouses were last habitually resident, in so far as one of them still resides there, or
–        the respondent is habitually resident, or 
–        in the event of a joint application, either of the spouses is habitually resident, or 
–        the applicant is habitually resident if he or she resided there for at least a year immediately before the application was
         made, or 
      
–        the applicant is habitually resident if he or she resided there for at least six months immediately before the application
         was made and is either a national of the Member State in question or, in the case of the United Kingdom and Ireland, has his
         or her “domicile” there;
      
(b)      of the nationality of both spouses or, in the case of the United Kingdom and Ireland, of the “domicile” of both spouses.’
Article of that regulation, headed ‘Exclusive nature of jurisdiction under Articles 3, and 5’, provides:
      
‘A spouse who:
(a)      is habitually resident in the territory of a Member State, or 
(b)      is a national of a Member State, or, in the case of the United Kingdom and Ireland, has his or her “domicile” in the territory
         of one of the latter Member States,
      
may be sued in another Member State only in accordance with Articles 3, and 5.’
Article of Regulation No 2201/2003, headed ‘Seising of a Court’, provides:
      
‘1.      A court shall be deemed to be seised:
(a)      at the time when the document instituting the proceedings or an equivalent document is lodged with the court, provided that
         the applicant has not subsequently failed to take the steps he was required to take to have service effected on the respondent;
      
or
(b)      if the document has to be served before being lodged with the court, at the time when it is received by the authority responsible
         for service, provided that the applicant has not subsequently failed to take the steps he was required to take to have the
         document lodged with the court.’ 
      
Article of that regulation provides:
      
‘1.      Where proceedings relating to divorce, legal separation or marriage annulment between the same parties are brought before
         courts of different Member States, the court second seised shall of its own motion stay its proceedings until such time as
         the jurisdiction of the court first seised is established.
      
…
3.      Where the jurisdiction of the court first seised is established, the court second seised shall decline jurisdiction in favour
         of that court.
      
In that case, the party who brought the relevant action before the court second seised may bring that action before the court
         first seised.’
      
Article of that regulation, entitled ‘Recognition of a judgment’, provides:
      
‘1.      A judgment given in a Member State shall be recognised in the other Member States without any special procedure being required.
...
4.      Where the recognition of a judgment is raised as an incidental question in a court of a Member State, that court may determine
         that issue.’
      
Article of Regulation No 2201/2003, headed ‘Prohibition of review of jurisdiction of the court of origin’, provides:
      
‘The jurisdiction of the court of the Member State of origin may not be reviewed. The test of public policy referred to in
         Articles 22(a) and 23(a) may not be applied to the rules relating to jurisdiction set out in Articles to 14.’
      
Article 64(1) and (4), which appear in Chapter VI of Regulation No 2201/2003, headed ‘Transitional provisions’, provide:
      
‘1.      The provisions of this Regulation shall apply only to legal proceedings instituted, to documents formally drawn up or registered
         as authentic instruments and to agreements concluded between the parties after its date of application in accordance with
         Article 72.
      
...
4.      Judgments given before the date of application of this Regulation but after the date of entry into force of Regulation … No 1347/in proceedings instituted before the date of entry into force of Regulation … No 1347/shall be recognised and enforced
         in accordance with the provisions of Chapter III of this Regulation provided they relate to divorce, legal separation or marriage
         annulment or parental responsibility for the children of both spouses on the occasion of these matrimonial proceedings and
         that jurisdiction was founded on rules which accorded with those provided for either in Chapter II of this Regulation or in
         Regulation … No 1347/or in a convention concluded between the Member State of origin and the Member State addressed which
         was in force when the proceedings were instituted.’
      
According to Article of Regulation No 2201/2003, the regulation entered into force on August and was to apply from
         March 2005, with the exception of Articles to 70, which are not relevant to the main proceedings.
      
 French legislation
Article 1070, fourth paragraph, of the Code de procédure civile (Code of Civil Procedure) states:
      
‘Territorial jurisdiction shall be determined by residence on the date of the application or, in divorce matters, on the date
         on which the initial petition is submitted.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
In 1979, Mr Hadadi and Ms Mesko, both of Hungarian nationality, married in Hungary. They emigrated to France in 1980, where,
         according to the order for reference, they still reside. In 1985, they became naturalised French citizens, so that they each
         hold Hungarian and French nationality.
      
On February 2002, Mr Hadadi instituted divorce proceedings before Pest Court. 
      
Ms Mesko instituted proceedings for divorce on the ground of fault before the Tribunal de grande instance de Meaux (Meaux
         Regional Court) (France) on February 2003.
      
On May 2004, that is after the accession of the Republic of Hungary to the European Union on May 2004, the couple’s divorce
         was granted by judgment of Pest Court. According to the order for reference, that judgment has become final.
      
By order of November 2005, the Juge aux Affaires Familiales (Family Court) of the Tribunal de grande instance de Meaux declared
         the divorce proceedings brought before it by Ms Mesko to be inadmissible.
      
On October 2006, following Ms Mesko’s appeal against that order, the Cour d’appel de Paris (Paris Court of Appeal) (France)
         held that the divorce granted by judgment of Pest Court could not be recognised in France. The Cour d’appel de Paris therefore
         held Ms Mesko’s proceedings for divorce to be admissible.
      
Mr Hadadi appealed on a point of law against the decision of the Cour d’appel de Paris, on the ground that it had rejected
         the jurisdiction of the Hungarian court on the sole basis of Article 3(1)(a) of Regulation No 2201/2003, concerning the habitual
         residence of the spouses, without having examined whether such jurisdiction could be founded on the spouses’ Hungarian nationality,
         as provided for under Article 3(1)(b) of the regulation.
      
In those circumstances, the Cour de cassation (Court of Cassation) decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following
         questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Is Article 3(1)(b) [of Regulation No 2201/2003] to be interpreted as meaning that, in a situation where the spouses hold both
         the nationality of the State of the court seised and the nationality of another Member State of the European Union, the nationality
         of the State of the court seised must prevail? 
      
2.      If the answer to Question is in the negative, is that provision to be interpreted as referring, in a situation where the
         spouses each hold dual nationality of the same two Member States, to the more effective of the two nationalities?
      
3.      If the answer to Question is in the negative, should it therefore be considered that that provision offers the spouses an
         additional option, allowing those spouses the choice of seising the courts of either of the two States of which they both
         hold the nationality?’ 
      
 Questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 Preliminary observations
The dispute in the main proceedings arises from the action for divorce brought in France by Ms Mesko on February 2003.
         According to the documents before the court, in the context of the examination of the admissibility of that action, the recognition
         of the judgment granting a divorce of Pest Court of May is an incidental question. Under Article 21(4) of Regulation
         No 2201/2003, the French courts may determine that issue. In that context, the Cour de cassation has raised questions concerning
         the interpretation of Article 3(1) of the regulation.
      
It should be noted that, in accordance with Article of Regulation No 2201/2003, the regulation entered into force on August and has been applicable since March 2005. 
      
Moreover, Regulation No 1347/was applicable in Hungary only from May 2004, pursuant to Article of the Act concerning
         the conditions of accession to the European Union of the Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Cyprus,
         the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the Republic of Poland,
         the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak Republic and the adjustments to the Treaties on which the European Union is founded
         (OJ L 236, p. 33). 
      
It follows that the judgment of Pest Court of May granting a divorce postdates the entry into force of Regulation No 1347/in Hungary, in proceedings instituted before that date of entry into force. It must also be pointed out that that judgment
         was given before March 2005, the date from which Regulation No 2201/became applicable.
      
In those circumstances, as the French, German, Polish and Slovak Governments argue, the question of recognition of that judgment
         must be assessed by applying Article 64(4) of Regulation No 2201/2003, since proceedings were instituted and the judgment
         delivered within the period set out in that provision.
      
In accordance with Article 64(4), that divorce judgment is to be recognised pursuant to Regulation No 2201/if jurisdiction
         was founded on rules which accorded with those provided for either in Chapter II of that regulation, or in Regulation No 1347/2000,
         or in a convention concluded between the Member State of origin (in the present case the Republic of Hungary) and the Member
         State addressed (in this case, the French Republic) which was in force when the proceedings were instituted. 
      
The documents before the Court do not indicate the provisions on which Pest Court founded jurisdiction or the wording of those
         provisions. However, that fact must be regarded as having no bearing on the main proceedings if the jurisdiction of the Hungarian
         courts was able to be established by applying Article 3(1) of Regulation No 2201/2003, whatever rules on jurisdiction were
         in fact applied by them. Thus, in essence, the present reference for a preliminary ruling seeks to establish whether, in circumstances
         such as those at issue in the main proceedings, the Hungarian courts could have had jurisdiction under that provision to rule
         in divorce proceedings concerning Mr Hadadi and Ms Mesko.
      
Finally, it is true that Ms Mesko maintains, in her written observations to the Court, that she only became aware of the divorce
         proceedings before Pest Court six months after they were instituted by Mr Hadadi. However, she does not claim that Mr Hadadi
         failed to take the steps he was required to take to have service effected or that, in accordance with Article of Regulation
         No 2201/2003, the Hungarian court could not, in consequence, be deemed to have been seised at that date. The documents before
         the court indicate, moreover, that Ms Mesko entered an appearance in the proceedings before that court. In addition, in response
         to a question put by the Court at the hearing, the Hungarian Government stated that, under national law, once proceedings
         have been instituted before a court, that court ensures service on the respondent. In those circumstances, the assumption
         must be that Pest Court is deemed to have been properly seised within the meaning of Article 16.
      
 First question
By its first question, the referring court asks, in essence, whether Article 3(1)(b) of Regulation No 2201/must be interpreted
         as meaning that, where spouses hold both the nationality of the Member State of the court seised and that of the same other
         Member State, the court of the State in which proceedings are brought must give precedence to the nationality of the Member
         State to which it belongs.
      
As a preliminary point, it should be noted that courts seised in situations such as that in the main proceedings, which are
         governed by the transitional provisions on recognition laid down in Article 64(4) of Regulation No 2201/2003, are called upon
         to rule on the jurisdiction of the courts of another Member State. Such situations differ from those governed more directly
         by the provisions of Chapter III of that regulation, concerning the recognition and enforcement of judgments, in relation
         to which Article of the regulation prohibits review of jurisdiction of the court of origin.
      
According to the documents before the court, in the judgment which is being contested in the main proceedings, the Paris Court
         of Appeal held that the jurisdiction of Pest Court, to the extent that this was founded on Mr Hadadi’s Hungarian nationality,
         a ground of jurisdiction not recognised by the French rules on international jurisdiction, was ‘in reality very flimsy’, whereas
         the jurisdiction of the courts where the marital home is situated, that is France, was by comparison ‘particularly clear’.
      
According to the Commission of the European Communities, the first question referred for a preliminary ruling has been posed
         because, where there is a conflict between French nationality and another nationality, French courts tend ‘most often to give
         precedence to the nationality of the State of the court seised’.
      
That view is confirmed by the argument submitted to the Court by Ms Mesko, who contends that Article 3(1) of Regulation No
         2201/does not contain any specific provisions governing the case of dual nationality, with the result that each Member
         State applies its own nationality law in this type of situation. According to Ms Mesko, it follows from French academic writing
         and case-law that, in case of conflicting nationalities, if one of them is the nationality of the State of the court seised,
         it will prevail.
      
In those circumstances, the question arises whether, given that, as Ms Mesko points out, Regulation No 2201/does not
         deal expressly with the case of spouses having the same dual nationality, Article 3(1) of the regulation must be interpreted
         in one way where the two spouses have the same two nationalities in common and another way where they have only the same,
         single, nationality. 
      
According to settled case-law, it follows from the need for uniform application of Community law and from the principle of
         equality that the terms of a provision of Community law which makes no express reference to the law of the Member States for
         the purpose of determining its meaning and scope must normally be given an autonomous and uniform interpretation throughout
         the Community, having regard to the context of the provision and the objective pursued by the legislation in question (see,
         in relation to Regulation No 2201/2003, Case C‑523/A [2009] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 34).
      
In that regard, it should be pointed out that Article 3(1) of Regulation No 2201/does not make any express reference
         to the law of the Member States for the purpose of determining the exact scope of the ‘nationality’ ground of jurisdiction.
         
      
Moreover, Regulation No 2201/does not appear, at least in principle, to make a distinction according to whether a person
         holds one or, as the case may be, several nationalities.
      
Accordingly, where the spouses have the same dual nationality, the court seised cannot overlook the fact that the individuals
         concerned hold the nationality of another Member State, with the result that persons with the same dual nationality are treated
         as if they had only the nationality of the Member State of the court seised. That would have the effect of precluding such
         persons, in the context of the transitional rule of recognition referred to in Article 64(4) of Regulation No 2201/2003, from
         relying on Article 3(1)(b) of that regulation before a court of the Member State addressed in order to establish the jurisdiction
         of the courts of another Member State, even though those persons hold the nationality of the latter State.
      
On the contrary, in the context of Article 64(4) of the regulation, where the spouses hold both the nationality of the Member
         State of the court seised and that of the same other Member State, that court must take into account the fact that the courts
         of that other Member State could, since the persons concerned hold the nationality of the latter State, properly have been
         seised of the case under Article 3(1)(b) of Regulation No 2201/2003.
      
Consequently, the answer to the first question is that, where the court of the Member State addressed must verify, pursuant
         to Article 64(4) of Regulation No 2201/2003, whether the court of the Member State of origin of a judgment would have had
         jurisdiction under Article 3(1)(b) of that regulation, the latter provision precludes the court of the Member State addressed
         from regarding spouses who each hold the nationality both of that State and of the Member State of origin as nationals only
         of the Member State addressed. That court must, on the contrary, take into account the fact that the spouses also hold the
         nationality of the Member State of origin and that, therefore, the courts of the latter could have had jurisdiction to hear
         the case.
      
 The second and third questions
By its second and third questions, which it is appropriate to examine together, the referring court asks, in essence, whether
         Article 3(1)(b) of Regulation No 2201/must be interpreted as meaning that, in order to determine the court which has
         jurisdiction in respect of the divorce of persons having the same dual nationality, only the nationality of the Member State
         with which those persons have the closest links – the ‘most effective’ nationality – is to be taken into account, so that
         the courts of that State alone have jurisdiction on the basis of nationality (second question), or whether, on the contrary,
         both nationalities are to be taken into account, so that the courts of those two Member States can have jurisdiction on that
         basis, allowing the persons concerned to choose the Member State in which to bring proceedings (third question). 
      
Ms Mesko and the Polish Government argue that, where the spouses have the same dual nationality, the ground of jurisdiction
         of the more effective nationality should be applied. In that regard, Ms Mesko, relying on various factors, in particular the
         fact that she and Mr Hadadi have been residing in France since 1980, considers that, in the case in the main proceedings,
         French nationality is the more effective. She submits that, if both nationalities were put on the same footing, that would
         trigger a ‘rush to the courts’, encouraging abuse of the system, with one spouse hurrying to seise the courts of one Member
         State in order to prevent the other spouse from instituting proceedings before the courts of another Member State. The Polish
         Government considers that the choice of the court having jurisdiction should not be left to the parties, because such a solution
         would accord an excessive privilege to persons holding the same dual nationality and allow them the possibility de facto of choosing the court having jurisdiction, whereas Regulation No 2201/does not grant the same option to others. In addition,
         according to that government, upholding the jurisdiction of the courts of a Member State in which the spouses had not lived
         for a long time would undermine the effectiveness and fairness of court judgments and lead to certain abuses, such as ‘forum
         shopping’. 
      
By contrast, according to Mr Hadadi, the French, Czech, German, Hungarian, Slovak and Finnish Governments, as well as the
         Commission, where the same dual nationality is held, each of the spouses is entitled, under Article 3(1)(b) of Regulation
         No 2201/2003, to institute divorce proceedings before the courts of either of the two Member States of which he or she and
         the other spouse hold the nationality.
      
In that regard, it should be noted at the outset that, according to recital in the preamble to Regulation No 2201/2003,
         that regulation is to contribute to creating an area of freedom, security and justice, in which the free movement of persons
         is ensured. To that end, Chapters II and III of the regulation lay down rules on jurisdiction and on recognition and enforcement
         of judgments concerning the dissolution of matrimonial ties.
      
In that context, Article 3(1)(a) and (b) of Regulation No 2201/provides for a number of grounds of jurisdiction, without
         establishing any hierarchy. All the objective grounds set out in Article 3(1) are alternatives. Taking into account that regulation’s
         purpose of ensuring legal certainty, Article thereof provides, in substance, that the grounds of jurisdiction contained
         in Articles to of the regulation are exclusive in nature. 
      
It follows that the system of jurisdiction established by Regulation No 2201/concerning the dissolution of matrimonial
         ties is not intended to preclude the courts of several States from having jurisdiction. Rather, the coexistence of several
         courts having jurisdiction is expressly provided for, without any hierarchy being established between them. 
      
In that regard, while the grounds of jurisdiction listed in Article 3(1)(a) of that regulation are based in various respects
         on the habitual residence of the spouses, that in Article 3(1)(b) is ‘the nationality of both spouses or, in the case of the
         United Kingdom and Ireland, the “domicile” of both spouses’. Thus, except in relation to the latter two Member States, the
         courts of the other Member States of which the spouses hold the nationality have jurisdiction in proceedings relating to the
         dissolution of matrimonial ties.
      
However, there is nothing in the wording of Article 3(1)(b) to suggest that only the ‘effective’ nationality can be taken
         into account in applying that provision. Article 3(1)(b), inasmuch as it makes nationality a ground of jurisdiction, endorses
         a link that is unambiguous and easy to apply. It does not provide for any other criterion relating to nationality such as,
         for example, how effective it is. 
      
Moreover, no basis can be found in the objectives of that provision or in the context of which it forms part for an interpretation
         according to which only an ‘effective’ nationality can be taken into consideration for the purposes of Article 3(1) of Regulation
         No 2201/2003. 
      
First, such an interpretation would restrict individuals’ choice of the court having jurisdiction, particularly in cases where
         the right to freedom of movement for persons had been exercised.
      
In particular, since habitual residence would be an essential consideration for the purpose of determining the most effective
         nationality, the grounds of jurisdiction provided for in Article 3(1)(a) and (b) of Regulation No 2201/would frequently
         overlap. On the facts, that would amount to establishing, with regard to persons holding a number of nationalities, a hierarchy
         between the grounds of jurisdiction laid down in Article 3(1), for which there is no basis in the wording of that paragraph.
         By contrast, a couple holding only the nationality of one Member State would always be able to seise the courts of that State,
         even if they had not had their habitual residence in that Member State for many years and even if they had few real links
         with that State.
      
Secondly, in the light of the imprecise nature of the concept of ‘effective nationality’, a whole set of factors would have
         to be taken into consideration, not always leading to a clear result. The need to check the links between the spouses and
         their respective nationalities would make verification of jurisdiction more onerous and thus be at odds with the objective
         of facilitating the application of Regulation No 2201/by the use of a simple and unambiguous connecting factor.
      
It is true that, pursuant to Article 3(1)(b) of Regulation No 2201/2003, the courts of a number of Member States can have
         jurisdiction where the individuals in question hold several nationalities. However, as the Commission and the French, Hungarian
         and Slovak Governments pointed out, were the courts of several Member States to be seised pursuant to that provision, the
         conflict of jurisdiction could be resolved by applying the rule laid down in Article 19(1) of that regulation.
      
Finally, it should be acknowledged that Regulation No 2201/2003, in so far as it regulates only jurisdiction but does not
         lay down conflict rules determining the substantive law to be applied, might indeed, as Ms Mesko claims, induce spouses to
         rush into seising one of the courts having jurisdiction in order to secure the advantages of the substantive divorce law applicable
         under the private international law rules used by the court seised. However, contrary to Ms Mesko’s claims, such a fact cannot,
         by itself, mean that the seising of a court having jurisdiction under Article 3(1)(b) of that regulation may be regarded as
         an abuse. As paragraphs to of the present judgment make clear, seising the courts of a Member State of which both spouses
         hold the nationality, even in the absence of any other link with that Member State, is not contrary to the objectives pursued
         by that provision.
      
In those circumstances, the answer to the second and third questions referred must be that, where spouses each hold the nationality
         of the same two Member States, Article 3(1)(b) of Regulation No 2201/precludes the jurisdiction of the courts of one
         of those Member States from being rejected on the ground that the applicant does not put forward other links with that State.
         On the contrary, the courts of those Member States of which the spouses hold the nationality have jurisdiction under that
         provision and the spouses may seise the court of the Member State of their choice.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Where the court of the Member State addressed must verify, pursuant to Article 64(4) of Council Regulation (EC) No 2201/of November concerning jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and the
            matters of parental responsibility, repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 1347/2000, whether the court of the Member State
            of origin of a judgment would have had jurisdiction under Article 3(1)(b) of that regulation, the latter provision precludes
            the court of the Member State addressed from regarding spouses who each hold the nationality both of that State and of the
            Member State of origin as nationals only of the Member State addressed. That court must, on the contrary, take into account
            the fact that the spouses also hold the nationality of the Member State of origin and that, therefore, the courts of the latter
            could have had jurisdiction to hear the case.
2.      Where spouses each hold the nationality of the same two Member States, Article 3(1)(b) of Regulation No 2201/precludes
            the jurisdiction of the courts of one of those Member States from being rejected on the ground that the applicant does not
            put forward other links with that State. On the contrary, the courts of those Member States of which the spouses hold the
            nationality have jurisdiction under that provision and the spouses may seise the court of the Member State of their choice.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 