
Case C-516/P
Commission of the European Communities
v
Ferriere Nord SpA
(Appeal – Competition – Commission decision – Fine – Enforcement – Regulation (EEC) No 2988/– Limitation period – Acts adversely affecting a party – Inadmissibility)
Judgment of the Court (Second Chamber), December Summary of the Judgment
Actions for annulment – Actionable measures – Definition – Measures producing binding legal effects 
(Art. EC and Art. 256, fourth para., EC; Council Regulation No 2988/74, Art. 5(1)(a))
Measures whereby the Commission orders an undertaking to pay the outstanding balance of a fine for breach of the competition
         rules and threatens to take steps to enforce the bank guarantee provided by that undertaking must be regarded as giving notice
         of enforcement of the decision which imposed the fine, and, as such, whether they occur before or after any time-bar, cannot
         be regarded as having produced legal effects binding on, and capable of affecting the interests of the fined undertaking,
         since in reality they merely constitute acts purely preparatory to enforcement. It follows that such measures do not constitute
         measures that are capable of forming the subject-matter of an action for annulment.
      
That interpretation is not invalidated, where the Commission agrees by those measures that interest should cease to accrue
         at a time subsequent to the Court judgment confirming the fine, by the presence of the of the term ‘decision’ in Article 5(1)(a)
         of Regulation No 2988/concerning limitation periods in proceedings and the enforcement of sanctions in the area of competition
         law, according to which the limitation period for the enforcement of sanctions shall be interrupted by ‘notification of a
         decision varying the original amount of the fine, penalty or periodic penalty payments or refusing an application for variation’.
         Even if a decision within the meaning of that provision constitutes, in all events, an act open to challenge for the purposes
         of Article EC, the Commission does not, by the measures referred to above, notify the fined undertaking of a decision
         ‘varying the original amount of the fine, penalty or periodic penalty payments’ within the meaning of the former provision.
      
Furthermore, the mere fact that the Commission agrees to the cessation of interest accrual at a time subsequent to the Court
         judgment which confirmed the fine cannot be deemed capable of transforming into an act open to challenge an act which does
         not constitute such an act. That fact as such cannot produce, in relation to the situation resulting from the decision which
         imposed the fine, legal effects binding on, and capable of affecting the interests of, the fined undertaking.
      
Nor, finally, can it be argued against that interpretation that there would be a legal vacuum if the contested measures were
         not open to challenge under Article EC. Enforcement of a decision of the Commission which imposes a pecuniary obligation
         on a person is governed by Article EC which, in its fourth paragraph, provides for effective judicial protection. In any
         event, the fact remains that, although the requirement for admissibility of an annulment action as to legal effects which
         are binding on, and capable of affecting the interests of, the applicant by bringing about a distinct change in its legal
         position must be interpreted in the light of the principle of effective judicial protection, such an interpretation cannot
         have the effect of setting aside that condition without going beyond the limits of the jurisdiction conferred by the EC Treaty
         on the Community courts.
      
(see paras 28-33)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
December (*)
      
(Appeal – Competition – Commission decision – Fine – Enforcement – Regulation (EEC) No 2988/– Limitation period – Acts adversely affecting a party – Inadmissibility)
In Case C‑516/P,
APPEAL pursuant to Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, lodged on December 2006,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by V. Di Bucci and F. Amato, acting as Agents,
      
appellant,
the other party to the proceedings being:
Ferriere Nord SpA, represented by W. Viscardini and G. Donà, avvocati,
      
applicant at first instance,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, J. Makarczyk, P. Kūris, J.-C. Bonichot and C. Toader,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Mazák,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By its appeal, the Commission of the European Communities asks the Court to set aside the judgment of the Court of First Instance
         of the European Communities in Case T‑153/Ferriere Nord v Commission [2006] ECR II‑(‘the judgment under appeal’) by which that court annulled the decisions of the Commission notified by
         letter of February and by fax of April (‘the contested acts’) concerning the outstanding balance of the fine
         imposed on Ferriere Nord SpA (‘Ferriere Nord’) by Commission Decision 89/515/EEC of August relating to a proceeding
         under Article of the EEC Treaty (IV/31.– Welded steel mesh) (OJ L 260, p. 1; ‘the Welded steel mesh decision’).
      
 Legal context
Regulation (EEC) No 2988/of the Council of November concerning limitation periods in proceedings and the enforcement
         of sanctions under the rules of the European Economic Community relating to transport and competition provides in Article 4,
         headed ‘Limitation period for the enforcement of sanctions’:
      
‘1.      The power of the Commission to enforce decisions imposing fines, penalties or periodic payments for infringements of the rules
         of the European Economic Community relating to transport or competition shall be subject to a limitation period of five years.
      
2.      Time shall begin to run on the day on which the decision becomes final.’ 
Article 5(1)(a) of that regulation, entitled ‘Interruption of the limitation period for the enforcement of sanctions’, provides:
‘1.      The limitation period for the enforcement of sanctions shall be interrupted:
(a)      by notification of a decision varying the original amount of the fine, penalty or periodic penalty payments or refusing an
         application for variation’. 
      
 Background to the dispute
As is clear from the judgment under appeal, the Commission adopted the Welded steel mesh decision by which, inter alia, it
         held that Ferriere Nord had participated in a series of infringements on the Community market in welded steel mesh and imposed
         on it a fine of ECU 000. 
      
Pursuant to Article of the Welded steel mesh decision, the fine imposed on Ferriere Nord was to be paid within three months
         of the date of notification of that decision. It was further stated that interest would automatically accrue on the amount
         of the fine on expiry of that period at the rate charged by the European Monetary Cooperation Fund on its ecu operations on
         the first working day of the month in which the Welded steel mesh decision was adopted, plus 3.percentage points, i.e. 12.50%.
      
On October 1989, Ferriere Nord brought an action before the Court of First Instance seeking annulment of the Welded steel
         mesh decision. 
      
On October 1989, with the agreement of the Commission, a bank guarantee was provided, on the instructions of Ferriere Nord,
         for the amount of the fine and for the interest.
      
Ferriere Nord’s action was dismissed by the Court of First Instance by judgment of April in Case T‑143/Ferriere Nord v Commission [1995] ECR II‑917.
      
The appeal against that judgment was dismissed by judgment of July in Case C‑219/P Ferriere Nord v Commission [1997] ECR I‑4411.
      
By letter of July 1997, citing the severe devaluation of the Italian lira which occurred between the date of the Welded
         steel mesh decision and the judgment of July in Ferriere Nord v Commission, and the duration of the legal proceedings of almost eight years, Ferriere Nord asked the Commission to consider reducing
         the amount of the fine and interest. That request was refused by the Commission by letter of September 1997.
      
In a registered letter of December 1997, Ferriere Nord repeated its request. In the same letter, it stated that it had,
         moreover, transferred a sum in Italian lire corresponding to the amount of the fine, that is, ECU 000, at the exchange
         rate applicable in 1989. That sum was credited on December to the Commission’s account with a value of ECU 918.
      
The Commission did not respond to the letter of December 1997. 
With regard to the subsequent events, the Court of First Instance found as follows in the judgment under appeal: 
‘14.      By letter of February (“the letter of February 2004”), the Commission informed [Ferriere Nord] that the amount still
         owed by it on February amounted in total to EUR 402.(the principal amount of the fine [of ECU 000], less
         ECU paid on December and including interest for the period from November to February 2004). The
         Commission put [Ferriere Nord] on notice to settle the debt as quickly as possible and stated that, once payment had been
         made, it would agree to the cancellation of the bank guarantee.
      
15.      By letter of February 2004, [Ferriere Nord] replied to the Commission that the demands contained in the letter of February
         were unjustified and out of time. [Ferriere Nord] argued in particular that the limitation period of five years under
         Article of Regulation No 2988/74, applicable to the enforcement of sanctions, had expired on September and that
         in those circumstances the Commission could no longer recover a debt owed to it or claim against the bank guarantee.
      
16.      By facsimile of April (“the fax of April 2004”), the Commission replied to [Ferriere Nord] that, with regard to
         limitation under Article of Regulation No 2988/74, that provision did not apply in the present case because of the existence
         of the bank guarantee which could be called in at any time and which had the effect of provisional payment so that enforcement
         was not necessary. The Commission also accepted that it had not reminded [Ferriere Nord] to pay its debt once the judgment
         of the Court of Justice had confirmed the Welded steel mesh decision and, on that basis, agreed that interest should accrue
         for only five months after delivery of that judgment, until December 1997. As a result, the Commission was claiming from
         [Ferriere Nord] only the sum of EUR 932.instead of the sum of EUR 402.demanded in the letter of February 2004.
         Finally, the Commission stated that, failing payment before April 2004, it would call on the bank to honour the guarantee.’
      
 The proceedings before the Court of First Instance and the judgment under appeal
By application lodged at the Registry of the Court of First Instance on April 2004, Ferriere Nord sought annulment of the
         contested acts.
      
The Court of First Instance examined, first, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, the question whether at
         the time the contested acts were adopted, that is to say on February and April 2004, the Commission’s power to enforce
         the Welded steel mesh decision was time-barred within the meaning of Article 4(1) of Regulation No 2988/74. Having held that
         to be the case, it then ruled on the admissibility of the action in the following terms:
      
‘54.      It should be borne in mind that a decision within the meaning of Article EC is any act clearly and definitively altering
         its addressee’s legal position (Case 22/Commission v Council [1971] ECR 263, paragraphs to 43, and Case 60/IBM v Commission [1981] ECR 2268).
      
55.      It follows from the reasoning relating to limitation (paragraphs to above) that, because the Commission’s power to enforce
         the Welded steel mesh decision was time-barred, its right to claim from [Ferriere Nord] payment of the outstanding balance
         had been extinguished and [Ferriere Nord] could legitimately, from September 2002, regard itself as protected from any
         claim made by the Commission relating to the enforcement of that decision.
      
56.      By the contested acts, the Commission addressed to [Ferriere Nord] a demand for payment of the outstanding balance and threatened
         to take steps to enforce the bank guarantee. The contested acts, to which in principle a presumption of lawfulness attaches,
         thus clearly and definitely alter [Ferriere Nord’s] legal position and on that basis constitute a decision within the meaning
         of Article EC which by definition does not confirm earlier acts.
      
57.      The plea of inadmissibility must therefore be rejected as unfounded.’
With regard to the substance, the Court of First Instance held, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the plea
         alleging infringement of Article 4(1) of Regulation No 2988/was well founded. It therefore annulled the contested acts.
      
 Forms of order sought 
By its appeal, the Commission claims that the Court should:
–       set aside the judgment under appeal in so far as it declares admissible the action for annulment brought by Ferriere Nord
         against the contested acts;
      
–       declare inadmissible and accordingly dismiss the action for annulment brought at first instance by Ferriere Nord against the
         contested acts;
      
–       order Ferriere Nord to pay the costs of the proceedings, together with the costs of the proceedings at first instance.
Ferriere Nord contends that the Court should:
–       dismiss the appeal as being manifestly unfounded;
–       order the Commission to pay the costs.
 The appeal
In support of its appeal, the Commission puts forward a single plea, entitled ‘infringement of the first paragraph of Article EC, read in conjunction with Article EC; failure to state reasons or incorrect statement of reasons; lack of jurisdiction
         on the part of the Court of First Instance’.
      
According to the Commission, the Court of First Instance, after setting out, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal,
         the criterion to be applied in assessing whether an act is open to challenge, did not show that that criterion was satisfied
         in the present case. However, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, it did give the result of its analysis relating
         to the question of limitation. That analysis is of no relevance to the assessment of the admissibility of the action, since
         the question whether an act produces legal effects is independent of the question whether the arguments or conclusions which
         it contains are well founded.
      
The Commission submits that a mere demand for payment does not in itself produce legal effects. It takes the view, therefore,
         that the Court of First Instance did not state reasons to support the conclusion that the contested acts could be challenged
         in an action for annulment or that the reason stated was manifestly incorrect. Furthermore, if it is accepted that there are
         such reasons, they are based on an error of interpretation of the notion of ‘act open for challenge’ for the purposes of the
         first paragraph of Article EC in conjunction with Article EC.
      
The Commission adds that the Court of First Instance gave judgment on the dispute despite not having jurisdiction.
It asserts that, if it had wished to obtain payment of the balance from Ferriere Nord despite the latter’s refusal to pay,
         it would have had to bring enforcement proceedings before the competent national court and in accordance with the rules of
         civil procedure in force in the territory of the State concerned, as laid down in the second paragraph of Article EC.
         In accordance with the fourth paragraph of Article EC, the courts of the country concerned are to have jurisdiction over
         complaints that enforcement is being carried out in an irregular manner.
      
Ferriere Nord submits that insofar as the supervening time-bar constitutes a legal fact that extinguished the obligation which
         existed to pay the fine, the legal effect of the notice to pay contained in the letter of February consisted in the
         fact of ‘reviving’ (or in the attempt to revive) a right already extinguished, with direct and autonomous effect on the legal
         position of Ferriere Nord.
      
Moreover, the content of the fax of April was new and supplementary in relation to all the other preceding acts since,
         by that fax, the Commission advised that it had amended the global amount required from Ferriere Nord by reducing the amount
         of interest. Under Article 5(1)(a) of Regulation No 2988/74, according to which the limitation period for the enforcement
         of sanctions is to be interrupted ‘by notification of a decision varying the original amount of the fine, penalty or periodic
         penalty payments …’, the reduction of interest would be regarded as a ‘decision’.
      
Ferriere Nord adds that if the letter of February was not open to challenge under Article EC, that would constitute
         a lacuna in the Community legal order and a breach of the rights of the defence. Indeed, it is not obvious how otherwise it
         could have used the supervening time-bar.
      
In that regard, it should be recalled that only measures the legal effects of which are binding on, and capable of affecting
         the interests of, the applicant by bringing about a distinct change in his legal position are acts or decisions which may
         be the subject of an action for annulment (see, inter alia, Case C‑131/P Reynolds Tobacco and Others v Commission [2006] ECR I‑7795, paragraph 54, and the case-law cited).
      
It is apparent from paragraph of the judgment under appeal that, in the view of the Court of First Instance, a distinct
         change in the legal position of Ferriere Nord was brought about by the fact that, by the contested acts, the Commission addressed
         to Ferriere Nord a demand for payment of the outstanding balance and threatened to take steps to enforce the bank guarantee.
      
Nevertheless, as is clear from the findings of the Court of First Instance in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal
         with regard to the contested acts, those acts must be regarded as giving notice of enforcement of a decision taken previously,
         that is to say the Welded steel mesh decision. As such, whether they occur before or after any time-bar, those acts cannot
         be regarded as having produced legal effects binding on, and capable of affecting the interests of, Ferriere Nord. In reality,
         they merely constitute acts purely preparatory to enforcement. Neither the former nor the latter acts constitute acts open
         to challenge (see, to that effect, Case C‑46/United Kingdom v Commission [2005] ECR I‑10167, paragraph 25, and Reynolds Tobacco and Others v Commission, paragraph 55). 
      
That interpretation is not invalidated by the use of the term ‘decision’ in Article 5(1)(a) of Regulation No 2988/74. Even
         if a decision within the meaning of that provision constitutes, in all events, an act open to challenge for the purposes of
         Article EC, it should be noted that, by the contested acts, the Commission did not notify Ferriere Nord of a decision
         ‘varying the original amount of the fine, penalty or periodic penalty payments’ within the meaning of the former provision.
         
      
Furthermore, the mere fact that, in the fax of April 2004, the Commission agreed that interest should accrue for only five
         months after delivery of the judgment of July in Ferriere Nord v Commission cannot be deemed capable of transforming into an act open to challenge an act which, for the reasons set out in paragraph
         of this judgment does not constitute such an act. That fact as such cannot produce, in relation to the situation resulting
         from the Welded steel mesh decision, legal effects binding on, and capable of affecting the interests of, Ferriere Nord.
      
Finally, with regard to the argument that there would be a legal vacuum if the contested acts were not open to challenge under
         Article EC, it should be recalled that enforcement of a decision of the Commission which imposes a pecuniary obligation
         on a legal person such as Ferriere Nord is governed by Article EC which, in its fourth paragraph, provides for effective
         judicial protection. Furthermore, it has not been shown that, if the Commission succeeded in calling in the bank guarantee
         furnished on the instructions of Ferriere Nord, the latter would be unable to benefit from effective judicial protection against
         the negative consequences thereof.
      
In any event, the fact remains that, although the requirement as to legal effects which are binding on, and capable of affecting
         the interests of, the applicant by bringing about a distinct change in its legal position must be interpreted in the light
         of the principle of effective judicial protection, such an interpretation cannot have the effect of setting aside that condition
         without going beyond the jurisdiction conferred by the EC Treaty on the Community courts (Reynolds Tobacco and Others v Commission, paragraph 81).
      
It follows from the foregoing that the Court of First Instance has erred in law in classifying the contested acts as acts
         open to challenge for the purposes of Article EC. The judgment under appeal must therefore be set aside and, having regard
         to the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, the action for annulment of the contested acts
         must be declared inadmissible.
      
 Costs
Under the first paragraph of Article of the Rules of Procedure, where the appeal is well founded and the Court itself
         gives final judgment in the case, the Court is required to make a decision as to costs. Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of
         Procedure, applicable to appeal proceedings by virtue of Article thereof, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay
         the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings.
      
As the appeal brought by the Commission and the objection of inadmissibility raised by it are well founded, Ferriere Nord
         must be ordered to pay all the costs incurred before the Court of First Instance and the Court of Justice.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
1.      Sets aside the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities of September in Case T‑153/Ferriere Nord v Commission;
2.      Declares the action for annulment brought by Ferriere Nord SpA against the decisions of the Commission of the European Communities
            notified by letter of February and by fax of April concerning the outstanding balance of the fine imposed on
            Ferriere Nord SpA by Commission Decision 89/515/EEC of August relating to a proceeding under Article of the EEC
            Treaty (IV/31.– Welded steel mesh) inadmissible.
3.      Orders Ferriere Nord SpA to pay the costs of both sets of proceedings. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 