
ORDER OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
December (
*)
(Rectification of judgment)
In Joined Cases C‑8/P-REC to C‑10/P-REC,
THREE APPEALS under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, lodged on January 2015,
Ledra Advertising Ltd, established in Nicosia (Cyprus) (C‑8/P),
Andreas Eleftheriou, residing in Limassol (Cyprus) (C‑9/P),
Eleni Eleftheriou, residing in Limassol (C‑9/P),
Lilia Papachristofi, residing in Limassol (C‑9/P),
Christos Theophilou, residing in Nicosia (C‑10/P),
Eleni Theophilou, residing in Nicosia (C‑10/P),
represented by A. Paschalides, dikigoros, A.M. Paschalidou, Barrister, and A. Riza QC, instructed by C. Paschalides, Solicitor,
appellants,
the other parties to the proceedings being:
European Commission, represented by J.-P. Keppenne and M. Konstantinidis, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
European Central Bank (ECB), represented by G. Várhelyi, K. Laurinavičius and O. Heinz, acting as Agents, and H.-G. Kamann, Rechtsanwalt,
defendants at first instance,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President, A. Tizzano, Vice-President, R. Silva de Lapuerta, T. von Danwitz, J.L. da Cruz Vilaça, A. Rosas and C.G. Fernlund, Presidents of Chambers, E. Juhász, A. Arabadjiev (Rapporteur), D. Šváby, M. Berger, A. Prechal, E. Jarašiūnas, M. Vilaras and E. Regan, Judges,
Advocate General: N. Wahl,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
after hearing the Advocate General,
makes the following
Order
On September 2016, the Court (Grand Chamber) delivered the judgment in Ledra Advertising and Others v Commission and ECB (C‑8/P to C‑10/P, EU:C:2016:701).
That judgment contains, in the version in the language of the case, an inaccuracy which it is appropriate for the Court to rectify of its own motion pursuant to Article 154(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, which applies to the procedure on appeal in accordance with Article 190(1) of those rules.
 
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby orders:
 
1.
In the introductory part of the judgment of September 2016, Ledra Advertising and Others v Commission and ECB (C‑8/P to C‑10/P, EU:C:2016:701), the reference to the representatives of the European Central Bank (ECB) shall be rectified as follows:
‘European Central Bank (ECB), represented by G. Várhelyi, K. Laurinavičius and O. Heinz, acting as Agents, and H.-G. Kamann, Rechtsanwalt,’.
 
2.
The original of this order shall be annexed to the original of the rectified judgment. A note of this order shall be made in the margin of the original of the rectified judgment.
 
Luxembourg, December 2017.
A. Calot Escobar
Registrar
K. Lenaerts
President
(
*)	Language of the case: English.
Top  
