
Case C-259/Elizabeth Florence Emanuel
v
Continental Shelf Ltd
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Person Appointed by the Lord Chancellor under Section of The Trade Marks Act
         1994, on Appeal from the Registrar of Trade Marks, submitted by the High Court of Justice of England and Wales)
      
(Trade marks of such a nature as to deceive the public or liable to mislead the public as to the nature, quality or geographical
         origin of a product – Trade mark assigned by the proprietor together with the undertaking producing the goods to which the mark relates – Directive 89/104/EEC)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Preliminary rulings – Reference to the Court – National court or tribunal within the meaning of Article EC – Meaning
(Art. EC)
2.        Approximation of laws – Trade marks – Directive 89/– Refusal to register or nullity – Grounds for revocation of the trade
            mark – Trade marks of such a nature as to deceive the public
(Council Directive 89/104, Arts 3(1)(g), and 12(2)(b))
1.        In order to determine whether a body is a court or tribunal within the meaning of Article EC, which is a question governed
         by Community law alone, it is necessary to take account of a number of factors, such as whether the body concerned is established
         by law, whether it is permanent, whether its jurisdiction is compulsory, whether its procedure is inter partes, whether it
         applies rules of law and whether it is independent. The Person Appointed by the Lord Chancellor under Section of the national
         Trade Marks Act, who may hear appeals on trade mark registration decisions, satisfies those criteria. The Appointed Person
         is a permanent body which makes findings of law in application of the Trade Marks Act and according to the procedural rules
         laid down by the Trade Marks Rules 2000. The procedure is, moreover, inter partes. The decisions of the Appointed Person are
         binding and, in principle, final, subject exceptionally to an application for judicial review. Lastly, during the Appointed
         Person’s period of office, he enjoys the same guarantees of independence as judges.
      
(see paras 19, 23-24)
2.        A trade mark corresponding to the name of the designer and first manufacturer of the goods bearing that mark may not, by reason
         of that particular feature alone, be refused registration and the trade mark may not be liable to revocation on the ground
         that it would deceive the public, within the meaning of Articles 3(1)(g) and 12(2)(b) of Directive 89/to approximate the
         laws of the Member States relating to trade marks, in particular where the goodwill associated with that trade mark, previously
         registered in a different graphic form, has been assigned together with the business making the goods to which the mark relates.
      
The circumstances for refusing registration and the conditions for revocation envisaged by the abovementioned provisions presuppose
         the existence of actual deceit or a sufficiently serious risk that the consumer will be deceived. In the case of a trade mark
         corresponding to the name of a person, even if the average consumer might be influenced in his act of purchasing a garment
         bearing the trade mark by imagining that the person in question was involved in the design of that garment, the characteristics
         and the qualities of that garment remain guaranteed by the undertaking which owns the trade mark.
      
On the other hand, it would be for the national court to determine whether or not, in the presentation of the trade mark,
         there is an intention on the part of the undertaking which lodged the application to register that mark to make the consumer
         believe that the person whose name corresponds to the trade mark is still the designer of the goods bearing the mark or that
         she is involved in their design. In that case, there would be conduct which might be held to be fraudulent but which could
         not be analysed as deception for the purposes of Article of Directive 89/and which, for that reason, would not affect
         the trade mark itself and, consequently, its prospects of being registered.
      
(see paras 47-48, 50-51, 53, operative part 1-2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
March (*)
      
(Trade marks of such a nature as to deceive the public or liable to mislead the public as to the nature, quality or geographical
         origin of a product – Trade mark assigned by the proprietor together with the undertaking producing the goods to which the mark relates – Directive 89/104/EEC)
      
In Case C‑259/04,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, brought by the Person Appointed by the Lord Chancellor under section
         of the Trade Marks Act 1994, on Appeal from the Registrar of Trade Marks (United Kingdom), by decision of May 2004,
         submitted by the High Court of Justice of England and Wales, received at the Court on June 2004, in the proceedings
      
Elizabeth Florence Emanuel
v
Continental Shelf Ltd,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of A. Rosas, President of the Chamber, J. Malenovský, J.‑P. Puissochet (Rapporteur), A. Borg Barthet and U. Lõhmus,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer,
Registrar:  L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on December 2005,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Elizabeth Florence Emanuel, by J. Hill, Barrister, H. Evans and C. Daniel, Solicitors,
–        Continental Shelf Ltd, by R. Hacon, Barrister,
–        the United Kingdom Government, by E. O’Neill, acting as Agent, and  M. Tappin, Barrister,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by N.B. Rasmussen, acting as Agent,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling by the Person Appointed by the Lord Chancellor under section of the Trade Marks
         Act (‘the Appointed Person’), on appeal from the Registrar of Trade Marks, concerns the interpretation of Articles 3(1)(g)
         and 12(2)(b) of Council Directive 89/104/EEC of December to approximate the laws of the Member States relating to
         trade marks (OJ L 40, p. 1).
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings between the fashion designer Ms Emanuel and Continental Shelf Ltd
         (‘CSL’). Those proceedings concern two applications made by Ms Emanuel against CSL, the first in opposition to the registration
         of the trade mark ‘ELIZABETH EMANUEL’, in upper case (‘the trade mark  “ELIZABETH EMANUEL”’), in respect of clothing produced
         by CSL, and the second to revoke the trade mark ‘Elizabeth Emanuel’, in lower case apart from the initial letters, registered
         in by another company which subsequently assigned it to CSL (‘the trade mark “Elizabeth Emanuel”’ or ‘the registered
         trade mark’).
      
 Law
Article 3(1) of Directive 89/provides:
      
‘The following shall not be registered or if registered shall be liable to be declared invalid:
…
(g)      trade marks which are of such a nature as to deceive the public, for instance as to the nature, quality or geographical origin
         of the goods or service;
      
…’      
Article 12(2) of Directive 89/provides:
      
‘A trade mark shall … be liable to revocation if, after the date on which it was registered, 
…
(b)      in consequence of the use made of it by the proprietor of the trade mark or with his consent in respect of the goods or services
         for which it is registered, it is liable to mislead the public, particularly as to the nature, quality or geographical origin
         of those goods or services.’ 
      
 The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
In Ms Emanuel, a well-known designer of wedding wear, began trading under the name ‘Elizabeth Emanuel’.
      
In 1996, together with a company called Hamlet International Plc, Ms Emanuel formed a company called Elizabeth Emanuel Plc
         (‘EE Plc’). Ms Emanuel assigned to EE Plc her business of designing and selling clothing, all assets of the business including
         its goodwill and an application to register the trade mark ‘Elizabeth Emanuel’ which was registered in 1997.
      
In September 1997, EE Plc assigned its business, goodwill and the registered trade mark to Frostprint Ltd, which immediately
         changed its name to Elizabeth Emanuel International Ltd (‘EE International’). EE International employed Ms Emanuel, who left
         that employment a month later.
      
In November 1997, EE International assigned the registered trade mark to another company, Oakridge Trading Ltd (‘Oakridge’).
         On March 1998, Oakridge lodged an application to register the trade mark ‘ELIZABETH EMANUEL’.
      
On January 1999, a notice of opposition to that application was filed. On September 1999, an application was lodged to
         revoke the registered trade mark ‘Elizabeth Emanuel’.
      
The opposition and the application for revocation were heard at first instance by the Hearing Officer who dismissed them in
         a decision of October on the ground that, whilst the public had indeed been deceived and confused, such deception
         and confusion was lawful and the inevitable consequence of the sale of a business and goodwill previously conducted under
         the name of the original owner.
      
An appeal against that decision was brought before the Appointed Person, who did not refer the appeal to the High Court of
         Justice in spite of a request to that effect by CSL, which in the course of the proceedings became the assignee of the registered
         trade mark and the application to register the trade mark ‘ELIZABETH EMANUEL’. That request had been made pursuant to section
         of the Trade Marks Act which makes provision for a reference to the High Court if it appears to the Appointed Person
         that the case involves a point of general legal importance.
      
As before the Hearing Officer, the argument focused on whether Articles 3(1)(g) and 12(2)(b) of Directive 89/provide a
         basis for the applications made against CSL.
      
Against that background, the Appointed Person decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following questions to the Court
         for a preliminary ruling: 
      
‘1.      Is a trade mark of such a nature as to deceive the public and prohibited from registration under Article 3(1)(g) [of Directive
         89/104] in the following circumstances: 
      
(a)      the goodwill associated with the trade mark has been assigned together with the business of making the goods to which the
         mark relates; 
      
(b)      prior to the assignment the trade mark indicated to a significant proportion of the relevant public that a particular person
         was involved in the design or creation of the goods in relation to which it was used; 
      
(c)      after the assignment an application was made by the assignee to register the trade mark; and 
(d)      at the time of the application a significant portion of the relevant public wrongly believed that use of the trade mark indicated
         that the particular person was still involved in the design or creation of the goods in relation to which the mark was used,
         and this belief was likely to affect the purchasing behaviour of that part of the public? 
      
2.      If the answer to question is not unreservedly yes, what other matters must be taken into consideration in assessing whether
         a trade mark is of such a nature as to deceive the public and prohibited from registration under Article 3(1)(g) [of Directive
         89/104] and, in particular, is it relevant that the risk of deception is likely to diminish over time? 
      
3.      Is a registered trade mark liable to mislead the public in consequence of the use made of it by the proprietor or with his
         consent and so liable to revocation under Article 12(2)(b) [of Directive 89/104] in the following circumstances: 
      
(a)      the registered trade mark and the goodwill associated with it have been assigned together with the business of making the
         goods to which the mark relates; 
      
(b)      prior to the assignment the trade mark indicated to a significant proportion of the relevant public that a particular person
         was involved in the design or creation of the goods in relation to which it was used;  
      
(c)      after the assignment an application was made to revoke the registered trade mark; and 
(d)      at the time of the application a significant portion of the relevant public wrongly believed that use of the trade mark indicated
         that the particular person was still involved with the design or creation of the goods in relation to which the mark was used,
         and this belief was likely to affect the purchasing behaviour of that part of the public? 
      
4.      If the answer to question is not unreservedly yes, what other matters must be taken into consideration in assessing whether
         a registered trade mark is liable to mislead the public in consequence of the use made of it by the proprietor or with his
         consent and so liable to revocation under Article 12(2)(b) [of Directive 89/104] and, in particular, is it relevant that the
         risk of deception is likely to diminish over time?’
      
 Observations on the Opinion of Advocate General Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer
By letter of February 2006, Ms Emanuel submitted observations on the Opinion of Advocate General Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer. She
         alleged that the Advocate General had erred in his interpretation of Articles and of Directive 89/and the Court’s
         earlier case-law.
      
Since neither the Statute of the Court of Justice nor the Rules of Procedure make provision for the parties to submit observations
         in reply to the Opinion of the Advocate General (see the order of February in Case C-17/EmesaSugar [2000] ECR I-665, paragraph 2), Ms Emanuel’s observations cannot be accepted.
      
However, the Court may, of its own motion, on a proposal from the Advocate General or at the request of the parties, reopen
         the oral procedure, in accordance with Article of its Rules of Procedure, if it considers that it lacks sufficient information,
         or that the case must be dealt with on the basis of an argument which has not been debated between the parties (see Case C-309/Wouters and Others [2002] ECR I-1577, paragraph 42; Case C-434/Arnold André [2004] ECR I‑11825, paragraph 27; and Case C-210/Swedish Match [2004] ECR I-11893, paragraph 25).
      
In the present case, the Court finds that it has all the information necessary to reply to the questions referred. Consequently,
         there is no need to order the reopening of the oral procedure.
      
 Admissibility of the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Before turning to the questions referred it is appropriate to examine whether the Appointed Person must be regarded as a court
         or tribunal within the meaning of Article EC.
      
In order to determine whether a body is a court or tribunal within the meaning of that provision, which is a question governed
         by Community law alone, the Court takes into account a number of factors, such as whether the body concerned is established
         by law, whether it is permanent, whether its jurisdiction is compulsory, whether its procedure is inter partes, whether it
         applies rules of law and whether it is independent (see, in particular, Case 61/Vaassen-Göbbels [1966] ECR 261; Case C-54/Dorsch Consult [1997] ECR I-4961, paragraph 23; and Case C-416/Nour Eddline El-Yassini [1999] ECR I-1209, paragraph 17).
      
The Appointed Person was established by the Trade Marks Act 1994.
      
Pursuant to sections and of that Act, the Appointed Person, appointed by the Lord Chancellor after consulting the Lord
         Advocate, may hear appeals from decisions of the Comptroller-General of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks (otherwise called
         the Registrar of Trade Marks). In England and Wales the Appointed Person shares that jurisdiction with the High Court of Justice
         and, in Scotland, with the Court of Session.
      
It is for the appellant to choose the jurisdiction before which he brings his appeal. However, the Appointed Person may in
         certain cases decide to refer the appeal to the High Court of Justice, inter alia if it appears to him that a point of general
         legal importance is involved.
      
The Appointed Person is a permanent body which makes findings of law in application of the Trade Marks Act and according
         to the procedural rules laid down by rules to of the Trade Marks Rules 2000. The procedure is inter partes. The decisions
         of the Appointed Person are binding and, in principle, final, subject exceptionally to an application for judicial review.
      
During the Appointed Person’s period of office, he enjoys the same guarantees of independence as judges.
      
It follows from all the foregoing factors that the Appointed Person must be regarded as a court or tribunal within the meaning
         of Article EC, so that the questions referred for a preliminary ruling are admissible.
      
 The first two questions
By its first two questions, the Appointed Person essentially seeks to ascertain the circumstances in which a trade mark may
         be refused registration on the ground that it is of such a nature as to deceive the public, within the meaning of Article
         3(1)(g) of Directive 89/104, where the goodwill associated with that trade mark has been assigned together with the business
         making the goods to which the mark relates and that trade mark, which corresponds to the name of the designer and first manufacturer
         of those goods, was previously registered in a different graphic form.
      
 Observations submitted to the Court
The Appointed Person is alive to the opposing arguments of the parties. He considers, first, that the public interest requires
         that trade marks must not be liable to mislead the average consumer, who is deemed to be reasonably observant and circumspect,
         and, second, that it is nevertheless in the public interest to permit the sale and assignment of businesses and goodwill together
         with the trade marks with which they are associated.   
      
Ms Emanuel, the appellant in the main proceedings, points to the public interest in the protection of consumers guaranteed
         by Article 3(1)(g) of Directive 89/104. She submits that for that article to apply, it suffices that there be at least a genuine
         risk that the use of the trade mark in issue misleads the average consumer of the goods or services, in respect of which registration
         of the trade mark has been applied for, as to their origin and influences that consumer’s purchasing decisions. Whether or
         not such a risk exists is a question of fact, so that all the circumstances which make that deception probable should be taken
         into consideration.
      
The appellant in the main proceedings submits next that once the risk of confusion is demonstrated, it does not matter that
         the goodwill and the trade mark have been assigned to the undertaking which believes it can use that trade mark.
      
CSL, the respondent in the main proceedings, submits that Article 3(1)(g) of Directive 89/does not draw any distinction
         between trade marks which correspond to the name of a person and those which do not. The only relevant criterion is whether
         objectively the trade marks are of such a nature as to deceive or are liable to mislead the public, inter alia by giving rise
         to confusion with other goods.
      
CSL contends that Ms Emanuel’s argument on the risk of confusion for the average consumer is based on the Court’s case-law
         in relation to specific regulations, which cannot be transposed to interpret Directive 89/104.
      
As regards the average consumer’s perception of a trade mark corresponding to a name, CSL submits that such a consumer is
         aware, especially in the field of fashion, that a trade name remains associated with the goods produced by an undertaking
         and that that undertaking may be assigned with that name. That applies equally to bakers, wine makers and manufacturers of
         luxury goods. Thus, the assignment of a trade name cannot in itself automatically give rise to confusion, whether or not that
         assignment was the subject of publicity.  
      
CSL stresses in particular that if Ms Emanuel’s argument were upheld, it would be impossible to assign a business together
         with the goodwill and the trade mark for the goods which the business produces. Very often the value of the assignment of
         a business lies essentially in the trade mark assigned.
      
The United Kingdom Government submits that the purpose of Article 3(1)(g) of Directive 89/is to deny registration to trade
         marks which deceive the public, not as to the origin of the goods or services covered by the registration or as to characteristics
         of that origin, but as to characteristics of the goods or services themselves. 
      
That provision was not intended to prohibit a trade mark merely because the standard of the goods in question does not match
         the purchaser’s expectations, whether because a particular person is no longer involved in the design and manufacture of those
         goods or for any other reason. Whilst a trade mark is required to act as a guarantee that goods emanate from a single undertaking
         which takes responsibility for their standard, it generally does not in itself act as a representation of that standard.
      
The United Kingdom Government submits that the public is aware that the standard of goods bearing a particular trade mark
         may vary, whether because of a decision of the proprietor of the trade mark, a change of ownership or management, or changes
         within the design team or manufacturing plant. The average consumer cannot therefore be deceived by a change in the proprietor
         of a trade mark.
      
The Commission of the European Communities notes, first of all, that the Court has not yet had the opportunity to give an
         interpretation of Article 3(1)(g) of Directive 89/as regards the situations in which a trade mark is likely to deceive
         the public and so has not yet identified the public interest which that provision protects. That public interest may differ
         from that analysed in respect of other absolute grounds for refusing to register such as those discussed in Joined Cases C-108/and C-109/Windsurfing Chiemsee [1999] ECR I-2779, Case C-299/Philips [2002] ECR I-5475, or Case C-104/Libertel [2003] ECR I-3793. 
      
The Commission recalls, however, that the Court has identified the essential function of a trade mark as being to guarantee
         the identity of origin of the marked goods or services to the consumer or end user by enabling him, without any possibility
         of confusion, to distinguish the goods or services from others which have another origin. For the trade mark to be able to
         fulfil its essential role in the system of undistorted competition which the Treaty seeks to establish and maintain, it must
         offer a guarantee that all the goods or services bearing it have been manufactured or supplied under the control of a single
         undertaking which is responsible for their quality (see, in particular, Case C-206/Arsenal Football Club [2002] ECR I-10273, paragraph 48).
      
The Commission infers from this that that function does not mean that the consumer should be able to identify the manufacturer
         from the trade mark, but that the trade mark serves as a guarantee that the goods were placed on the market with the consent
         of its proprietor.
      
The Commission further submits that the mere fact that a trade mark corresponds to the name of a person does not mean that
         that person is affiliated with the proprietor of the trade mark or that such involvement is to be presumed and consequently
         does not support the finding that that person is involved in the manufacture of the goods bearing that trade mark. The Commission
         contends that that argument is supported by the Court’s reasoning in Case C-404/Nichols [2004] ECR I-8499, according to which there is no special rule of trade mark law applicable to a personal name.
      
The Commission further submits that the average consumer can be deceived, for the purposes of Article 3(1)(g) of Directive
         89/104, by a trade mark corresponding to the name of a person only if the sales strategy is to suggest that that person is
         involved in the manufacture of the product bearing the trade mark concerned although he is no longer affiliated with the proprietor
         of that trade mark.
      
Lastly, all those who have submitted observations to the Court submit that the time elapsed since the person to whose name
         the trade mark corresponds ceased to be the proprietor of the mark has no bearing on whether or not that mark is liable to
         deceive the average consumer.
      
 Findings of the Court
Article of Directive 89/contains a list, described as a list of examples in the seventh recital in the preamble to that
         directive, of signs which may constitute a trade mark, provided that such signs are capable of distinguishing the goods or
         services of one undertaking from those of other undertakings, that is to say to fulfil the trade mark’s function as an indicator
         of origin. That list expressly includes personal names (Nichols, paragraph 22).
      
As the Commission pointed out, for the trade mark to be able to fulfil its essential role in the system of undistorted competition
         which the Treaty seeks to establish and maintain, it must offer a guarantee that all the goods or services bearing it have
         been manufactured or supplied under the control of a single undertaking which is responsible for their quality (see, in particular,
         Arsenal Football Club, paragraph 48).
      
A trade mark such as ‘ELIZABETH EMANUEL’ may have that function of distinguishing the goods manufactured by an undertaking,
         particularly where that trade mark has been assigned to that undertaking and the undertaking manufactures the same type of
         goods as those which initially bore the trade mark in question.
      
However, in the case of a trade mark corresponding to the name of a person, the public interest ground which justifies the
         prohibition laid down by Article 3(1)(g) of Directive 89/to register a trade mark which is liable to deceive the public,
         namely consumer protection, must raise the question of the risk of confusion which such a trade mark may engender in the mind
         of the average consumer, especially where the person to whose name the mark corresponds originally personified the goods bearing
         that mark.
      
Nevertheless, the circumstances for refusing registration referred to in Article 3(1)(g) of Directive 89/presuppose the
         existence of actual deceit or a sufficiently serious risk that the consumer will be deceived (Case C-87/Consorzio per la tutela del formaggio Gorgonzola [1999] ECR I-1301, paragraph 41).
      
In the present case, even if the average consumer might be influenced in his act of purchasing a garment bearing the trade
         mark ‘ELIZABETH EMANUEL’ by imagining that the appellant in the main proceedings was involved in the design of that garment,
         the characteristics and the qualities of that garment remain guaranteed by the undertaking which owns the trade mark.
      
Consequently, the name Elizabeth Emanuel cannot be regarded in itself as being of such a nature as to deceive the public as
         to the nature, quality or geographical origin of the product it designates.
      
On the other hand, it would be for the national court to determine whether or not, in the presentation of the trade mark ‘ELIZABETH
         EMANUEL’ there is an intention on the part of the undertaking which lodged the application to register that mark to make the
         consumer believe that Ms Emanuel is still the designer of the goods bearing the mark or that she is involved in their design.
         In that case there would be conduct which might be held to be fraudulent but which could not be analysed as deception for
         the purposes of Article of Directive 89/and which, for that reason, would not affect the trade mark itself and, consequently,
         its prospects of being registered.
      
Consequently the answer to the first two questions must be that a trade mark corresponding to the name of the designer and
         first manufacturer of the goods bearing that mark may not, by reason of that particular feature alone, be refused registration
         on the ground that it would deceive the public, within the meaning of Article 3(1)(g) of Directive 89/104, in particular where
         the goodwill associated with that trade mark, previously registered in a different graphic form, has been assigned together
         with the business making the goods to which the mark relates.  
      
 The last two questions
By its last two questions, the Appointed Person essentially seeks to ascertain the circumstances in which a trade mark is
         liable to revocation on the ground that that mark would mislead the public, within the meaning of Article 12(2)(b) of Directive
         89/104, where the goodwill associated with that mark has been assigned together with the business making the goods to which
         the mark relates and that trade mark corresponds to the name of the designer and first manufacturer of those goods. 
      
Since the conditions for revocation laid down by Article 12(2)(b) of Directive 89/are the same as those for the refusal
         of registration under Article 3(1)(g) of that directive, analysis of which has formed the subject of the reply to the first
         two questions, the reply to the last two questions must be that a trade mark corresponding to the name of the designer and
         first manufacturer of the goods bearing that mark is not, by reason of that particular feature alone, liable to revocation
         on the ground that that mark would mislead the public, within the meaning of Article 12(2)(b) of Directive 89/104, in particular
         where the goodwill associated with that mark has been assigned together with the business making the goods to which the mark
         relates.    
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      A trade mark corresponding to the name of the designer and first manufacturer of the goods bearing that mark may not, by reason
            of that particular feature alone, be refused registration on the ground that it would deceive the public, within the meaning
            of Article 3(1)(g) of Council Directive 89/104/EEC of December to approximate the laws of the Member States relating
            to trade marks, in particular where the goodwill associated with that trade mark, previously registered in a different graphic
            form, has been assigned together with the business making the goods to which the mark relates.  
2.      A trade mark corresponding to the name of the designer and first manufacturer of the goods bearing that mark is not, by reason
            of that particular feature alone, liable to revocation on the ground that that mark would mislead the public, within the meaning
            of Article 12(2)(b) of Directive 89/104, in particular where the goodwill associated with that mark has been assigned together
            with the business making the goods to which the mark relates.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 