
Case C-14/Anagram International Inc.
v
Inspecteur van de Belastingdienst – Douanedistrict Rotterdam
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Gerechtshof te Amsterdam)
(Common Customs Tariff – Combined Nomenclature – Tariff classification – Gas‑filled balloons)
Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber), July Summary of the Judgment
Common Customs Tariff – Tariff headings – Subheading (other toys of plastics, not mechanically operated)
(Commission Regulation No 442/2000)
Subheading (other toys of plastics, not mechanically operated) of the Combined Nomenclature of the Common Customs
         Tariff, in the version set out in Regulation No 1832/amending Annex I to Regulation No 2658/on the tariff and statistical
         nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff must be interpreted as meaning that it covers gas‑filled balloons made of aluminised,
         bonded plastic foil, the plastic foil forming the exterior of the balloon, such as those described in point of the table
         set out in the Annex to Regulation No 442/concerning the classification of certain goods in the Combined Nomenclature.
         
      
The classification decided upon by the Commission in that regulation is applicable by analogy to balloons having the same
         composition, but in which the plastic foil forms the inside of the balloon. 
      
(see paras 16, 28, 33, 35, operative parts and 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Common Customs Tariff – Combined Nomenclature – Tariff classification – Gas‑filled balloons)
In Case C‑14/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Gerechtshof te Amsterdam (Netherlands), made by decision
         of December 2004, received at the Court on January 2005, in the proceedings
      
Anagram International Inc.
v
Inspecteur van de Belastingdienst - Douanedistrict Rotterdam,
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
composed of J. Malenovský, President of the Chamber, S. von Bahr and U. Lõhmus (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: A. Tizzano,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Anagram International Inc., by K. Winters, advocaat and J.A.H. Hollebeek, adviser,
–       the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster and D.J.M. de Grave, acting as Agents,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by J. Hottiaux, acting as Agent, and by  F. Tuytschaever, avocat,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns, first, the interpretation of the Combined Nomenclature of the Common Customs
         Tariff (‘the CN’), set out in Annex I to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/of July on the tariff and statistical
         nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff (OJ L 256, p. 1), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1832/of August (OJ L 290, p. 1) and, secondly, the interpretation and, if necessary, the validity of point of the
         table set out in the Annex to Commission Regulation (EC) No 442/of February concerning the classification of
         certain goods in the Combined Nomenclature (OJ L 54, p. 33). 
      
The reference was made in proceedings between Anagram International Inc. (‘Anagram’), a company established in the United
         States of America, and the Inspecteur van de Belastingdienst - Douanedistrict Rotterdam (the Rotterdam district customs inspector)
         (‘the Inspector’) concerning the tariff classification for a helium‑filled balloon.  
      
 Legal framework
 Community law
The CN is based on the worldwide Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System (‘the HS’) drawn up by the Customs Cooperation
         Council (now the World Customs Organisation). The International Convention which established the HS, concluded at Brussels
         on June 1983, and the Protocol of Amendment thereto of June were approved on behalf of the Community by Council
         Decision 87/369/EEC of April (OJ L 198, p. 1). The CN takes six-digit headings and subheadings from the HS. Only
         the seventh and eighth digits of the CN form subdivisions specific to it. 
      
The version of the CN applicable at the material time is that deriving from Regulation No 1832/2002. The relevant headings
         in Chapter 95, entitled ‘Toys, games and sports requisites; parts and accessories thereof’, of Section XX, entitled ‘Miscellaneous
         manufactured articles’, of the CN are worded as follows: 
      
‘Other toys; reduced-size (“scale”) models and similar recreational models, working or not; puzzles of all kinds:
…
– Other:
…
                  – – Other:
                  − − − Of plastics:
– – – – Not mechanically operated
…
Festive, carnival or other entertainment articles, including conjuring tricks and novelty jokes:
…
− Other’
Article 9(1)(a) of Regulation No 2658/provides that the Commission of the European Communities is to be responsible for
         the application of the CN and, in particular, for the explanatory notes and the classification of goods in the CN.
      
Regulation No 442/was adopted by the Commission pursuant to Article of Regulation No 2658/87. In point of the Annex
         to Regulation No 442/2000, the products to which these proceedings relate were classified as follows:
      
Balloons, made of aluminised, bonded plastic foil. The plastic foil forms the exterior of the balloon. The balloons have
         a filler neck, in which a valve in the form of a strip of synthetic material is inserted. This strip automatically seals the
         gas inside the balloon and prevents it from leaking out. The balloons will be filled with gas (air or helium).
      
The classification of those products is determined, according to the accompanying statement of reasons, by the provisions
         of General Rules and for the interpretation of the Combined Nomenclature, Note 2(v) to Chapter and the wording of heading
         and of subheadings and of the CN. That statement of reasons also provides that those products may
         be printed with different motifs which do not influence the classification as a toy balloon.
      
By way of guidance, the HS Explanatory Notes on heading state:
‘This heading covers toys intended essentially for the amusement of persons (children or adults). ... The heading includes:
         
      
(A)      All toys not included in headings 95.and 95.02. Many of the toys of this heading are mechanically or electrically operated.
These include:
…
(6)       Toy balloons and toy kites [other than those of heading 88.01]. 
…
(18)      Hoops, skipping ropes, diabolo spools and sticks, spinning and humming tops, balls (other than those of heading 95.or 95.06).
…’
The HS Explanatory Notes on heading state: 
‘This heading covers:
(A)      Festive, carnival or other entertainment articles, which in view of their intended use are generally made of non‑durable material.
         They include:
      
(1)      Decorations such as festoons, garlands, Chinese lanterns,
…
(4)      Throw-balls of paper or cotton-wool, paper streamers (carnival tape), cardboard trumpets, “blow-outs”, confetti, carnival
         umbrellas, etc.
      
…’
 The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
On February 2003, Anagram applied to the Inspector for the issue of a binding tariff information for a product which it
         proposed be classified under subheading of the CN. The product was described as follows: 
      
‘A plastic festive balloon with an aluminium coating, in various shapes, printed with different motifs depending on the occasion
         for which it is to be used, such as an anniversary or birthday, a birth, Valentine’s Day etc. The balloon is filled once with
         helium and is equipped with a cut-off valve to protect it against gas leakage.’ 
      
In the binding tariff information issued on February 2003, the Inspector, contrary to Anagram’s proposal, classified the
         product under subheading of the CN, taking as the description of the product the wording of point of the table
         set out in the Annex to Regulation No 442/2000.
      
Following the Inspector’s decision dismissing the objection made by Anagram against that binding tariff information, Anagram
         brought proceedings before the Gerechtshof te Amsterdam (Regional Court of Appeal, Amsterdam).
      
After examining a sample of the product, that court expressed doubts as to the justification for classifying the balloon at
         issue as a toy, observing that it does not possess the characteristics of a toy to be used for amusement or play, but rather
         that it fits the concept of ‘festive articles’ as referred to in heading of the CN.
      
As regards Regulation No 442/2000, the referring court observes that the product at issue does not have exactly the same characteristics
         as those described in point of the table set out in the Annex to that regulation. However, that court considers that, having
         regard to Case C‑130/Krings [2004] ECR I‑2121, paragraph 35, Regulation No 442/should be applied by analogy to the product at issue, as the Inspector
         proposes. Consequently, the referring court raises the question of whether that regulation is consistent with the wording
         of the CN.
      
It was in those circumstances that the Gerechtshof te Amsterdam decided to stay the proceedings and to refer to the Court
         the following questions for a preliminary ruling: 
      
‘(1)  Must point of the Annex to Regulation … No 442/be interpreted as meaning that it also relates to the goods described
         in the statement of facts …?  
      
(2)       If so, is the regulation valid in that respect?
(3)      If the regulation is invalid or if it does not cover the goods at issue, can the Common Customs Tariff be interpreted as meaning
         that those goods must be classified as “festive articles” of [sub]heading [of the CN]?’
      
 The questions
It should be noted as a preliminary point that the dispute in the main proceedings concerns the tariff classification for
         gas‑filled balloons made of aluminised, bonded plastic foil, the plastic foil forming the inside of the balloon. Balloons
         having the same composition, but in which the plastic foil forms the exterior, are classified under subheading of the CN (relating to toys of plastics, not mechanically operated) in terms of point of the table set out in the Annex
         to Regulation No 442/2000.  
      
By its second question, which it is appropriate to examine first, for, if the answer to this question is in the negative,
         the first question would be redundant, the referring court raises the question of the validity of point of the table set
         out in the Annex to Regulation No 442/in so far as it classifies balloons made of aluminised, bonded plastic foil, in
         which the plastic foil forms the exterior, under subheading of the CN. 
      
According to settled case-law, the Council of the European Union has conferred upon the Commission, acting in cooperation
         with the customs experts of the Member States, a broad discretion to define the subject-matter of tariff headings falling
         to be considered for the classification of particular goods. However, the Commission’s power to adopt the measures referred
         to in Article of Regulation No 2658/does not authorise it to alter the subject-matter and the scope of the tariff headings
         (see, to that effect, Krings, paragraph 26, and the case‑law cited). 
      
It is therefore necessary to consider whether subheading of the CN must be interpreted as covering products such
         as the balloons described in point of the table set out in the Annex to Regulation No 442/2000.
      
It is also settled case‑law that, in the interests of legal certainty and for ease of verification, the decisive criterion
         for the classification of goods for customs purposes is in general to be sought in their objective characteristics and properties
         as defined in the wording of the relevant heading of the CN. The Explanatory Notes drawn up by the Commission as regards the
         CN and by the World Customs Organisation as regards the HS may be an important aid to the interpretation of the scope of the
         various tariff headings but do not have legally binding force (see Case C‑467/Ikegami [2005] ECR I‑2389, paragraph 17).
      
The intended use of a product may constitute an objective classification criterion if it is inherent in the product; the inherent
         character must be capable of being assessed on the basis of the product’s objective characteristics and properties (see Ikegami, paragraph 23, and the case‑law cited). 
      
Anagram submits that the balloon described in point of the table annexed to Regulation No 442/cannot be characterised
         as a ‘toy’ as referred to in subheading of the CN. Since such a balloon can only float in the air, it cannot be
         used for amusement or play. Moreover, because of the material from which it is made, it is not sufficiently resistant or durable
         to be used as a toy. It does not correspond to the description of heading of the CN or to the description of the HS Explanatory
         Notes on that heading.  
      
In that connection, it follows from the HS Explanatory Notes on heading that a toy as referred to in that heading is
         an object intended essentially for the amusement of persons (children or adults). 
      
It must be held that the balloons in question have that characteristic notwithstanding that the material from which they are
         made is not resistant or durable, since the fact that they do not last long and that they float in the air does not prevent
         children in particular from enjoying and playing with those objects. 
      
Moreover, the Commission’s classification of the balloons in Regulation No 442/is supported by the HS Explanatory Notes
         on heading 9503, which state that that heading includes toy balloons and toy kites, as well as balls (other than those for
         funfair, table, parlour or sporting games). 
      
Furthermore, it is irrelevant that those balloons can also be used as festive articles. If the objective characteristic of
         a product can be established at the time of customs clearance, the fact that it may also be possible to envisage another use
         for that product will not preclude its classification for legal purposes. For its classification for customs purposes, that
         product does not have to be solely or exclusively intended for use corresponding to that objective characteristic. It suffices
         if that is the main use for which it is intended (see, to that effect, Case C‑395/Neckermann Versand [1994] ECR I‑4027, paragraphs and 9).
      
Finally, the wording of subheadings and of the CN does not provide a distinct criterion which identifies
         gas‑filled balloons.  It contains only two general conditions in order for a product to fall within subheading of the CN, namely, that it is made from plastic and that it is not mechanically operated. Those two conditions are met by
         the goods referred to in point of the table set out in the Annex to Regulation No 442/2000.
      
Consequently, the answer to be given to the referring court is that consideration of the second question has disclosed nothing
         capable of affecting the validity of Regulation No 442/in so far as the products referred to in point of the table
         set out in its Annex are classified under subheading of the CN. 
      
As regards the first question, which asks whether the product at issue in the main proceedings must also be classified under
         subheading of the CN, it should be noted that a classification regulation is of general application in so far as
         it does not apply to an individual trader but, in general, to products which are the same as that examined by the Customs
         Code Committee which has given its opinion for the purposes of that regulation. In the interpretation of a classification
         regulation, in order to determine its scope, account must be taken, inter alia, of its statement of reasons (Krings, paragraph 33, and the case‑law cited). 
      
Anagram maintains that, having regard to the description set out in point of the table set out in the Annex to Regulation
         No 442/2000, the product at issue does not fall within the scope of that point. It draws attention to the explicit manner
         in which the balloon is described, namely that it consists of plastic foil on the exterior of which an aluminium layer is
         bonded. According to Anagram, that type of balloon is the only one referred to in that provision. In the product at issue,
         the plastic foil forms the inside of the balloon.
      
In that regard, it should be stated that the product at issue in the main proceedings is admittedly not identical to the product
         described in point of the table set out in the Annex to Regulation No 442/2000, in that it does not correspond, in every
         respect, to the description of the goods contained in that point. Consequently, as the Netherlands Government correctly points
         out in its written observations, that regulation is not directly applicable to that product.
      
Nevertheless, as the Court has already held, the application by analogy of a classification regulation, such as Regulation
         No 442/2000, to products similar to those covered by that regulation facilitates a coherent interpretation of the CN and the
         equal treatment of traders (see Krings, paragraph 35).
      
The only difference between the product at issue and the product referred to by the description contained in point of the
         table set out in the Annex to Regulation No 442/consists in a mere inversion of the materials from which the product
         is made and, as the Commission also notes, its principal characteristics are not affected. It follows that that regulation
         is applicable to Anagram’s product by analogy.
      
Moreover, that finding is confirmed by the statement of reasons relating to point 3, according to which products may be printed
         with different motifs, which, in the present case, relate mainly to various festive occasions, without however influencing
         the classification as a toy balloon.
      
Accordingly, the reply to the first question must be that the classification decided upon by the Commission in Regulation
         No 442/2000, as regards the product described in point of the table set out in the Annex thereto, is applicable by analogy
         to gas‑filled balloons made of aluminised, bonded plastic foil, the plastic foil forming the inside of the balloon.
      
In the light of the foregoing, it is not necessary to reply to the third question. 
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Sixth Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Consideration of the second question has disclosed nothing capable of affecting the validity of Commission Regulation (EC)
            No 442/of February concerning the classification of certain goods in the Combined Nomenclature in so far as the
            products referred to in point of the table set out in the Annex thereto are classified under subheading of the
            Combined Nomenclature of the Common Customs Tariff, set out in Annex I to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/of July on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff, as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1832/of August 2002.
2.      The classification decided upon by the Commission of the European Communities in Regulation No 442/2000, as regards the product
            described in point of the table set out in the Annex thereto, is applicable by analogy to gas‑filled balloons made of aluminised,
            bonded plastic foil, the plastic foil forming the inside of the balloon.
[Signatures]
*Language of the case: Dutch.
      
Top  
 