
Judgment of the Court (Fourth Chamber) of June – Commission v Italy
(Case C-487/04)
Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Council Regulation (EC)No 1255/and Commission Regulation (EC) No 2799/– Milk and milk products – Skimmed-milk powder – System of traceability of skimmed-milk powder
1.                     Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Milk and milk products – Aid for skimmed milk and skimmed-milk powder intended
            for animal feed – Regulation No 2799/– Conditions for granting (Commission Regulation No 2799/1999) (see paras 29-30)
2.                     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Examination of merits by the Court – Situation to be taken into consideration
            – Situation on expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion (Art. EC) (see para. 31)
3.                     Member States – Obligations – Failure to fulfil obligations – Retention of a provision of national law which is incompatible
            with Community law (Art. EC) (see para. 33)
Re: 
Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Infringement of Council Regulation (EC) No 1255/of May on the
                  common organisation of the market in milk and milk products (OJ L 160, p. 48) and Commission Regulation (EC) No 2799/of December laying down detailed rules for applying Regulation (EC) No 1255/as regards the grant of aid for skimmed
                  milk and skimmed-milk powder intended for animal feed and the sale of such skimmed-milk powder (OJ L 340, p. 3) – Institution
                  of a system of traceability of milk powder not provided for by Community legislation.
               
Operative part
The Court: 
1.
Declares that by unilaterally instituting a system of traceability of skimmed-milk powder for certain uses, not provided for
                     by harmonised provisions of Community law applicable to the sector, the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations
                     under Council Regulation (EC) No 1255/of May on the common organisation of the market in milk and milk products
                     and Commission Regulation (EC) No 2799/of December laying down detailed rules for applying Regulation (EC) No
                     1255/as regards the grant of aid for skimmed milk and skimmed-milk powder intended for animal feed and the sale of such
                     skimmed-milk powder;
                  
2.
Orders the Italian Republic to pay the costs.
Top  
 